as congress continues the debate on an appropriate response to the climate change issue , multiple bills have been introduced that would require reductions in greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions .

of these , h.r .

2454 , ( the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ) has received particular attention .

introduced by representatives waxman and markey , h.r .

2454 passed the house of representatives on june 26 , 2009 .

several analyses have been done on the impact of the cap - and - trade provisions , and as of september 2009 , seven studies had been released .

they are presented below in no particular order .

e nvironmental p rotection a gency : a comprehensive analysis has been conducted by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

the report is entitled: epa analysis of the american clean e nergy and security act of 2009: h.r .

2454 in the 111 th congress ( june 23 , 2009 ) .

beyond a "core" analysis of h.r .

2454 , the report employs a suite of models and reference cases , along with some useful sensitivity analyses .

this report will focus on cases from three of the models .

the first model is adage: a computable general equilibrium ( cge ) model developed by rti international .

the "core" analysis case employing the adage model is designated epa / adage .

the second model is igem: a cge model developed by dale jorgenson associates .

the "core" analysis case employing the igem model is designated epa / igem .

the third model is ipm: a dynamic , deterministic linear programming model of the u.s. electric power sector developed by icf resources .

the case employing the ipm model is designated epa / ipm in this report .

e nergy i nformation a dministration : a second comprehensive analysis has been conducted by the energy information administration ( eia ) .

the report is entitled energy market and economic impacts of h.r .

2454 , the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( august 4 , 2009 ) .

the analysis employs eia's nems model: a macroeconomic forecasting model with extensive energy technology detail .

in addition to conducting a "basic case" analysis of h.r .

2454 using its updated 200 9 annual energy outlook ( aeo ) reference , eia also conducts some useful sensitivity analyses that focus on the upside risk of decreased offset supply ( and thus , increased allowance prices ) under h.r .

2454 .

the basic case h.r .

2454 analysis is designated eia / nems in this report .

n ational b lack c hamber of c ommerce : a third analysis has been conducted for the national black chamber of commerce by charles river associates ( cra ) international .

the report is entitled impact on the economy of the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( h.r .

2454 ) ( may 2009 ) .

the analysis employs cra's mrn - neem macroeconomic model with extensive electric power sector detail .

cra conducted three scenarios: reference , high , and low .

the "reference" scenario analysis is designated nbcc / cra .

in cases where the reference scenario projections were not presented , the low or high case scenario figures ( designated nbcc / cra / low and nbcc / cra / high ) are used instead .

heritage foundation: a fourth analysis has been conducted by the heritage foundation , based on projections from the global insight model — a macroeconomic model with energy sector modeling .

focused on the economic impacts of h.r .

2454 , the results were first disseminated in a series of "webmemos" as h.r .

2454 was developed , then released in a report .

the analysis is limited to carbon dioxide emission reductions from the energy sector and is designed as hf / gi in this review .

congressional budget office: a fifth series of legislative analyses have been conducted by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) on various aspects of h.r .

2454 during its movement through the house of representatives .

these analyses address budgetary , household , and other impacts of the bill , and are incorporated in this report .

american council for capital formation / national association of manufacturers: a sixth analysis has been conducted for the american council for capital formation ( accf ) and national association of manufacturers ( nam ) by science applications international corporation .

the report is entitled analysis of the wa x man - markey bill "the american clean energy and security act of 2009" ( h.r .

2454 ) using the national energy modeling system ( nems ) .

the report states that it includes assumptions about renewable portfolio standards and energy efficiency standards .

employing eia's nems model , the accf / nam study presents a "low cost" case with several restrictions on technology availability , and is designed as accf - nam / nems in this review .

the analysis also includes a "high cost" sensitivity case that uses some of the most constrained and high - cost assumptions of any of the analyses presented here , and is discussed here as appropriate massachusetts institute of technology: a seventh analysis has been conducted by the massachusetts institute of technology ( mit ) joint program on the science and policy of global change .

the report is an appendix to a more comprehensive analysis of cap - and - trade programs released in april 2009 .

the appendix is titled: appendix c : analysis of the waxman - markey american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( h.r .

2454 ) .

the appendix employs mit's eppa cge model and presents sensitivity analyses of h.r .

2454 's offset provisions .

the case that incorporates a gradual increase in available offsets ( entitled " h.r .

2454 with medium offsets" ) is designated mit / eppa in this report .

beyond these more comprehensive studies of h.r .

2454 , there have been numerous more focused efforts , generally targeting specific economic issues .

these reports are generally presented in short presentation formats with limited documentation .

most have to do with electricity price impacts and are discussed at an appropriate time later in the report .

beyond specific caveats each of these analyses has , there are some more general caveats the reader should keep in mind when comparing them to each other: first , the different studies analyze the impact of h.r .

2454 at different stages of its development .

the nbcc / cra analysis is of the bill as introduced in april 2009 .

the epa analyses is of the bill as reported by the energy and commerce committee in may 2009 .

the eia , accf / nam , and mit analyses are of the bill as passed by the house .

the version analyzed by the heritage foundation depends on the date of the webmemo or other presentation of the results , although its allowance allocation scheme is generally based on a memorandum by representatives waxman and markey dated may 14 , 2009 .

likewise , analyses by cbo reflect the legislative point in the debate where the analysis was done .

at each stage of the legislative process , changes were made to the bill that affect the compliance costs and the distribution of allowance value .

second , h.r .

2454 is a comprehensive energy and environmental bill ( not just a cap - and - trade bill ) , and the studies differ in terms of the scope of their analyses .

the nbcc analysis focuses on the cap - and - trade program ( including bonus allowances for carbon capture and storage , and the impact of free allowance allocations on regional and u.s. welfare impacts ) and the combined renewable energy and energy efficiency standard for electricity ( res ) in title i of the bill .

the epa analyses include these areas , along with state energy and environmental development ( seed ) accounts , and an explicit analysis of the allocation of allowances to trade - exposed , energy - intensive industries .

the eia analysis includes the cap - and - trade program , the combined energy efficiency and renewable energy standard for electricity , carbon capture and sequestration provisions , and various energy efficiency provisions ( eg , lighting standards ) .

the heritage foundation study is limited to carbon dioxide emissions from the energy sector ; other sectors are not incorporated in their analysis .

the accf - nam analysis discusses the impact of h.r .

2454 in terms of the cap - and - trade provisions , renewable portfolio standards , energy efficiency standards , and supposed low - carbon fuel standards .

the mit analysis includes the combined renewable energy and energy efficiency standard for electricity in title i along with the cap - and - trade provisions in title iii .

third , the studies examined in this report are published with different levels of documentation , making comparative analysis difficult .

each study's sponsor has selected features or impacts it is particularly interested in highlighting , and presentations of projections that emphasize those points .

in order to increase the comparability of the various cases examined here , crs has converted all publicly available data presented by the cases to 2005 dollars ( where appropriate ) and interpolated missing data where possible .

likewise , where studies have stated they used specific projections as a reference case ( such as eia's annual energy outlook 2009 projections ) , crs has assumed those assumptions have not been altered except as specifically stated by the study .

in some cases , the authors of the reports were contacted in order to clarify assumptions or results .

finally , crs has attempted to present projections in the most comparable fashion possible .

fourth , a special note with respect to the res is appropriate .

as noted above , seven cases ( epa / adage , epa / igem , nbcc / cra , eia / nems,accf - nam / nems , cbo , and mit / eppa ) clearly included the res in their analyses .

epa and cra do not highlight any significant cost increases directly resulting from implementing res , while eia states that no additional costs are entailed by compliance with the res as sufficient renewable energy is incorporated in the baseline .

likewise , cbo finds that the res requirement is not binding .

accf - nam / nems only includes it as one reason for increasing energy prices .

however , the mit / eppa case finds the res raises household costs , particularly in early years when the res is increasing rapidly .

mit found the effect moderates in later years , but the overall losses in the early years depress the level of savings and investment that continues to affect the economy in later years .

as passed by the house , title iii of h.r .

2454 would amend the clean air act to set up a cap - and - trade system that is designed to reduce greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from covered entities 17% below 2005 levels by 2020 and 83% below 2005 levels by 2050 .

covered entities are phased into the program over a four - year period from 2012 to 2016 .

when the phase - in schedule is complete , the cap will apply to entities that account for 84.5% of u.s. total ghg emissions .

by including other provisions contained in the legislation ( eg , a separate cap - and - trade program for hydrofluorocarbons ( hfcs ) ) , the world resources institute ( wri ) estimates that the overall potential net reductions in ghg emissions from the economy as a whole ( as opposed to just covered entities ) from h.r .

2454 could range from 28% - 33% below 2005 levels in 2020 and 75% - 81% in 2050 .

the market - based approach adopted by h.r .

2454 would establish an absolute cap on the emissions from covered sectors and would allow trading of emissions permits ( " allowances " ) among covered and non - covered entities .

the bill achieves its broad coverage through an upstream compliance mandate on petroleum , most fluorinated gas producers and importers , a downstream mandate on electric generators and industrial sources , and a midstream mandate on natural gas local distribution companies ( ldcs ) .

generally , the emissions cap would limit greenhouse gas emissions from entities that produce or import more than 25,000 metric tons annually ( carbon dioxide equivalent ) of greenhouse gases ( or produce or import products that when used will emit more than 25,000 metric tons of greenhouse gases ) .

the potential for noise is greater in estimating the costs of a ghg program than the simple three driver illustration presented above .

in its analysis of h.r .

2454 , epa presents four pages of bullets identifying various limitations on its modeling exercise and four pages of additional "qualitative" considerations .

this is a good indicator of the modeling complexity in attempting to estimate the impact of a greenhouse gas reduction bill .

these modeling limitations reflect the inherent complexity of such strategies that cannot be quantified or predicted .

because of the economic and regulatory complexities and interactions noted above , analysts have generally chosen to focus on estimating the macro - economic effects of proposals , such as gdp impacts .

there are two components of macro - economic cost measures: ( 1 ) the direct abatement ( or compliance ) cost of a greenhouse gas reduction program , and ( 2 ) the general equilibrium effects of a greenhouse gas reduction program ( i.e. , the interactions of the direct abatement costs with the rest of the economy ) .

the most common measure presented is gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

gdp measures the total value of goods and services produced within a nation's borders .

although it is commonly used as a measure of quality of life , this application is problematic .

generally , it includes only those items for which there is a value defined in a market , and does not take into account some activities that have economic value , but no market valuation ( eg , leisure time , environmental quality , etc. ) .

thus , gdp is intended to be a measure of economic activity , not quality of life .

a second measure sometimes presented is consumption effects ( sometimes called welfare effects ) .

unfortunately , the models do not measure consumption or welfare effects in a consistent fashion ( the primary advantage of using gdp ) .

this problem is discussed later in the section on " impact on households . .

in addition , like gdp , none of the definitions of consumption or welfare currently employed quantify any benefits from improved environmental quality .

a third measure often presented is allowance prices .

allowance prices reflect to some degree the aggregate marginal cost of reductions as estimated by the models .

marginal cost is the cost of reducing the last ton ( and , therefore , the most expensive ) of greenhouse gases required by the program at a specific point in time .

marginal costs are very useful to affected entities in choosing what reduction strategy would be the most cost - effective in achieving reductions required by the cap - and - trade program .

marginal costs are not average costs and therefore cannot be simply multiplied by the greenhouse gases reduced to estimate total compliance cost .

they also need to be put into the context of the overall reduction achieved at the given point and time being examined .

however , allowance prices in most analyses are not equal to marginal costs of achieving the specified reductions in a specific year because of program provisions , such as banking .

banking activity reflects the assumed foresight of affected entities to the likelihood of increasing allowance prices ( in real terms ) as the cap tightens .

as indicated by the experience with the so 2 program , entities will bank substantial allowances early and use them later as the program's requirements tighten .

this results in allowance prices being higher than marginal costs in the early years of the program , and lower in later years .

this ability to time - shift reduction requirements and compliance costs means that allowance price projections reflect the assumed foresight of affected entities as much as they do actual marginal costs .

in examining cost measures , aggregate welfare indicators such as gdp may be overemphasized .

as illustrated above in table 2 , aggregate , macroeconomic cost results for h.r .

2454 are generally lost in the uncertainty about future conditions .

focusing on aggregate macroeconomic measures may lead readers to miss valuable insights into the analyses' assumptions and their conclusions about the costs or benefits of certain compliance strategies .

for example , figure 4 below shows a 1997 scatter - plot by world resources institute ( wri ) of 162 predicted impacts estimates from 16 different economic models of the u.s. economy as a result of a co 2 abatement program .

as indicated , the vast majority of estimates fall with a range of 0% - 4% of gdp , regardless of the reduction requirement .

over - emphasis on gdp or other aggregate cost measures can obscure fundamental technological , economic , or behavioral insights the analyses may have in helping policymakers craft legislation .

instead , the analysis becomes a "black box" exercise with little enlightenment function .

this resulting "fog" is inherent when analysts choose to include the general equilibrium effects of a program in their cost measure — a fog that can limit the explanatory value of the analysis .

while supporting use of aggregate welfare cost measures , mit notes: ge [general equilibrium] effects can stem from interactions with pre - existing distortions ( eg , taxes ) , from externally induced terms - of - trade effects , from the fact that the domestic policy itself creates terms - of - trade effects , and from other rigidities in the economy .

many aspects of model structure produce ge effects that are not easy to separately measure because of the inherent interactions in the economy .

generally , the cases examined here have not chosen to separate the two components of macro - economic cost measures: ( 1 ) the direct abatement ( or compliance ) cost of a greenhouse gas reduction program , and ( 2 ) the general equilibrium effects of a greenhouse gas reduction program ( i.e. , the interactions of the direct abatement costs with the rest of the economy ) .

the availability of accurate compliance cost estimates would allow policymakers to put current greenhouse gas reduction proposals in the context of other environmental initiatives — be they acid rain or toxic air pollutants — and , indeed , to the overall environmental agenda , and greatly increase the transparency of the analyses' insights .

it would also help relieve confusion between compliance costs , average costs ( per ton reduced ) , and the other commonly presented costs , such as allowance prices .

it is argued that an aggregate macroeconomic cost measure provides a more complete view of the economic impact of proposed legislation , and helps identify potential unintended economic effects of compliance strategies .

this may be true , particularly if , for example , auction revenues are being recycled via a reformed tax code .

however , as indicated here , aggregated macroeconomic cost measures , such as gdp , can also be interpreted to merely show that the united states has a massive economy that can absorb substantial shocks with limited long - term effect .

a frontier area in model development is creating fuller representations of technology advancement .

a substantial amount of technological change occurs within the economy without direct policy intervention — the free enterprise system provides significant rewards for those who develop cost - effective alternatives and introduce them into the market .

technological change is a very complex subject and can also be induced through a variety of policy levers , including prices ( such as allowance prices ) , subsidies , and technology mandates or standards , along with both publicly and privately funded research and development .

however , analyses do not provide a consistent relationship between policy levers and evolution of new technology , so this "induced technological change" ( itc ) is not fully represented in the models used here , although it is a critical part of h.r .

2454 .

observing that no single factor dominates the process of technology change — a process that includes roles for market incentives , research and development , learning - by - doing , and spillovers from other industries engaged in these activities , l. clarke , et al .

state: the lesson from these observations is to be cautious in interpreting the policy conclusions of models that assume only a single source of technological progress or that neglect critical factors such as spillovers .

this includes virtually all formal models in use today , implying a need both for more comprehensive treatments of technological change and more research to understand the nature and magnitude of any distortions of policy conclusions from models with limited representations of technological change .

the model's inability to reliably project technological change is a major source of over - or under - estimation of costs .

h.r .

2454 includes numerous incentives for technology development — incentives for which no model has ( or could be expected to have ) estimated the collective effect .

this report examines seven studies that project the costs of the cap - and - trade provisions of h.r .

2454 to 2030 or 2050 .

it is difficult ( and some would consider it unwise ) to project costs up to the year 2030 , much less beyond .

the already tenuous assumption that current regulatory standards will remain constant becomes more unrealistic , and other unforeseen events ( such as technological breakthroughs ) loom as critical issues which cannot be modeled .

hence , long - term cost projections are at best speculative , and should be viewed with attentive skepticism .

the finer and more detailed the estimate presented , the greater the skepticism should be .

in the words of the late dr. lincoln moses , the first administrator of the energy information administration: "there are no facts about the future. .

but if models cannot predict the future , they can indicate the sensitivity of a program's provisions to varying economic , technological , and behavioral assumptions that may assist policymakers in designing a greenhouse gas reduction strategy .

the various cases examined here do provide some important insights on the costs and benefits of h.r .

2454 and its many provisions .

first , if enacted , the ultimate cost of h.r .

2454 w ould be determined by the response of the economy to the technological challenges presented by the bill .

the bill provides numerous price , research and development , deployment , and regulatory incentives for technology innovation .

the potential for new technology to reduce the costs of h.r .

2454 is not fully analyzed by any of the cases examined , nor can it be .

the process of technology development and dissemination is not sufficiently understood at the current time for models to simulate that process with any long - term confidence .

in the same vein , it is difficult to determine whether the various incentives provided by the bill are directed in the most optimal manner , as in many cases the bill focuses on specific technologies .

second , the distribution of allowance value ( either through free allocations or auction revenue ) under h.r .

2454 will determine who bears much of the program's cost .

the allowances created by h.r .

2454 ( essentially licenses to emit a metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent ) will have market value based on supply and demand .

total allowance value could approach or exceed $100 billion ( 2005$ ) annually — significantly more than the projected costs to comply with the bill's emissions reduction requirement .

h.r .

2454 transfers that value to a wide range of covered and non - covered entities .

entities receiving that value will bear less of the program's costs compared with those who do not .

the major impact of h.r .

2454 's allowance allocation scheme is not in changing the costs required to comply with the program's reduction requirement ; instead , it is in changing who bears those costs .

third , the cases studied generally indicate that the availability of offsets ( particularly international offsets ) is a major factor in determining the cost of h.r .

2454 .

sensitivity analyses generally found that eliminating international offsets would raise allowance prices by 60% or more .

in general , those studies that assumed restrictive ( and in some cases , declining ) offset supply projected higher allowance prices .

cases that ramped up availability of offsets generally projected lower allowance prices .

no case assumed that the full amount of offsets permitted under h.r .

2454 would be available or used immediately in 2012 .

fourth , the interplay between nuclear power , renewables , natural gas , and coal - fired capacity with carbon capture and storage ( ccs ) among the cases emphasizes the need for a low - carbon source of electric generating capacity in the mid - to long - term .

a considerable amount of low - carbon generation will have to be built under h.r .

2454 in order to meet the reduction requirement .

the cases presented here do not agree on the amount of new generating capacity necessary under the bill , or the mix of fuels and technologies that would be employed .

the estimated amount of capacity constructed depends on the cases' assumptions about the need for new capacity and replacement / retirement of existing capacity under h.r .

2454 , along with consumer demand response to the rising prices and incentives contained in the bill .

here again , technological development will be critical .

f ifth , attempts to predict household effects ( or conduct other fine - grained analyses ) are fraught with numerous difficulties ; estimates generated reflect more on the philosophies and assumptions of the cases reviewed than on any credible future effect .

decisions about appropriate welfare measure , household size , and discounting , and , indeed , the value of government services in general , dwarf any insight that could be gained from such estimates .

for example , estimates of household effects in the studies reviewed vary by an order of magnitude , even when normalized by household size and accounting method .

likewise , fine - grained analysis of effects on specific states and / or economic sectors are similarly suspect .

s ixth , h.r .

2454 ' s climate - related environmental benefit should be considered in a global context and the desire to engage the developing world in the reduction effort .

when the united states and other developed countries ratified the 1992 united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) , they agreed both to reduce their own emissions to help stabilize atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and to take the lead in reducing greenhouse gases .

this global scope raises two issues for h.r .

2454 : ( 1 ) whether the bill's greenhouse gas reduction program and other provisions would be considered sufficiently credible by developing countries so that schemes for including them in future international agreements become more likely , and ( 2 ) whether the bill's reductions meet u.s. commitments to stabilization under the unfccc and occur in a timely fashion so that global stabilization may occur at an acceptable level .

