the issue of the president and vice president's term of office is generally regarded as an accepted constitutional norm that arouses little controversy in the 21 st century .

both the four - year term and the venerable two - term tradition , initiated by george washington and ultimately incorporated in the constitution in 1951 by the twenty - second amendment , appear to be fixed elements in the nation's political landscape .

in marked comparison , the issues of tenure and reelection of the president , and of the vice president ( an office added almost as an afterthought during the constitutional convention of 1787 ) , were the subject of intense and prolonged debate during the philadelphia gathering .

delegates argued for three months over the length of the presidential term and whether the chief executive should be eligible for reelection before reaching a compromise package of provisions — a four - year term , and eligibility for reelection — several days before the convention adjourned .

since that time , a wide range of changes to these conditions has been proposed as constitutional amendments , but relatively few conditions have been added to the original provisions governing the president's term of office .

in addition to the twenty - second amendment cited above , the twelfth , ratified in 1804 , set the same qualifications for the vice president ; the twentieth , ratified in 1933 , set january 20 of every year following a presidential election as the date on which the chief executive's term begins ; and the twenty - fifth amendment clarified the question of vice - presidential succession to the presidency and authorized the president to nominate persons to fill vacancies in the vice presidency , subject to approval by vote of both houses of congress .

proposals for a single term were popular in the 19 th century , and for several decades before the civil war , the concept of a voluntary limit of one presidential term in office drew wide support .

beginning in 1808 , constitutional amendments were introduced that would have changed the presidential term to five , six , seven , and even eight years .

by the 20 th century , the single six - year term for presidents had become a preferred option for such amendments , with multiple amendment proposals introduced in successive congresses as late as the 1990s , while amendments to repeal the twenty - second amendment to allow unlimited reelection were regularly introduced as recently as the 113 th congress .

in the past two decades , however , public and congressional interest in these issues has arguably declined .

in contrast to proceedings at the constitutional convention and widespread congressional interest in the past , the questions of presidential term and tenure appear to be relatively settled issues in the contemporary context .

nevertheless , the potential for renewed interest in change , which has emerged as a force to be contended with in the past , remains a possibility in both the present and future .

the conditions of terms and tenure for the president and vice president of the united states have evolved over nearly two centuries , from the earliest provisions in article ii , section 1 , of the u.s. constitution , set by the constitutional convention in 1787 , to provisions governing vacancies in the office of vice president established in the twenty - fifth amendment , ratified in 1967 .

the terms of the president and vice president were originally established at four years , with eligibility for reelection , by the philadelphia convention of 1787 , which drafted the u.s. constitution .

the question of presidential and vice presidential terms and tenure has had a sometimes - dramatic history in the more than two centuries that have passed since the constitutional convention settled on the basic questions of term length and reelection .

as this report documents , various circumstances contributed to what approached a de facto one - term presidential tradition for much of the 19 th century , while during this same period a durable body of opinion favored a constitutional amendment to formalize the single term .

in the 20 th century , three constitutional amendments made incremental changes in certain conditions of presidential tenure , most notably the twenty - second amendment's establishment of limits on the number of times a person could be elected president of the united states .

in recent years , however , these issues have not been the subject of much debate .

certain questions do occasionally rise to command some degree of public attention , including speculation on the applicability of the twenty - second amendment to presidents who have been elected twice , or proposals for constitutional changes that would repeal the amendment or establish a single six - year presidential and vice presidential term .

by design , however , constitutional amendments must pass a number of demanding tests before they can be incorporated in the nation's fundamental charter .

those few of the many hundreds of amendments proposed that were successful arguably owe their success to one or more of the following developments: they incorporate a reform that has been considered and debated over a period of time , and has gradually gained the approval of a contemporaneous majority of the public that includes a wide range of social , cultural , and political support from diverse elements around the nation .

they have been viewed as a remedy to a sudden and traumatic event in the nation's life that requires a swift and definitive solution .

they have received the steady support of generally bipartisan leadership in both houses of congress over the extended periods generally necessary for the legislature to consider and propose amendments for consideration by the states .

until or unless any proposals to change the existing conditions of presidential terms and tenure meet one or more of these requirements , there is arguably little momentum for their moving beyond the realm of advocacy and speculation .

