health care reform is at the top of the domestic policy agenda for the 111 th congress , driven by concerns about the growing ranks of the uninsured and the unsustainable growth in spending on health care and health insurance .

improving access to care and controlling rising costs will require changes to both the financing and delivery of health care .

experts point to a growing body of evidence of the health care system's failure to consistently provide high - quality care to all americans .

in a november 2008 report outlining its goals for health reform , the national priorities partnership , representing all the major stakeholder groups in the health sector , identified four major challenges to the delivery of high - quality care .

the first is to improve patient safety by eliminating medical errors and other adverse events .

these errors mostly result from faulty systems , processes , and conditions that lead to mistakes .

the second challenge is to eradicate disparities in care .

racial and ethnic minorities and low - income groups face disproportionately higher rates of disease , disability , and mortality , largely because of variations in access to care , and quality of care .

the third challenge is to reduce the burden of chronic disease , which affects almost half of all americans and accounts for three - quarters of health care spending .

the final challenge is to eliminate unnecessary and ineffective care that compromises quality , drives up costs , and neglects the needs of patients .

according to the institute of medicine ( iom ) , an estimated 30% - 40% of health care spending is wasted on unnecessary and even unsafe care .

on october 19 , 2009 , senator max baucus introduced a comprehensive health care reform bill entitled the america's healthy future act of 2009 ( s. 1796 , s.rept .

111-89 ) .

the legislation is based on the chairman's mark which was ordered reported , as amended , by the senate finance committee on october 13 , 2009 .

s. 1796 consists of six titles .

title i addresses private health insurance , and would establish both a health insurance exchange and an individual mandate .

title ii includes provisions related to prevention and wellness , and generally promotes preventive services .

title iii addresses the quality and efficiency of health care , and would strengthen quality measurement .

title iv would promote transparency and integrity in the medicare program .

title v includes a series of provisions intended to prevent health care fraud and abuse .

finally , title vi contains revenue raising provisions .

this report summarizes the workforce , quality , prevention , and other provisions in titles i , ii , iii , iv , and vi of s. 1796 .

the report groups the bill's provisions under the following headings: ( 1 ) health workforce ; ( 2 ) health care quality ; ( 3 ) health information technology ; ( 4 ) prevention and wellness ; ( 5 ) maternal and child health services ; ( 6 ) health disparities ; ( 7 ) emergency care ; ( 8 ) health care for veterans ; ( 9 ) elder justice ; and ( 10 ) miscellaneous .

in most instances , each section begins with some background on current law and practice so as to provide context for the subsequent brief descriptions of the bill's provisions .

unless otherwise stated , references to "the secretary" refer to the secretary of hhs .

a list of all the acronyms used in the report can be found in appendix .

a companion report , crs report r40831 , public health , workforce , quality , and other provisions in the affordable health choices act ( s. 1679 ) , summarizes comparable provisions in the senate help committee's health reform legislation , the affordable health choices act ( s. 1679 ) .

this section would prohibit the federal government , and any state or local government or health care provider that receives federal financial assistance under this proposed law ( or under an amendment made by this proposed law ) or any health plan created under this proposed law ( or under an amendment made by this proposed law ) from paying for or reimbursing any health care entity for items or services furnished for the purpose of causing , or for the purpose of assisting in causing , the death of any individual , such as by assisted suicide , euthanasia , or mercy killing .

it would also prohibit subjecting an individual or institutional health care entity to discrimination on the basis that the entity does not provide any health care item or service furnished for the purpose of causing , or assisting in causing , the death of any individuals , such as by assisted suicide , euthanasia , or mercy killing .

the hhs office of civil rights would be designated to receive complaints of discrimination on this basis .

nothing in the above would be construed to apply or to affect any limitation relating to ( 1 ) the withholding or withdrawing of medical treatment or medical care ; ( 2 ) the withholding or withdrawing of nutrition or hydration ; ( 3 ) abortion ; or ( 4 ) the use of an item , good , benefit , or service furnished for the purpose of alleviating pain or discomfort , even if such use may increase the risk of death , so long as it is not also furnished for the purpose of causing , or assisting in causing , death .

this section would impose an annual fee on covered entities : certain manufacturers and importers of branded prescription drugs ( including biological products and excluding orphan drugs ) .

covered entities would pay annually to the secretary of the treasury a total of $2.3 billion , which would be transferred to the medicare part b trust fund .

each covered entity would pay a proportion of the $2.3 billion , calculated by the secretary , equal to the proportion that specified amounts of each entity's branded prescription drug sales for specified government programs bore to the total such sales of all covered entities for the previous year .

the specified amounts of total that would be taken into account are as follows .

for sales of not more than $5 million , none would be taken into account .

for sales of more than $5 million and not more than $125 million , 10% would be taken into account .

for sales of more than $125 million and not more than $225 million , 40% would be take into account .

for sales of more than $225 million and not more than $400 million , 75% would be take into account .

for sales of more than $400 million , 100% would be take into account .

the secretary of the treasury would calculate the proportion to be paid by each covered entity based upon annual reports made by the secretaries of hhs , veterans affairs , and defense .

reports would contain the total branded prescription drug sales for each covered entity with respect to medicare parts b and d , medicaid , the department of veterans affairs programs , and the department of defense programs and tricare .

this section would impose an annual fee on covered entities : certain manufacturers and importers of medical devices with sales in united states .

sales would exclude those of class ii devices typically sold to consumers for less that $100 , and those of class i devices .

covered entities would pay annually to the secretary of the treasury a total of $4 billion .

each covered entity would pay proportion of the $4 billion , calculated by the secretary , that is equal to the proportion that specified amounts of its gross receipts from medical device sales bore to the total gross receipts of all covered entities for the previous year .

the specified amounts of total that would be taken into account are as follows .

for sales of not more than $5 million , none would be taken into account .

for sales of more than $5 million and not more than $25 million , 50% would be taken into account .

for sales of more than $25 million , 100% would be take into account .

the secretary of the treasury would calculate the proportion to be paid by each covered entity based upon annual reports made by covered entities .

penalties could be imposed for a failure to make required reports .

