this report provides a summary and analysis of selected provisions of s. 1733 , the clean energy jobs and american power act .

the topics covered include electric power and incentives for the development of natural gas technologies .

the report also compares those provisions with counterparts , if any , in h.r .

2454 , the american clean energy and security act .

other aspects of s. 1733 and h.r .

2454 are covered in additional crs reports .

these reports are available in the climate change section of the crs website , located at http: / / crs.gov / pages / subissue.aspx ? cliid=2645&parentid=2522 .

the remainder of this report is divided into the following sections: electric power and natural gas technologies .

electric power transmission and related technologie .

h.r .

2454 contains several provisions relating to electric power transmission that have no counterparts in s. 1733 .

these provisions are briefly summarized below .

for more detail see crs report r40643 , greenhouse gas legislation: summary and analysis of h.r .

2454 as passed by the house of representatives , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

subtitle f of title i of h.r .

2454 deals with transmission planning and permitting .

the subtitle provides for the following in respect to transmission planning: establishes a national transmission planning policy , which states that transmission planning "should facilitate the deployment of renewable and other zero - carbon and low - carbon energy sources for generating electricity to reduce greenhouse gas emissions while ensuring reliability , reducing congestion , ensuring cyber - security , minimizing environmental harm , and providing for cost - effective electricity services throughout the united states…. .

directs the federal energy regulatory commission to define electric transmission planning principles , based on the national policy , which can be used by planning entities .

ferc is to facilitate coordination between state , regional , and industry transmission planning entities .

in respect to permitting , the bill grants ferc new federal siting and permitting authority within the western interconnection .

this authority to supersede state permitting decisions applies only to proposed transmission projects that meet certain criteria , including interstate projects "identified as needed in significant measure to meet demand for renewable energy. .

h.r .

2454 includes several provisions aimed at supporting development and installation of smart grid technologies ( see title i , subtitle e ) .

the bill would direct the department of energy and environmental protection agency to identify products that could be cost - effectively equipped with smart grid capability .

the legislation would also direct the federal trade commission to initiate a rulemaking to determine whether smart grid information , such as potential dollar savings to the consumer , should be added to energy guide product labels .

 ( energy guide is an existing federal program for labeling energy efficient products. ) .

the legislation would establish requirements for electric power retailers to reduce their peak loads using smart grid and other energy efficient technologies ; and would modify an energy efficiency public information program authorized by the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 ) to make it into a smart grid and energy efficiency information program .

h.r .

2454 would also modify an epact05 energy efficiency appliance rebate program to add appliances with smart grid capabilities .

additionally , h.r .

2454 would require state regulatory authorities and self - regulating power suppliers ( such as municipal utilities ) to consider implementing standards intended to ensure that utility smart grid systems would be compatible with plug - in electric drive vehicles .

section 152 of subtitle f of h.r .

2454 provides for net metering of federal agencies .

net metering is a ratemaking concept intended to encourage the development of "distributed generation" ( i.e. , electricity generated at the customer's site , possibly , but not necessarily , using renewable energy ) .

net metering is intended to make distributed generation more economical by requiring the utility that supplies electricity to a facility to also take any electricity generated by that facility , such as from rooftop solar panels or an on - site diesel generator .

the ultimate utility bill to the facility is reduced by the amount of electricity supplied to the power company .

section 152 amends the public utility regulatory policies act of 1978 to require state regulatory authorities to consider ordering utilities under their jurisdiction to implement net metering for federal facilities .

it also requires non - regulated utilities ( such as many municipal utilities ) to make the same evaluation .

the net metering standard must be adopted if it is consistent with state law and is found by the controlling regulatory authority to be "appropriate. .

section 153 of subtitle f would amend epact05 to provide for incentives for the development and construction of transmission lines and related facilities using currently non - commercial technology .

the categories of technology include "advanced electric transmission property" ( essentially high - efficiency underground transmission lines and associated equipment ) , "advanced electric transmission manufacturing plant" ( plants that manufacture the "advanced electric transmission property" ) , and "high efficiency transmission property" ( essentially high - efficiency overhead transmission lines and associated equipment ) .

all three categories of technology would be added to the list of technologies qualifying for the new loan guarantee program added to epact05 by the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 .

additionally , "advanced electric transmission property" and "advanced electric transmission manufacturing plant" only would be added to the original loan guarantee program included in epact05 .

this program was originally created to support the development of low carbon and other advanced energy technologies .

