periodically , concerns have been raised about the number and variety of products created to document congressional activity .

other concerns focus on the process for authorizing and distributing printed government documents to members of congress , congressional committees , and other officials in the house and senate .

concerns regarding congressional activities are typically considered in the context of the congressional environment .

in the field of information management , however , they reflect broader issues related to the manner in which government and private information is created , assembled , distributed , and preserved .

a number of issues arise due to significant transformations in the areas of printing , publishing , and information management .

those changes have been initiated as a consequence of the emergence in the past three decades of electronic publishing and distribution , which has expanded the means of information creation and delivery beyond mechanical compilation and production of documents that only exist on paper .

since its establishment in 1861 , and until the emergence and integration of digital dissemination , the government printing office ( gpo ) has compiled , formatted , printed , bound , and distributed documents that recorded the activities of congress ( and the work of other governmental entities ) through a series of labor - and resource - intensive steps .

over time , the agency has integrated new technologies into its production processes as they became available , or were mandated .

the enactment of p.l .

103-40 , the government printing office electronic information access enhancement act of 1993 , required the production of electronic versions of the congressional record and the federal register , and provided authority for production and distribution of other government documents electronically .

the act requires gpo to the "extent practicable , [to] accommodate any request by the head of a department or agency to include … information that is under the control of the department or agency involved" in its electronic directory and systems of online access .

arguably , that language does not bind congress to make its materials available , since it is not a department or agency .

nevertheless , congress has made some of its materials available in electronic form through gpo since p.l .

103-40 was enacted .

gpo began producing electronic versions of the daily edition of the congressional record and the federal register in 1994 .

soon after , gpo began providing access to electronic versions of congressional documents authorized for distribution by congress through its gpo access website .

the agency began distributing new documents through its federal digital system ( fdsys ) , and migrating collections from gpo access in the spring of 2009 .

in current practice , according to gpo , approximately 97% of all u.s. government documents are "born digital," published electronically and available through the internet , and will never be printed by the federal government .

as a consequence of electronic production and dissemination , some congressional materials are more readily available to wider congressional , governmental , and public audiences than when they were produced and distributed only in paper form .

further , changes in the production process from the creation of content through delivery to a user , in print or electronic form , have reduced the resources necessary to produce congressional information .

in light of these changes , some have argued that eliminating paper versions of some congressional documents , and relying instead on electronic versions , could result in further cost and resource savings , and might provide environmental benefits .

at the same time , however , current law regarding document production , authentication , and preservation , as well as some user demand , require a number of paper - based documents to be produced and distributed as part of the official record of congressional proceedings .

as a result of requirements for both electronic and paper - based versions of congressional documents , gpo oversees an information distribution process that produces and distributes most of the congressional information for which it is responsible in both electronic and printed forms .

this process provides the necessary information and appropriate formats for congress to carry out and document its activities , but it may also result in some unwanted printed copies of congressional documents being delivered to congressional users who prefer to access those resources electronically .

more broadly , the transition to electronic distribution of materials may raise questions about the capacity of congressional authorities to effectively oversee gpo's management and distribution responsibilities regarding congressional information under current law and congressional practices .

this report provides an overview and analysis of issues related to the processing and distribution of congressional information by the government printing office ( gpo ) .

subsequent sections address several issues , including funding congressional printing , printing authorizations , current printing practices , and options for congress .

finally , the report provides congressional printing appropriations , production , and distribution data in a number of tables .

gpo is a legislative branch agency that serves all three branches of the federal government as a centralized resource for gathering , cataloging , producing , providing , authenticating , and preserving published information .

the agency's activities are funded through three sources .

these include appropriations , a revolving fund through which executive and judicial branch agencies pay gpo for information management and distribution services , and sales of products to nongovernmental entities and the general public .

gpo's appropriation is included in the annual legislative branch appropriations bill .

the bill funds three gpo accounts: congressional printing and binding ( cpb ) ; salaries and expenses of the superintendent of documents ( s&e ) ; and , on occasion , a small part of the revolving fund .

congress allocates a substantial proportion of the funds appropriated to gpo to the cpb account , which funds the production and dissemination of congressional documents .

since 1988 , appropriations for cpb have comprised an average of 73.08% of funds provided to gpo by congress .

activities funded in the revolving fund and s&e accounts do not directly support congressional publishing activity .

figure 1 provides the levels of funding of the cpb account since 1985 , based on nominal and constant ( 2010 ) dollars .

the data show that cpb spending has declined from $164.3 million in 1985 ( 2010 dollars ) to $93.73 million in 2010 .

part of the decline in appropriations reflects savings resulting from reduced staffing due to the implementation by gpo of less labor - intensive printing technologies , increased electronic distribution , and somewhat reduced demands for some types of congressional products .

table 6 , in the data tables below , provides gpo cpb account appropriations data in nominal and constant ( 2010 ) dollars and the percentage of appropriations allocated to cpb since 1987 .

any further adjustment to statutory printing requirements may be formally authorized by legislation , committee order , or through report language .

in practice , gpo notes that it prints the number of copies of congressional documents requested .

in past debate on proposed amendments to appropriations bills to reduce or eliminate printing of the daily edition of the congressional record , congressional leaders have said that current levels of distribution to congress are based on the availability of appropriations to cover the costs of congressional printing .

if that is the case , the further reduction or elimination of printed copies may impair the ability of some members from carrying out their duties .

congressional leaders have also noted that any efforts to change congressional printing practices must proceed through jcp rather than through appropriations bills .

officials at gpo suggest that much of the reduction in the number of printed congressional documents could be ascribed to the use of newer printing technologies , and migration by congressional documents users to information technologies that provide congressional information through electronic means .

those transitions have generally resulted in a smaller work force at gpo , a reduction in the number of printed copies produced , arguably , reduced paper consumption , and smaller appropriations .

while overall printing costs have gone down , it is not clear that continued reduction in print runs would result in significant reductions of costs .

in line with printing industry practices , gpo estimates that prepress processes , actions that must be taken before multiple copies can be made , make up approximately two - thirds of the cost of producing the daily edition of the congressional record .

the balance is spent on printing , binding , and mailing of the finished copies .

for fy2011 , gpo estimates the cost of producing one page of the congressional record at $782 .

the agency allocates $532 ( 68.03% ) for prepress , which gpo refers to as "data preparation," and $250 ( 31.97% ) for printing .

in their budget requests , gpo does not provide estimates for other congressional products broken down by the cost of prepress and printing processes .

table 5 provides some the potential savings that might result by the elimination of the printed versions of several congressional products , based on the distribution of prepress and printing cost estimates for the congressional record .

since most of the prepress costs would be necessary to make the congressional record and other congressional documents available to users , whether in electronic or printed form , the extent of any statutory reduction in authorized printing levels or further reductions in the actual number of copies that gpo produces may result in somewhat modest cost savings .

any such cost savings may come at the expense of denying congressional materials to users who prefer the paper - based documents , or those who do not have access to electronic versions .

any effort to reduce the availability of centrally produced printed versions of congressional documents in favor of electronic delivery and storage may also raise concerns about the preservation and long - term ability to retrieve congressional records , and the need for reliable backup systems .

while some of the printed records of congress dating back to the first congress ( 1789-1791 ) are retrievable in paper form , concerns have been raised about the ability to retrieve some electronic records created in the past few decades .

other related challenges might include the costs of document conversion as electronic document creation , management , and storage technologies evolve in a way that might not incorporate records and documents created with obsolete systems .

taken together , these concerns might raise questions about the long - term costs of a "paperless" system in comparison to the current hybrid process of making documents available in electronic and paper form .

of particular concern in the congressional environment could be the preservation of an official , definitive version of a document that is widely accepted by lawmakers , congressional officials , the executive branch , the courts , and the american public .

currently , gpo provides hard copies of the congressional record , legislative measures at various stages of consideration , related congressional documents , and laws passed by congress .

similar materials are available electronically through the legislative information system ( lis ) for congressional users , and through thomas , maintained by the library of congress , for the general public .

nevertheless , congressional rules require legislative measures to be signed by the member sponsoring them before introduction , and the preservation of those original , official documents by congressional officials .

the bound version of the congressional record , which may appear up to four years after the conclusion of a congress , is considered , the official , archival product .

any transition to a more integrated use of electronic documents would likely need to take into account document verification and authentication procedures to ensure the provenance and accuracy of any official record of congressional activity , and facilitate the acceptance of those materials as legitimate .

depending on the degree to which congress believes that action on matters relating to congressional printing activities might be necessary or desirable , it might consider the following options to maintain the status quo , conduct studies , or consider legislation .

