health care reform is at the top of the domestic policy agenda for the 111 th congress , driven by concerns about the growing ranks of the uninsured and the unsustainable growth in spending on health care and health insurance .

improving access to care and controlling rising costs will require changes to both the financing and delivery of health care .

experts point to a growing body of evidence of the health care system's failure to consistently provide high - quality care to all americans .

in a november 2008 report outlining its goals for health reform , the national priorities partnership , representing all the major stakeholder groups in the health sector , identified four major challenges to the delivery of high - quality care .

the first is to improve patient safety by eliminating medical errors and other adverse events .

these errors mostly result from faulty systems , processes , and conditions that lead to mistakes .

the second challenge is to eradicate disparities in care .

racial and ethnic minorities and low - income groups face disproportionately higher rates of disease , disability , and mortality , largely because of variations in access to care , and quality of care .

the third challenge is to reduce the burden of chronic disease , which affects almost half of all americans and accounts for three - quarters of health care spending .

the final challenge is to eliminate unnecessary and ineffective care that compromises quality , drives up costs , and neglects the needs of patients .

according to the institute of medicine ( iom ) , an estimated 30% - 40% of health care spending is wasted on unnecessary and even unsafe care .

on september 17 , 2009 , senator harkin introduced a comprehensive health care reform bill entitled the affordable health choices act ( s. 1679 ) .

the legislation is identical to the unnumbered health reform bill that was marked up and , on july 15 , 2009 , approved by the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) .

the affordable health choices act ( hereinafter referred to as the senate help bill ) consists of six titles .

title i addresses private health insurance , including the establishment of an insurance exchange and the creation of a public option .

title ii includes provisions related to improving health care quality and service delivery , including strengthening quality measurement .

title iii promotes preventive services .

title iv includes provisions to increase the primary care and public health workforce .

title v includes a series of provisions intended to prevent health care fraud and abuse .

and title vi addresses access to medical therapies , including creating a regulatory pathway for approving biosimilars and expanding participation in the public health service act ( phsa ) 340b drug pricing program .

this report summarizes the workforce , quality , prevention , and other provisions in titles i , ii , iii , iv , and vi of the senate help bill , as amended and adopted by the help committee .

the report groups the bill's provisions under the following headings: ( 1 ) health centers ; ( 2 ) health workforce , including programs authorized under the phsa and under other statutes ; ( 3 ) health care quality ; ( 4 ) prevention and wellness ; ( 5 ) food and drug administration ; ( 6 ) emergency care ; ( 7 ) behavioral health care ; ( 8 ) pain care and management ; ( 9 ) phsa 340b drug pricing program ; and ( 10 ) miscellaneous .

in most instances , each section begins with some background on current law and practice so as to provide context for the subsequent brief descriptions of the bill's provisions .

unless otherwise stated , references to "the secretary" refer to the secretary of hhs .

a list of all the acronyms used in the report is in the appendix .

this report will be updated to reflect future legislative actions .

a companion report , crs report r40745 , public health , workforce , quality , and other provisions in h.r .

3200 , summarizes comparable provisions in the house health reform legislation , american's affordable health choices act of 2009 ( h.r .

3200 ) .

this legislation was jointly developed by the house committees on ways and means , energy and commerce , and education and labor , which share jurisdiction over the federal health statutes .

all three committees have held markups — in each case focusing on the titles in the bill that fall under the committee's jurisdiction — and ordered the legislation to be reported , as amended .

under general authorities in phsa title iii and title iv , nih established the pain consortium to enhance pain research and promote collaboration among researchers across various nih institutes and centers that have programs and activities addressing pain .

in addition , phsa sec .

403 requires the nih director to submit to the president and congress a biennial report that includes , among other things , a summary of the research activities throughout the agency organized by category ; the chronic disease category includes pain and palliative care .

sec .

799 ( f ) requires each applicant for a health professions education grant under title vii ( except any scholarship or loan program ) to submit to a peer review group for an evaluation of the merits of the proposals made in the application .

the senate help bill includes the following four sections that would address pain research , education , and awareness for the purposes of recognizing pain as a national public health problem .

section 411 ( c ) ( 4 ) of the black lung benefits act provides for a rebuttable presumption of eligibility for black lung benefits for a miner and his or her survivors in the case of a miner who had worked in underground coal mines for at least 15 years , had a negative chest roentgenogram , and had other evidence of a totally disabling respiratory or pulmonary impairment .

section 422 ( l ) of the black lung benefits act provides that the survivors of a miner who was eligible for part c black lung benefits at the time of his or her death are not required to submit a new claim in order to receive survivors benefits .

neither of these provisions applies to claims filed on or after january 1 , 1982 .

sec .

174 of the bill would apply these provisions to claims under part b or c of the black lung benefits act filed after january 1 , 2005 and that are pending on or after the date of enactment of the proposed law .

this section would require the secretary to publish , on the hhs website , a list of all the authorities provided to the secretary under the proposed law no later than 30 days after enactment .

this section would prohibit any provisions in the proposed law ( or an amendment made by this proposed law ) from being carried out in a manner that threatens the solvency of either the medicare or social security programs .

this section would prohibit the federal government , and any state or local government or health care provider that receives federal financial assistance under this proposed law ( or under an amendment made by this proposed law ) or any health plan created under this proposed law ( or under an amendment made by this proposed law ) , from subjecting an individual or institutional health care entity to discrimination on the basis that the entity does not provide any health care item or service furnished for the purpose of causing , or assisting in causing , the death of any individuals , such as by assisted suicide , euthanasia , or mercy killing .

nothing in the above would be construed to apply or to affect any limitation relating to ( 1 ) the withholding or withdrawing of medical treatment or medical care ; ( 2 ) the withholding or withdrawing of nutrition or hydration ; ( 3 ) abortion ; or ( 4 ) the use of an item , good , benefit , or service furnished for the purpose of alleviating pain or discomfort , even if such use may increase the risk of death , so long as it is not also furnished for the purpose of causing , or assisting in causing , death .

the hhs office of civil rights would be designated to receive complaints of discrimination based on this section .

notwithstanding any other provision of the proposed law , the secretary would be prohibited from promulgating any federal regulation that ( 1 ) creates any unreasonable barriers to the ability of individuals to obtain appropriate medical care ; ( 2 ) impedes timely access to health care services ; ( 3 ) interferes with communications regarding a full range of treatment options between the patient and the provider ; ( 4 ) restricts the ability of health care providers to provide full disclosure of all relevant information to patients making health care decisions ; ( 5 ) violates the principles of informed consent and the ethical standards of health care professionals ; or ( 6 ) limits the availability of health care treatment for the full duration of a patient's medical needs .

this section would prohibit requiring any individual , company , business , nonprofit entity or health insurer offering group or individual health insurance from participating in any federal health insurance program created or expanded under this proposed law ( or any such amendments made by this proposed law ) .

it would also prohibit penalties or fines from being imposed upon any such insurer for choosing not to participate in such programs .

