as the administration and congress move forward to pursue engagement , harsher sanctions , or both , regional actors are evaluating their policies and priorities with respect to iran .

iran's neighbors share many u.s. concerns , but often evaluate them differently than the united states when calculating their own relationship with or policy toward iran .

because iran and other regional concerns — the arab - israeli peace process , stability in lebanon and iraq , terrorism , and the ongoing war in afghanistan — have become increasingly intertwined , understanding the policies and perspectives of iran's neighbors could be crucial during the consideration of options to address overall u.s. policy toward iran .

iran's neighbors seek to understand and influence changes in the following areas: iran's regional influence , iran's nuclear program , iran's role as an energy producer , and iran's support for terrorism and non - state actors .

although the obama administration may share many goals of the previous administration on iran , it also sees the need for new strategies and approaches .

the obama administration advocated a policy of engagement with iran to determine the nature of its nuclear program and address other subjects of international concern .

while post - election turmoil in iran delayed these efforts temporarily , the administration pursued engagement through the p5+1 framework .

the first meeting took place on october 1 , 2009 and president obama called it a "constructive beginning. .

as the talks continued , however , prospects for an agreement appeared to diminish .

the united states , israel , and the eu proposed the end of 2009 as a "firm" deadline for iran to demonstrate its willingness to cooperate on the nuclear issue .

that deadline has lapsed with no visible progress toward a resolution and the administration is now working with its p5+1 partners to determine a course of action for 2010 .

it is widely expected that the group will pursue a fourth round of sanctions through the u.n. security council with the goal of targeting the ruling elite in tehran .

u.s. secretary of state hillary clinton said on january 12 , 2010 that "it is clear that there is a relatively small group of decision makers inside iran…they are in both political and commercial relationships , and if we can create a sanctions track that targets those who actually make the decisions , we think that is a smarter way to do sanctions .

but all that is yet to be decided upon. .

clinton also said the administration's thinking developed as part of consultations with a wide range of other countries and that the u.s. remains interested in engaging with iran , even as it considers ways to pressure tehran through sanctions .

regardless of how they decide to proceed , any actions on the part of the obama administration , congress , or the international community , and any developments in or provocations by iran , will have implications for u.s. interests in the region as iran's neighbors react and reevaluate their policies accordingly .

questions remain about the course of u.s. and international efforts to resolve the issue of iran's uranium enrichment program: will the u.n security council pass additional sanctions ? .

will member states enforce those sanctions ? .

can sanctions be effective to deter iran from pursuing a nuclear weapons program ? .

how will sanctions affect engagement with iran and how might they increase or diminish the prospects for a negotiated resolution to iran's nuclear program ? .

how should the international community evaluate the effectiveness of sanctions ? .

is there a deadline for sanctions to yield results ? .

what are the options of sanctions and continued engagement fail ? .

regardless of the answers to these questions , most analysts agree that sanctions are the logical next step and that if they fail the u.s. and the international community could be forced to weigh the costs of a preemptive strike against the implications of a nuclear iran .

in any case , the policies pursued by the united states and the international community will continue to affect regional approaches toward iran , and could have implication for other u.s. and international interests in the middle east .

while attention in the united states tends to focus on the response of european countries to expanded unilateral sanctions or the likelihood that russia and china would join an international effort to impose sanctions on iran , many of iran's neighbors would also be affected .

iran has strong economic relations and shared economic interests with many of its neighbors that could be complicated by efforts to further isolate it .

it is unclear whether iran's neighbors would stop trade or forgo plans to cooperate in the area of resource exploitation in the face of international condemnation .

the united arab emirates ( uae ) , for example , is among iran's major gasoline suppliers by virtue of the fact that much of the refined petroleum products that iran imports transit storage facilities in the uae en route to iran .

turkey and armenia depend on cooperation with iran to reduce their dependence on russia for energy resources .

expanded sanctions could force iran's neighbors to choose between cooperating with the international community and their own economic well - being .

engagement and sanctions are both aimed at alleviating tensions over iran's nuclear program , but many also view them as the best hope for preventing a new war in the middle east .

israeli prime minister binyamin netanyahu has made it clear that "all options remain on the table" for dealing with iran , including the military option .

so far , the obama administration has as well .

they have also both referred to the end of 2009 as a deadline for iran to demonstrate its willingness to cooperate with the international community on the nuclear issue .

as the deadline fast approaches , iran's arab neighbors , the gulf states in particular , appear nervous , weighing the cost of a regional war against the danger of a nuclear iran , while calculating the long term political viability of the iranian regime in light of continuing domestic protests .

some argue that tension between iran and israel could bring israel and / or the united states and iran's arab neighbors closer together , perhaps even to some level of cooperation .

others caution that any israeli strike could outrage iran's arab neighbors , and that the conflict would become regional and factious .

the security of u.s. military personnel , facilities , and material in neighboring countries is also of concern to u.s. decision makers and regional leaders .

most regional states ( with a few noteworthy exceptions ) are concerned primarily with avoiding potential conflicts with iran that could lead to military action or regional instability .

some might even prefer to learn to live with a nuclear iran than to endure a regional war to prevent one .

the primary concern among policy makers is the potential for a nuclear arms race in the middle east , which would under undermine regional stability and run counter to the obama administration's long term vision of a world without nuclear weapons and its shorter term strategy to reduce the number of strategic warheads and missiles and to end the production of fissile material .

u.s. secretary of state hillary clinton's remark about possibly protecting the gulf states under a "defense umbrella" was perceived by some as a tacit acceptance of the prospect of a nuclear iran .

others saw it as an effort to mitigate the risk of a nuclear arms race — highlighting concerns that some of iran's neighbors might pursue their own nuclear programs if they become convinced that iran's nuclear aspirations cannot be checked .

in the interim others have highlighted the dangers of a de facto regional conventional arms race , as iran's gulf arab neighbors take steps to upgrade and expand their military forces as a deterrent and iraq continues its efforts to reconstitute and reequip its military .

