the united states department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides a broad range of benefits and services to american veterans and to certain members of their families .

in addition , the department of defense ( dod ) offers a variety of benefits to veterans who are also military retirees .

retired members of the national guard or the reserve components who have not yet reached the age of 60 and who have not been recently deployed to a combat theater , however , are not entitled to the same federal benefits , such as health care , that other veterans and military retirees receive .

national guard and reserve members may not necessarily meet the relevant statutory definition of "veterans" for va benefit purposes , and retired members of the national guard or reserve are not eligible for dod benefits until they reach the age of 60 .

these national guard and reserve retirees are commonly known as gray area retirees ( gars ) .

the national defense authorization act of fiscal year 2010 ( p.l .

111-84 ) provided tricare standard ( ts ) coverage for certain members of the retired reserve who are qualified for a non - regular retirement , but are not yet 60 years old .

this report examines the current va and dod benefit eligibility for members of the national guard and the reserves ; the benefit status and situation of gars ; and legislation related to gars .

eligibility for va benefits may vary significantly for certain members of the guard and the reserves , as compared with members of the regular military , particularly at the time that a member of the guard or reserves retires .

various benefits are provided by the va to "veterans," and other benefits are provided by the dod to certain military retirees .

these two benefit systems are examined below .

section 705 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 ( p.l .

111-84 ) ( october 28 , 2009 ) provided tricare standard ( ts ) coverage for certain members of the retired reserve who are qualified for a non - regular retirement but are not yet 60 years old .

the tricare program allows retired reservists to purchase tricare coverage if "they are under the age of 60 and are not eligible for , or enrolled in , the federal employees health benefits ( fehb ) program. .

they are also required to be members of the retired reserve of a reserve component and qualified for non - regular retirement .

detailed eligibility criteria are available on the tricare website .

in the 112 th congress , s. 542 , s. 1768 , and h.r .

1003 would authorize space - available travel on military aircraft for gars on the same basis as active - duty military personnel .

s. 491 and h.r .

1025 would recognize service by certain persons in the reserves by honoring them with the status as veterans under law .

however , such persons would not be entitled to any benefit by reason of such recognition .

