policymakers are dedicating considerable attention to greenhouse gas emission reduction , primarily discussing options for carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emission reduction .

less frequently addressed in proposed legislation is emission reduction for non - co 2 greenhouse gases , such as nitrous oxide ( n 2 o ) .

however , n 2 o reduction efforts have the potential to mitigate climate change .

moreover , n 2 o emission sources may be regulated under the existing clean air act as a class i or class ii ozone - depleting substance at the discretion of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) administrator .

no new legislation needs to be passed to regulate n 2 o for climate protection and ozone recovery .

the five non - co 2 greenhouse gases regularly monitored but not entirely regulated by epa ( methane , nitrous oxide , hydroflourocarbons , perflourocarbons , and sulfur hexaflouride ) accounted for approximately 17% of u.s. greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions in 2009 , as measured by total tons of co 2 equivalent .

nitrous oxide — the third - most abundant greenhouse gas — was responsible for roughly 4% of total u.s. ghg emissions in 2009 by weight .

although they comprise a smaller portion of ghg emissions , non - co 2 greenhouse gases , including n 2 o , are more potent than co 2 .

the gases identified above are 21 to 23,900 times more effective than an equivalent weight of co 2 at trapping heat in the atmosphere , with n 2 o being 310 times more potent by weight .

in addition to being one cause of greenhouse gas emission growth , n 2 o is an ozone - depleting substance ( ods ) .

indeed , scientific analysis suggests that n 2 o is now the leading ods being emitted , as emissions of other substances have been reduced significantly owing to regulations enacted in the late 1980s , in the montreal protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer .

n 2 o emission reduction could thus play a compelling role in recovery of the ozone layer as well as in greenhouse gas emission reduction .

the agriculture sector is the primary anthropogenic source of nitrous oxide .

the bulk of u.s. n 2 o emissions stem from fertilizing agricultural soils for crop production .

strategies or technologies designated for n 2 o emission reduction are limited .

this is partly due to the dispersed nature of n 2 o emission sources .

in the agriculture sector , the majority of n 2 o is released as a consequence of specific nitrogen cycle processes ( nitrification and denitrification ) when large amounts of synthetic nitrogen fertilizers are used for crop production .

more efficient application of synthetic fertilizers ( eg , precision agriculture , nitrogen inhibitors , nitrogen sensors , controlled - release fertilizer products ) is one way to reduce excess amounts of nitrogen available for bacterial processing and eventual release to the atmosphere as n 2 o .

high costs and difficulty in measuring these products' efficacy , among other deterrents , have hampered widespread adoption of practices to reduce n 2 o emissions .

this report focuses on the contributions of n 2 o to alteration in the earth's climate and ozone depletion .

policy options for n 2 o emission reduction , sources of n 2 o , and federal support to lower n 2 o emissions are discussed .

nitrous oxide ( n 2 o ) , familiar to some as "laughing gas," contributes to climate change and ozone depletion .

once released , n 2 o lingers in the atmosphere for decades ( its atmospheric lifetime is approximately 114 years ) and is 310 times more effective at trapping heat in the atmosphere over a 100-year time frame than carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) .

n 2 o emission quantity estimates remained fairly constant from 2005 to 2007 , hovering around 325 million metric tons carbon dioxide equivalent ( co 2 e ) .

n 2 o emission quantity estimates dropped in 2009 to below 300 million metric tons co 2 e. see table 1 .

n 2 o emission mitigation options are available for agricultural soil management and nitric acid production .

nitric acid is a chemical compound used to make synthetic fertilizers .

n 2 o abatement options for nitric acid production include a high - temperature catalytic reduction method , a low - temperature catalytic reduction method , and nonselective catalytic reduction .

the estimated reduction efficiencies ( the percentage reduction achieved with adoption of a mitigation option ) are 90% , 95% , and 85% , respectively .

agricultural soil management mitigation options recommended by researchers and technology transfer specialists to discourage excess application of nitrogen fertilizers and soil disturbance ( table 2 ) are not generally being practiced .

fertilizer and soil best - management practices aim to provide the crop with the nutrient and soil conditions necessary for crop production , and prevent nutrient and soil loss from the crop field ( eg , erosion , leaching ) .

some may consider less money spent towards fertilizer use an economic incentive for agricultural producers .

others may want to ensure that crop yields meet expected feed , fiber , and fuel mandates ( eg , for corn ethanol ) , which may be difficult to attain with less fertilizer use .

monitoring reduced nitrogen fertilization applications on a large scale for greenhouse gas emission reduction purposes may be difficult ; it is not clear how such a program could be managed at a national level .

enforcement options could include voluntary verification , third - party verifiers , or government intervention .

reporting n 2 o emissions from agricultural soil management was not included in the final mandatory reporting of greenhouse gases rule issued by epa on september 22 , 2009 .

epa's reasoning behind this decision was that no low - cost or simple direct n 2 o measurement methods exist .

additionally , epa released a proposed rule requiring new or modified facilities that could trigger prevention of significant deterioration ( psd ) permitting requirements to apply for a revision to their operating permits to incorporate the best available control technologies and energy efficiency measures to minimize ghg emissions .

usda provides some financial and technical assistance for nutrient management through its conservation programs .

moreover , usda's agricultural research service ( ars ) is studying the relationship between agricultural management practices and nitrous oxide emissions .

in addition to the agriculture sector , work is being done in the transportation sector to reduce n 2 o emissions .

mobile combustion was responsible for roughly 8% of n 2 o emissions reported in 2009 .

one n 2 o emission reduction effort , proposed by epa and the department of transportation , is a per - vehicle n 2 o emission standard of 0.010 grams per mile effective in model year 2012 for all light - duty cars and trucks as part of a wider effort to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and improve fuel economy in tandem .

epa has allocated financial resources to quantify n 2 o emissions for the greenhouse gas inventory ( eg , daycent model ) .

congress has begun to investigate the reduction of non - co 2 greenhouse gas emissions , including n 2 o emissions , as one strategy to mitigate climate change .

some contend that n 2 o emissions reduction could serve as a short - term response in the larger , long - term scheme of mitigation and adaptation efforts .

it may be viewed as a short - term response because n 2 o emissions make up a small amount of the ghg inventory compared to co 2 emissions .

any substantial approach to mitigate climate change is likely at some point to have to address sources that emit co 2 .

congress could approach n 2 o emissions reduction as part of a comprehensive ghg emission strategy offering economically attractive abatement alternatives to discourage actions leading to climate change .

for example , a cap or fee on n 2 o emissions could spur innovative methods for agricultural producers to limit excess synthetic fertilizer application .

congress could also examine the tools necessary to identify n 2 o emission abatement options , assess their cost , and determine their economic impact for full incorporation into climate change legislation .

besides greenhouse gas emission reduction , reducing n 2 o emissions could lead to ozone recovery .

congress could explore the co - benefits that may arise from restricting n 2 o emissions for climate change purposes .

n 2 o is not regulated as an ods under the clean air act , title vi , stratospheric ozone protection ( as guided by the montreal protocol ) .

as emissions of other odss ( eg , chlorofluorocarbon - 11 , halon - 1211 ) have declined due to regulation , n 2 o has emerged as the dominant ods emission .

the first - ever published ozone depletion potential ( odp ) value assigned to n 2 o , 0.017 , is less than the odp value of 1.0 for the reference gas chlorofluorocarbon 11 ( cfc - 11 ) .

while some may not see a cause for alarm based on the odp value alone , the quantity of n 2 o emissions and its potency as a ghg can lead to serious harm ( see table 1 ) .

the odp value for n 2 o does not allow for its mandatory inclusion as a class i substance for regulation under the clean air act .

however , n 2 o could be listed as a class ii substance at the direction of the epa administrator or regulated under section 615 of the act .

class i substances have an odp of 0.2 or more and are more harmful to stratospheric ozone molecules than class ii substances , which have an odp of less than 0.2 .

with or without odp substance listing , congress may find it useful to incorporate the ozone depletion impacts of n 2 o into its climate change policy proposals both to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to further ozone recovery achievements .

classifying n 2 o emission reduction as an eligible offset type , including n 2 o as a covered entity within a cap - and - trade program , or directing epa to use existing authority under the clean air act to regulate n 2 o are other available options to reduce n 2 o emissions for ozone or climate protection .

any option chosen to reduce n 2 o emissions will more than likely require an improvement of n 2 o estimation , measurement , and reporting methods and possible financial incentives .

congress could apply lessons learned from previous international agreements that are intended to abolish harmful compounds .

the outcomes of the montreal protocol , put into action in the late 1980s , may prove useful to congress in understanding the long - term implications of certain climate change policy options , specifically cap - and - trade .

a number of gases were phased out under the protocol , which allowed for each country to establish a regulatory framework to monitor and reduce odss .

certain ozone - depleting substances , such as n 2 o , were not included in the protocol partly because their threat was not perceived as urgent at the time .

however , one unintended consequence of the success of the protocol reducing targeted odss is that n 2 o has emerged as the leading ods .

