on june 11 , 2009 , in response to the global spread of a new strain of influenza , the world health organization ( who ) raised the level of influenza pandemic alert to phase 6 , which indicates the start of an actual pandemic .

this change reflects the spread of the new influenza a ( h1n1 ) virus , not its severity .

although currently the pandemic is of moderate severity with the majority of patients experiencing mild symptoms and making a rapid and full recovery , this experience could change .

the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) has often been described as the most sweeping nondiscrimination legislation since the civil rights act of 1964 .

it provides broad nondiscrimination protection in employment , public services , public accommodation and services operated by private entities , transportation , and telecommunications for individuals with disabilities .

as stated in the act , the ada's purpose is "to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities. .

the application of the ada to an influenza pandemic is uncharted territory since the most recent previous influenza pandemic was in 1969 , before the 1990 enactment of the ada , and before the 1973 enactment of section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 , which was the model for the ada .

title i of the ada prohibits employment discrimination , and specifically provides that no covered entity shall discriminate against a qualified individual with a disability on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures ; the hiring , advancement , or discharge of employees ; employee compensation ; job training ; and other terms , conditions , and privileges of employment .

the term employer is defined as a person engaged in an industry affecting commerce who has 15 or more employees .

the ada limits an employer's ability to make disability - related inquiries or to require medical examinations .

prior to an offer of employment , all disability - related inquiries and medical examinations are prohibited .

after a conditional job offer , but prior to the commencement of employment , an employer may make disability - related inquiries and conduct medical examinations as long as this is done for all entering employees in the same job category .

after an employee begins work , an employer may make disability - related inquiries and conduct medical examinations only if they are job - related and consistent with business necessity .

any medical information an employer obtains as a result of these actions must be treated as a confidential medical record .

if an inquiry is not about a disability or likely to elicit information about a disability , the ada's prohibition on disability - related inquiries does not apply .

the eeoc technical assistance document regarding workplace pandemic preparedness and the ada discusses disability - related inquiries in the context of a pandemic , noting that "asking an individual about symptoms of a cold or the seasonal flu is not likely to elicit information about a disability. .

an inquiry that seeks to determine if an individual would be in a high - risk group for pandemic influenza due to a chronic health condition like asthma would not be permitted prior to a pandemic .

similarly , such an inquiry would not be permitted during a pandemic where the illness , as is currently the case , is generally moderate or mild .

however , such inquiries may be made if public health officials find that the illness caused by the pandemic is generally severe .

any disclosures of medical information by an employee must be kept confidential .

for an ada employment - related issue , if the threshold issues of meeting the definition of an individual with a disability and involving an employer employing over 15 individuals are met , the next step is to determine whether the individual is a qualified individual with a disability who , with or without reasonable accommodation , can perform the essential functions of the job .

title i defines a "qualified individual with a disability. .

such an individual is "an individual with a disability who , with or without reasonable accommodation , can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such person holds or desires. .

the eeoc states that a function may be essential because ( 1 ) the position exists to perform the duty , ( 2 ) there are a limited number of employees available who could perform the function , or ( 3 ) the function is highly specialized .

it is a defense to a charge of discrimination that an alleged application of a qualification standard has been shown to be job - related and consistent with business necessity .

a qualification standard may include a requirement that an individual not pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals .

"direct threat" is defined as meaning "a significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by reasonable accommodation. .

eeoc states that the severity of the illness is the determinate of whether pandemic influenza rises to the level of a direct threat , and that this determination is to be based on assessments by cdc or public health authorities .

currently , the h1n1 influenza virus is not seen as posing such a threat .

the ada requires the provision of reasonable accommodation unless the accommodation would pose an undue hardship on the operation of the business .

"reasonable accommodation" is defined in the ada as including making existing facilities readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities , job restructuring , part - time or modified work schedules , reassignment to vacant positions , acquisition or modification of equipment or devices , adjustment of examinations or training materials or policies , provision of qualified readers or interpreters , and other similar accommodations .

the eeoc interprets reasonable accommodation as including work at home and the use of paid or unpaid leave .

during a pandemic , reasonable accommodations must continue to be provided unless these constitute an undue hardship .

for example , if employees are asked to telework to reduce the spread of the virus , an employee with a disability who needs an accommodation at work , such as a screen - reader , must be provided that same accommodation during telework , barring undue hardship .

"undue hardship" is defined as "an action requiring significant difficulty or expense. .

factors to be considered in determining whether an action would create an undue hardship include the nature and cost of the accommodation , the overall financial resources of the facility , the overall financial resources of the covered entity , and the type of operation or operations of the covered entity .

the eeoc has provided detailed guidance on reasonable accommodation and undue hardship , which , in part , discusses the use of paid or unpaid leave as a form of reasonable accommodation .

it is important to note that the third prong of the ada's definition of disability , being "regarded as" having a disability , does not require the provision of reasonable accommodation .

as a practical matter , this would mean that the provision of telework for individuals who are quarantined or subject to a "snow day" would not be required under the ada , even if an individual were to meet the requirements of the third prong of the definition .

