health care reform is at the top of the domestic policy agenda for the 111 th congress , driven by concerns about the growing ranks of the uninsured and the unsustainable growth in spending on health care and health insurance .

improving access to care and controlling rising costs are seen to require changes to both the financing and delivery of health care .

experts point to a growing body of evidence of the health care system's failure to consistently provide high - quality care to all americans .

both the house and the senate have passed comprehensive health care reform legislation .

on november 7 , 2009 , by a vote of 220-215 , the house approved the affordable health care for america act ( h.r .

3962 ) .

the legislation , introduced by representative dingell on october 29 , 2009 , is based on an earlier measure , the america's affordable health choices act of 2009 ( h.r .

3200 ) , which was jointly developed and reported by the house committees on ways and means , energy and commerce , and education and labor .

the senate passed an alternative health reform bill , the patient protection and affordable care act ( h.r .

3590 , as amended ) , on december 24 , 2009 , by a vote of 60-39 .

the senate measure is an amalgam of separate bills reported by the committee on finance and the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) .

the house is preparing to vote on h.r .

3590 , as passed by the senate , and on an accompanying reconciliation bill ( h.r .

4872 ) .

the reconciliation bill would change several controversial elements in h.r .

3590 and otherwise amend the underlying legislation so that its budgetary impact meets the reconciliation instructions in last year's budget resolution .

if the house approves h.r .

3590 , it will be sent to the president to be signed into law .

the reconciliation measure , if approved by the house , would then be taken up by the senate .

this report summarizes the workforce , prevention , quality , and related provisions in h.r .

3962 .

it begins with some background on health care delivery reform , followed by an overview of the report's content and organization .

in a november 2008 report outlining its goals for health reform , the national priorities partnership , representing 32 key stakeholder groups in the health sector , identified four major challenges to the delivery of high - quality care .

according to the partnership , the first is to improve patient safety by eliminating medical errors and other adverse events .

these errors mostly result from faulty systems , processes , and conditions that lead to mistakes .

the second challenge is to eradicate disparities in care .

racial and ethnic minorities and low - income groups face disproportionately higher rates of disease , disability , and mortality , largely because of variations in access to care , and quality of care .

the third challenge is to reduce the burden of chronic disease , which affects almost half of all americans and accounts for three - quarters of health care spending .

the final challenge is to eliminate unnecessary and ineffective care that compromises quality , drives up costs , and neglects the needs of patients .

according to the institute of medicine , an estimated 30% - 40% of health care spending is wasted on unnecessary and even unsafe care .

while primarily focused on health care financing issues , the health reform debate has encompassed a number of proposals to address these challenges and improve the delivery of health care services .

they include initiatives to encourage individuals to adopt healthier lifestyles , and to change the way that physicians and other providers treat and manage disease .

delivery reform proposals focus on ( 1 ) expanding the primary care workforce , ( 2 ) encouraging the use of clinical preventive services , and ( 3 ) strengthening the role of chronic care management .

the current system places a high value on specialty care , rather than primary care .

patients with multiple chronic conditions often receive care from several providers in different settings .

among other things , this can compromise patients' understanding of their conditions and ways to manage them .

and the incomplete or inaccurate transfer of information among providers can lead to poor outcomes .

care coordination is seen as an important aspect of health care that helps avoid waste , and the over - and underuse of medications , diagnostic tests , and therapies .

health workforce policy has emerged as an important component of the health reform debate .

transforming the nation's health care delivery system — from one that is focused on fragmented specialty care for acute illness to one that places a greater emphasis on primary care , disease prevention , and the coordination and management of care for chronic illness across settings — would require significant changes in health professions education and training .

while some advisory groups have warned of a future physician shortage , based on the growing patient demand for services , others caution that simply adding more physicians to the current health care system will increase costs and not improve accessibility or quality .

currently , the number of physicians per capita varies significantly across the country .

but that variation is largely driven by where physicians like to live and practice , rather than by patient need .

moreover , higher physician supply is not associated with better patient outcomes or satisfaction , or improved quality of care .

instead of focusing on overall physician supply , many health policy analysts recommend a workforce policy that couples the training of more primary care physicians ( and other primary care providers ) with the promotion and development of integrated systems of care .

expanding the use of clinical preventive services is a key goal of delivery reform and often touted as having the potential to reduce health care costs .

such services include immunizations and other interventions that prevent the onset of disease ( known as primary prevention ) , and screening tests that detect the presence of an incipient disease ( known as secondary prevention ) .

while there is clear evidence that clinical preventive services can improve health and may be cost - effective ( i.e. , providing good value for their cost ) , few of these interventions are cost - saving .

proponents of delivery reform have also embraced the concept of a medical home , intended to improve the quality of care through partnerships between patients and specially trained primary care physicians .

in this model , the physician helps the patient manage his or her own care and coordinates services across settings ( specialists' offices , hospitals , and laboratories ) and types of care ( acute , chronic , and preventive ) .

concern about the rising costs of treating chronic disease and the lack of coordination of care also has generated keen interest in disease management programs .

these programs , typically focused on a specific disease such as diabetes , can help patients manage their own care .

program elements include patient education , symptom monitoring , and adherence to treatment plans .

disease management programs share similarities with the medical home concept .

but whereas the medical home is built around a physician - patient partnership , disease management programs typically are run by health plans or specialized vendors .

h.r .

3962 consists of four divisions .

division a addresses private health insurance .

its provisions would mandate health insurance coverage , establish health insurance exchanges , and create a public health insurance plan .

division b covers the medicare and medicaid programs .

it would substantially reduce the growth of medicare's payment rates for most covered services , relative to the growth rates projected in current law , and significantly expand eligibility for medicaid .

division c , entitled "public health and workforce development," includes a series of provisions intended to increase the primary care and public health workforce , promote preventive services , and strengthen quality measurement , among other things .

finally , division d incorporates the indian health care improvement act amendments of 2009 ( h.r .

2708 ) .

this report summarizes all the provisions in division c except for those in title v , subtitle d , which would establish a new national insurance program for purchasing community living assistance services and supports ( class ) .

the class provisions are discussed in a separate crs product ( see below ) .

several provisions in division a and b that directly relate to health care quality , prevention and other topics covered under division c are also included in this report .

the house bill's provisions are grouped and discussed under the following headings: ( 1 ) public health investment fund ; ( 2 ) health centers ; ( 3 ) health workforce , including programs authorized under the public health service act ( phsa ) and under other statutes ; ( 4 ) prevention and wellness ; ( 5 ) maternal and child health ; ( 6 ) behavioral health ; ( 7 ) quality ; ( 8 ) health disparities ; ( 9 ) health information technology ; ( 10 ) emergency care ; ( 11 ) pain care and management ; ( 12 ) food and drug administration , including provisions relating to medical devices , biological drugs , and food labeling ; ( 13 ) 340b drug pricing ; ( 14 ) health provider - industry financial relationships ; and ( 15 ) miscellaneous .

in most instances , each section begins with some background on current law and practice so as to provide context for the subsequent brief descriptions of the bill's provisions .

table 1 summarizes the key public health , workforce , and quality provisions in h.r .

3962 .

unless otherwise stated , references to "the secretary" refer to the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) .

a list of all the acronyms used in the report is in the appendix a .

a companion product , crs report r40943 , public health , workforce , quality , and related provisions in h.r .

3590 , as passed by the senate , summarizes the provisions in the senate - passed health reform legislation that are comparable to the house provisions discussed in this report .

both reports are organized and formatted in the same way to ease comparison of the house and senate bills .

a crosswalk of the two sets of provisions is provided in table 2 .

h.r .

3962 would amend numerous phsa programs .

while authorizations of appropriations for many of these programs have expired , in most cases programs continue to receive an annual appropriation .

h.r .

3962 includes new authorizations of appropriations to fund most of these programs , typically through fy2015 .

it also would create a multi - billion dollar public health investment fund to provide additional funds for the programs .

the legislation includes several provisions authorizing the appropriation of amounts from the fund for specified phsa programs .

these amounts would be in addition to any amounts provided in annual appropriations acts under regular procedures .

to ensure that the fund is used to supplement and not supplant such annual appropriations , the authority to appropriate amounts from the fund would be contingent on maintaining a certain level of annual appropriations for the programs .

federal civil rights policy requires most health care providers to make interpretation services available to patients with limited english proficiency ( lep ) .

hhs regulations promulgated under the civil rights act require recipients of hhs financial assistance to provide meaningful access by lep persons .

recipients of hhs assistance include hospitals ; nursing homes ; home health agencies ; managed care organizations ; universities ; state , county , and local health agencies ; medicaid agencies ; public and private contractors ; vendors ; physicians ; and other providers .

providers who only receive medicare part b payments are not considered recipients of hhs assistance .

research has demonstrated that medicare beneficiaries with lep have a harder time accessing health care than lep seniors covered by medicaid .

some authors have argued that this difference may be attributed to the fact that federal civil rights policies require medicaid health care providers to offer language assistance , while physicians serving only medicare patients are not subject to the same requirements .

although all providers are bound by the civil rights act , which obligates health care professionals to make interpreters available to lep patients , studies suggest that a lack of reimbursement for language services and poor enforcement of the act has sometimes made it difficult for lep medicare beneficiaries to access translation services .

under general authorities in phsa title iii and title iv , nih established the pain consortium to enhance pain research and promote collaboration among researchers across various nih institutes and centers that have programs and activities addressing pain .

in addition , phsa sec .

403 requires the nih director to submit to the president and congress a biennial report that includes , among other things , a summary of the research activities throughout the agency organized by category ; the chronic disease category includes pain and palliative care .

the house legislation includes the following three sections that would address pain research , education , and awareness for the purposes of recognizing pain as a national public health problem .

phsa title iii , part r , comprising secs .

399aa - 399ee , authorizes several programs related to autism spectrum disorder ( asd ) and other developmental disabilities .

sec .

399aa authorizes grants for the collection , analysis , and reporting of state epidemiological data on asd and other developmental disabilities , and directs the secretary to establish regional centers of excellence in asd epidemiology .

sec .

399bb requires the secretary to establish and evaluate activities to increase public awareness of asd and other developmental disabilities , research and promote early screening , and support evidence - based interventions .

the secretary is further directed to provide culturally competent information about asd and other developmental disabilities to meet the needs of individuals with these conditions and their families through federal health , education and welfare programs .

sec .

399cc requires the secretary to establish an interagency autism coordinating committee to track asd - related research , monitor federal asd activities , make recommendations to the secretary , and submit an annual asd research plan to congress .

sec .

399dd requires the secretary to submit to congress a progress report on activities related to asd and other developmental disabilities , as outlined in the combating autism act of 2006 , no later than four years after its enactment .

sec .

399ee authorizes appropriations for the activities authorized under secs .

399aa , 399bb , and 399cc through fy2011 .

this section would amend title i of the developmental disabilities assistance and bill of rights act by adding at the end a new subtitle f , national training initiative on autism spectrum disorders .

within that subtitle , a new sec .

171 would require the secretary , in consultation with the interagency autism coordinating committee , to award training grants to qualifying university centers for excellence in developmental disabilities education , research , and service , or other comparable entities .

these grants would be used to ( 1 ) expand and develop interdisciplinary training and continuing education initiatives for parents , health , allied health , vocational , educational , and other professionals for the purpose of improving services provided to children and adults with asd ; and ( 2 ) develop model services and supports that demonstrate evidence - based practices , among other activities .

the secretary also would be required to reserve up to 2% of the appropriated funds to make a grant to a qualified national organization for providing training and technical assistance to the university centers for excellence .

this organization would assist in the national dissemination of evidence - based best practices from the interdisciplinary training programs ; compile and disseminate technical assistance materials ; assist in the coordination of grantees under this section ; and serve as a research - based resource for policymakers , among other activities .

there would be authorized to be appropriated $17 million for fy2011 , and ssan for each of fy2012 through fy2015 to carry out the training grant program .

in addition , the section would require the secretary to award grants to establish up to four new university centers for excellence in developmental disabilities education , research , and service .

priority would be given to minority institutions and facilities located in a state with one or more underserved populations .

the section would authorize to be appropriated $2 million for each of fy2011 through fy2015 for these grants .

this section would authorize the secretary to make incentive payments to states that enact and implement effective alternative medical liability laws that include litigation alternatives such as certificate of merit , early offer , or both , and that do not limit attorneys' fees or impose caps on damages .

in determining the effectiveness of such a law , the secretary must consider whether it ( 1 ) makes the medical liability system more reliable through the prevention of , or prompt resolution of , disputes ; ( 2 ) encourages the disclosure of health care errors ; and ( 3 ) maintains access to affordable liability insurance .

nothing in the section would preempt or modify existing state laws that limit attorneys' fees or cap damage awards , impair a state's authority to establish such laws , or restrict the eligibility of a state for an incentive payment on the basis of such laws provided they are not established or implemented as part of an alternative medical liability law that meets the requirements described above .

the secretary would be required to submit to congress an annual report on the progress states are making in enacting and implementing alternative medical liability laws and the effectiveness of such laws .

the section would authorize to be appropriated ssan for the incentive payments , which would be used to improve health care in the state .

this section would require states , in order to be eligible for federal funds authorized under the phsa , to agree , as an employer , to adhere to the requirements in division a of the bill , and assure that all political subdivisions in the state do the same .

this section would require the secretary to report to congress , within one year of enactment , on the epidemiology of , impact of , and appropriate funding required to address neglected diseases of poverty , including a number of specified parasitic diseases .

the report should provide the information necessary to enhance health policy to accurately evaluate and address the threat of those diseases .

this section would create a new phsa sec .

229 , establishing in the office of the secretary an office on women's health , for the establishment of goals and objectives , expert consultation , and other specified duties .

among them , the secretary would be required to establish a national women's health information center and an hhs coordinating committee on women's health .

the secretary would be authorized to provide funding and make interagency agreements as necessary to carry out these duties , and would be required to conduct evaluations of such activities and provide periodic reports to congress .

the section would transfer to this new office all functions of the existing office on women's health of the public health service .

in addition , the section would establish new offices of women's health , with specified duties , in cdc ( new phsa sec .

310a ) , ahrq ( new phsa sec .

927 ) , hrsa ( new phsa sec .

713 ) , and the food and drug administration ( fda , new federal food , drug , and cosmetic act , ffdca sec .

1011 ) .

for the ahrq office , there would be authorized to be appropriated ssan for fy2011 through fy2015 .

the section would also amend current authority for offices of women's health at nih and samhsa , to establish that the director of each office would report to the senior official of the respective agency .

this section and amendments made by it would not alter existing regulatory authority ; terminate , reorganize , or transfer authority away from women's health offices in existence as of enactment without the approval of congress ; or change existing administrative activities at hhs regarding women's health .

this section would add a new sec .

510 of the rehabilitation act , requiring the architectural and transportation barriers compliance board to issue guidelines for minimal technical criteria for new medical diagnostic equipment ( as specified ) used in medical settings .

the guidelines must ensure that individuals with disabilities can use , enter , and exit such equipment independently , to the maximum extent possible .

the board would be required periodically to review the guidelines and amend them as necessary .

within six months of the issuance of the guidelines , each federal agency authorized to promulgate regulations under the rehabilitation act or the ada would be required to prescribe regulations to carry out the provisions of each act with respect to accessibility standards that are consistent with the guidelines , and to ensure that health care providers and health care plans covered under this bill meet the requirements of section 504 of the rehabilitation act and the ada , including ensuring that individuals with disabilities receive equal access to all aspects of the health care delivery system .

this section would require the secretary to conduct a study to determine whether any newly established grant program under division c of this bill is duplicative of one or more hhs federal grant programs specifically authorized in the phsa or receiving appropriations .

if determined to be duplicative , the secretary would be required to attempt to integrate the new program with the duplicative programs .

and , if integration is not appropriate or not successful , the secretary would be required to promulgate a rule eliminating the duplication , including terminating one or more programs , if appropriate .

any funds appropriated to carry out a program that is terminated would remain available for obligation for the one or more programs that ( 1 ) were determined to be duplicative of such program and ( 2 ) remain in effect .

the section would require the secretary to submit a report to congress and make the results of the study publicly available .

this section would require the secretary , acting through the cdc director , to promote the education and training of physicians on the importance of birth and death certificate data , encourage state adoption of the latest standard revisions of birth and death certificates , and work with states to re - engineer their vital statistics systems .

the section also would allow the secretary to promote improvements to the collection of diabetes mortality data .

appendix a .

appendix a .

acronyms used in the repor .

