this report provides a summary of current developments in the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) effort to establish a national animal traceability capacity with the intended goal of being able to rapidly identify and respond to an animal disease outbreak .

national animal identification and traceability appear to have substantial economic value , yet federal proposals have proven controversial among certain segments of the u.s. cattle industry .

this report provides background on animal id and traceability in general , and the development of the current u.s. system of animal id and traceability in particular .

in addition , it reviews the claims and counter - claims of proponents and opponents of a national animal id system , and describes many of the unresolved issues related to program development .

finally , two appendixes offer a brief chronology of the development of the u.s. national animal identification system ( nais ) and its successor program , and a brief description of the major international organizations involved in setting standards and rules for animal health and trade in animal products , along with summary descriptions of animal id and traceability programs found in other major livestock producer and consumer countries .

animal identification ( id ) refers to keeping records on individual farm animals or groups ( eg , flocks or herds ) of farm animals so that they can be more easily tracked from their birth through the marketing chain .

historically , animal id was intended to indicate ownership and prevent thievery .

today , animal identification has been expanded to include information on the animal's origins ( eg , birthplace , parentage , sex , breed , genetics ) as well as traceability — the ability to trace an animal product back through the marketing chain to its source , while identifying those other animals or animal products with which it has come into contact .

in essence , a national database of animal id combined with traceability , accessible via a high - speed computer network , is considered the ideal system to permit quick response to news of an animal disease outbreak or the discovery of tainted food so as to limit threats to human or animal health and to minimize commercial damage .

versions of animal id systems currently exist in several countries , with differences based primarily on the amount and type of information collected and the extensiveness of the traceability system .

as a national animal id and traceability system has evolved in the united states , so too have its proponents and critics .

this section briefly highlights the potential benefits of a national animal id and traceability system as cited by its proponents , and the criticisms that have been raised by program opponents .

at the national level , an animal id and traceability program emerged and evolved over the years from various state and national animal disease eradication and pest control programs .

for example , usda's animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) — the federal agency that oversees animal health in consultation with state veterinary authorities — directs several programs for animal disease eradication and control that include animal identification components effectively requiring id and tracking .

as part of a brucellosis eradication program , uniquely numbered brucellosis id tags were routinely attached to animals , noting that they had been vaccinated or tested .

the program was successful , and brucellosis has largely been eradicated from u.s. commercial herds ; as a result , animal id became less common as the program wound down .

in addition to id requirements under selected aphis programs , certain classes of livestock have long had official identification requirements before entering interstate commerce .

for example , the official disease programs for pseudorabies in swine and scrapie in sheep require that both of these species be officially identified before entering interstate commerce .

often state laws or breed association rules require animals of these and other species , like cattle and horses , to be identified to participate in shows or races .

but these various programs are not national in scope and vary in their manner of animal identification , record keeping , and data management .

u.s. animal id limitations were noted after bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse , or mad cow disease ) was discovered in the united states ( in a canadian - born dairy cow ) in december 2003 .

a number of trading partners that had quickly closed their borders to u.s. beef reportedly were reluctant to reopen them , due in part to u.s. difficulties in tracing the whereabouts of other cattle that had entered the united states with the bse - infected cow ; similar difficulties arose in determining the whereabouts and / or herd mates of the two later u.s. - born bse cases .

the national animal identification system ( nais ) program , first proposed in 2002 , attempted to build on and learn from these earlier programs , and , although administered by usda's aphis , was based on a state - federal - industry partnership that provided the opportunity for producers not part of a disease program to voluntarily participate in national animal health safeguarding efforts .

certain states have mandated some components of animal identification , such as premises registration ; however , at the federal level , nais was a voluntary program .

usda's february 5 , 2010 , decision to replace nais with a more flexible , state - based program that mandates traceability only for livestock moving in interstate commerce responds to strong criticism of nais from the u.s. cattle sector , in large part because the burden of cost and implementation would fall most heavily on cattle producers .

the following discussion refers primarily to the now - outdated nais system , but is useful in that many aspects of nais remain highly relevant to the potential implementation of the new , as - yet - unnamed system to take its place .

since early 2004 , usda has committed nearly $142 million to the development of nais , providing many of the funds to states and tribal organizations for research , database systems , and startup of premises registration .

despite the large monetary investment , overall participation in nais remained low through 2009 at about 40% of livestock producers , and substantial criticism of the proposed national program resonated from the u.s. cattle sector .

in response to slow growth in nais participation rates and to better assess the producer concerns surrounding nais implementation , secretary of agriculture tom vilsack undertook a series of public listening sessions around the country between april 15 and june 30 , 2009 , to hear from livestock producers and other interested parties concerning their views of the nais .

secretary vilsack said that he hoped to use the listening sessions to gather feedback and input that would assist him in making decisions about the future direction of animal id and traceability in the united states .

it was the information obtained from these listening sessions , plus the thousands of written comments submitted to usda , that motivated secretary vilsack to announce the abandonment of nais in favor of a more flexible , state - based system on february 5 , 2010 ( as described in this report's introduction ) .

from fy2004 through fy2009 , approximately $142 million was appropriated for nais ( table 6 ) .

however , since 2008 congress expressed growing frustration with the slow pace of nais implementation relative to the funding outlays .

the explanatory language that accompanied the fy2009 usda appropriation ( p.l .

110-161 , division a ) , explicitly directed aphis "to make demonstrable progress" to implement the program , and to meet a number of specific objectives ( regarding 48-hour traceback ability ) that were in the agency's 2008 traceability business plan .

in 2009 the administration proposed increasing the funding for the nais slightly to $14.6 million in fy2010 .

however , on june 11 , 2009 , the house agriculture appropriations subcommittee voted to eliminate funding for usda's nais from the fy2010 appropriations bill ( h.r .

2997 ) .

subcommittee chairwoman rosa delauro , along with collin peterson , chairman of the house agriculture committee , both of whom expressed interest in seeing a mandatory animal id program passed into law , also expressed frustration with the slow pace of national sign - up for nais .

the full committee's report ( h.rept .

111-181 ) observed: after receiving $142 million in funding since fy2004 , aphis has yet to put into operation an effective system that would provide needed animal health and livestock market benefits .

until usda finishes its listening sessions and provides details as to how it will implement an effective id system , continued investments in the current nais are unwarranted .

the senate version of h.r .

2997 ( originally s. 1406 ) originally provided for the entire $14.6 million proposed by the administration .

an amendment to zero out senate funding for nais failed to pass in committee in july ; however , another floor amendment ( s.amdt .

2230 ; introduced by senators tester and enzi ) was passed on august 3 , 2009 , that reduced the fy2010 funding to $7.3 million .

the successful amendment explicitly restricted use of fy2010 funds to ongoing nais activities and purposes related to rulemaking for the program .

the senate version of h.r .

2997 , as amended , was passed by the full senate on august 4 , 2009 .

house and senate differences in nais funding for fy2010 were resolved in conference and the final fy2010 funding level for nais was set at $5.3 million .

the fy2010 agriculture appropriations bill was signed into law as p.l .

111-80 by president obama on october 21 , 2009 .

usda has claimed it has existing authority , under the animal health protection act ( 7 u.s.c .

8301 et seq .

 ) , to implement an animal id program .

in the 110 th congress , several bills were proposed ( but not adopted ) aimed at clarifying usda's authority or spelling out what type of program should be established .

they included h.r .

1018 , prohibiting usda from carrying out a mandatory program and also seeking to protect the privacy of producer information under a voluntary system ; h.r .

2301 , establishing an industry - led livestock identification board to manage a national id system ; and s. 1292 , requiring usda to implement a more comprehensive farm - to - consumer animal id and meat traceability program .

h.r .

3485 would have required comprehensive new traceability systems both for usda - regulated meat and poultry and for other foods regulated by the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) .

in the 111 th congress , the broader food traceability provisions of h.r .

814 ( degette ) and s. 425 ( brown ) both include the requirement that fsis establish , within one year , a system that can trace each animal to any premises in which it was held at any time prior to slaughter , and each carcass , carcass part , or meat / poultry product from slaughter through processing and distribution to the ultimate consumer .

the bills also would authorize the secretary of agriculture to require records to be maintained and to provide access to them for purposes of traceability .

traceability provisions have been incorporated into food safety legislation ( h.r .

2749 ) approved by the house and into a bill ( s. 510 ) expected to be the markup vehicle in the senate , but these provisions would apply to fda - regulated foods , not to fsis - regulated meat and poultry products .

the 111 th congress held two hearings on the national animal id system ( nais ) , both in the house .

on march 11 , 2009 , the house committee on agriculture's subcommittee on livestock , dairy , and poultry held a public hearing to review animal identification systems .

then on may 5 , 2009 , the house committee on agriculture's subcommittee on livestock , dairy , and poultry held a joint public hearing with the committee on homeland security's subcommittee on emerging threats , cybersecurity , and science and technology to review the national animal identification system .

previous congresses have held public hearings on issues related to animal id , including animal health and disease matters , as well as bio - security and agro - terrorism .

appendix a .

chronology of nais's development early u.s. history use of animal id in the united states dates back at least to the 1800s , when hot iron brands were used throughout the u.s. west to identify ownership and prevent thievery .

1940s during the 1940s , the aphis predecessor at usda initiated an extensive program to identify cattle vaccinated for brucellosis .

the official brucellosis vaccination tag and ear tattoo provided usda with a highly successful animal id program for cattle for decades .

however , since brucellosis has neared eradication in the united states , the system of tagging and id has been phased out .

1950s - 1980s individuals associated with animal industries recognized that finding potentially sick or exposed animals early in a disease outbreak was essential to containing the disease quickly .

usda slowly began piecing together plans for a national animal identification system .

1986-1988 bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse ) or "mad cow disease" — a fatal neurological disease — is first identified in the united kingdom's cattle and dairy herds .

bse is believed to be transmitted mainly by feeding infected cattle parts back to cattle ( a practice widespread in the uk at the time ) .

subsequent testing found bse to be widespread in the uk's cattle population and resulted in the slaughter of 3.7 million cattle .

1997 an outbreak of foot and mouth disease ( fmd ) in swine in taiwan cost $6.9 billion in losses and eradication costs , including the slaughter of 3.8 million pigs , and decimated its previously strong pork export market .

similarly , a major outbreak of classical swine fever in the netherlands resulted in the destruction of 12 million hogs and direct economic losses totaling $2.3 billion .

2001 an outbreak of fmd in cattle in the united kingdom ultimately led to the forced slaughter of over 10 million sheep and cattle and cost an estimated $7.9 billion in losses and eradication costs .

2002 aphis officials working with the national institute for animal agriculture , the u.s .

animal health association , and other organizations helped to draft an early version of an animal id plan .

2003 the preliminary work plan was expanded by a group of approximately 100 state , federal , and industry representatives — the national identification development team — which produced an initial draft of the u.s .

animal identification plan ( usaip ) .

december 2003 a draft "u.s .

animal identification plan ( usaip ) " is published calling for recording the movement of individual animals or animal groups in a central database .

aphis's role was to design an id numbering system , then allocate numbers to premises ( eg , farms , feedlots , auction barns , processing plants ) and to animals or groups of animals .

finally , aphis was to coordinate the data collection .

the work plan envisioned by the usaip had first called for all states to have an animal premises id system by july 2004 , with farm animals of all major species identified by july 2006 .

as the draft usaip was being published in december 2003 , the first case of bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse or mad cow disease ) was detected in the united states .

among the initiatives usda quickly announced to shore up confidence in the beef supply was accelerated implementation of a verifiable national animal id system including action taken by then - secretary of agriculture ann veneman who used her emergency authority to transfer $18.8 million of commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) funds to aphis for this purpose .

april 27 , 2004 secretary ann veneman announced the framework for implementing the national animal identification system ( nais ) .

the outlines of the program have been periodically revised since then in response to changing circumstances and input from industry participants .

may 2005 usda issued a "draft strategic plan" that included timelines for a mandatory program by january 2009 .

august 2005 usda announced the draft program standards with a new set of "guiding principles. .

april 2006 usda unveiled a new plan — "implementation strategies" — that set a timeline for full implementation by 2009 .

the plan stated that the program was voluntary with a contingency that usda would consider regulations that would require participation if voluntary participation levels were not adequate to have an effective program .

august 2006 nais program was initially designed with a vision of ultimately transitioning from a voluntary program to a mandatory program .

however , in response to various concerns raised by some producers , small farmers , and religious groups , then - secretary of agriculture mike johanns announces that nais would be entirely voluntary at the federal level .

november 2006 usda distributed a draft "user guide" as "the most current plan for the nais [which] replaces all previously published program documents , including the 2005 draft strategic plan and draft program standards and the 2006 implementation strategies. .

this user guide first identifies the proposed three - step approach — premises registration , animal id , and traceability — to implementing a national animal id program .

the user guide sought to assure livestock producers that the program would remain voluntary , and that it is bound by law to protect individuals' private and confidential business information .

december 2007 usda's aphis released the national animal identification system ( nais ) — a user guide and additional information resource .

april 2008 usda's aphis released a business plan to advance animal disease traceability in draft form .

this same report is currently available with a september 2008 date .

the business plan attempted to further clarify current implementation strategies .

it provided benchmarks to guide the nais' progress towards the long - term goal of 48-hour traceback of affected or exposed animals in the event of an animal disease outbreak .

one of seven key strategies would be to prioritize species , with the primary commercial food animals in "tier 1," along with horses that need a health certificate or test when moved .

all other livestock and poultry would be in a lower - priority tier 2 .

another key objective would be to bring 70% of the cattle breeding herd into nais by the end of 2009 .

january 13 , 2009 aphis published a proposed rule entitled , "official animal identification numbering system," ( docket no .

aphis - 2007-0096 ) in the federal register for comment through march 16 , 2009 .

the proposed rule would establish the seven - character pin as the standard location identifier .

april 15 , 2009 to june 30 , 2009 secretary of agriculture tom vilsack undertook a series of public listening sessions — with a variety of stakeholders representing the full spectrum of views on the nais — around the country to gather feedback and input to assist secretary vilsack and usda in making decisions about the future direction of animal identification and traceability in the united states .

april 29 , 2009 usda's aphis released the results of a comprehensive benefit - cost analysis — ksu cost - benefit study ( 2009 ) — of the nais .

february 5 , 2010 secretary of agriculture vilsack announced that usda was substantially revising its approach to achieving a national capability for animal disease traceability .

nais was to be replaced with a new approach that will allow individual states ( and tribal nations ) to choose their own degree of within - state animal identification ( id ) and traceability for livestock populations .

however , under the proposed revision usda will require that all animals moving in interstate commerce have a form of id that allows traceability back to its originating state .

march 2010 through august 2010 usda held a series of public meetings on the animal disease traceability framework to provide opportunities for state and tribal nation animal health officials to discuss and provide feedback .

aphis released two documents on august 13 ( animal disease traceability framework , overview and current thinking and animal disease traceability framework , update and preliminary content of the proposed rule ) that described what a proposed rule on traceability might contain .

appendix b .

international animal id and traceability organizations and standards the united states participates with its trading partners in several important international organizations that are involved in animal health , food safety , and trade in livestock and animal products including the codex alimentarius , the world organization for animal health ( oie ) , and the world trade organization ( wto ) .

in addition to u.s. participation in these international organizations , u.s. livestock and animal products are often subject to "export certification" standards imposed by importing countries .

as a member of the wto , the united states agrees to abide by a set of international trade rules that seek to harmonize participation in international commerce and to provide for a framework for dispute settlement .

in contrast , both the codex alimentarius and the oie are designed to recommend scientifically - based standards for food safety and animal health , respectively , but such standards are not international laws ; rather , they are intended as guidelines for countries when they are developing their own standards .

world trade organization ( wto ) in response to concerns that market access may be limited by use of non - tariff trade barriers , the wto's agreement on the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures explicitly restricts the implementation of traceability measures applied to imports to two requirements .

first , any traceability requirements must be scientifically justified based on an assessment of risk to human , animal or plant health .

second , they may be equivalent to , but not more rigorous than , the standards applied to domestic industry .

codex the codex alimentarius commission was created in 1963 by two united nations' organizations — the food and agricultural organization ( fao ) and the world health organization ( who ) — to develop food standards , guidelines and related texts such as codes of practice under the joint fao / who food standards program .

the main purposes of this program are protecting health of the consumers and ensuring fair trade practices in the food trade , and promoting coordination of all food standards work undertaken by international governmental and nongovernmental organizations .

world organization for animal health ( oie ) founded in 1924 as the office international des epizooties ( oie ) and renamed in 2003 as the world organization for animal health , the oie is an intergovernmental organization responsible for improving animal health worldwide .

in its capacity as a leading international standard - setting organization for animal identification and traceability , the oie helps its member countries and territories to implement animal identification and traceability systems in order to improve the effectiveness of their policies and activities relating to disease prevention and control , animal production food safety , and certification of exports .

in march 2006 , the oie's terrestrial animal health standards commission established a first series of guidelines on identification and traceability on behalf of oie members , which democratically adopted them in may 2007 as official oie standards in the terrestrial animal health code .

chapter four of the oie's terrestrial code includes two sections on animal identification and tracing: section 4.1 which defines general principles , and section 4.2 which provides general guidance on the design and implementation of systems .

in april 2008 , the director general of the oie ( bernard vallet ) called for progressive implementation of animal identification and product traceability systems from the "farm to the fork" be progressively implemented worldwide .

under internationally recognized oie standards , robust animal identification and tracing systems would allow compartmentalization and regionalization of a disease outbreak so that trade could continue for animal products from other parts of the country .

the oie's terrestrial code includes two sections that deal with compartmentalization: section 4.3 which defines general principles of zoning and compartmentalization , and section 4.4 which discusses application of compartmentalization .

export certification certification is frequently part of export verification processes imposed by importing countries .

in the united states , certification is handled by usda's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) .

although each specific country can have its own specific beef importing requirements , certification generally refers to the idea that animal production methods and processing plants comply with the importer's veterinary , animal health , and sanitary standards .

this often involves sanitary sampling and plant inspection by the importing country .

the oie contributes to harmonization of international certification standards through its various programs and via the promotion of transparency and reliance on scientific information as a basis for evaluation .

chapter 5 of the oie's terrestrial code presents the general obligations related to certification as well as certification procedures .

foreign animal id and traceability programs many of our international trading partners and competitors , including argentina , australia , brazil , canada , the european union , japan , new zealand , south korea , and uruguay , have adopted national animal identification systems with traceability capabilities ( table b - 1 ) .

canada the canadian cattle identification agency ( ccia ) is a federally incorporated , nonprofit , industry - led organization that manages , administers , and develops policy for canada's national individual identification , tracking , and trace - back system for the canadian cattle and bison industry .

the ccia is led by a board of directors made up of representatives from several sectors of the canadian livestock industry .

the government's canadian food inspection agency ( cfia ) is a non - voting board member of the ccia .

agri - food and agriculture canada ( aafc ) — canada's usda counterpart — works closely with the ccia to ensure that funding requirements for development and enhancement initiatives are met .

animal identification for cattle in canada was initially a voluntary program when first established in 2001 , but was phased into a mandatory program on july 1 , 2002 .

initially , identification was based on traditional ccia - approved ear tags .

however , in 2003 the canadian cattle industry committed to transitioning to radio frequency identification ( rfid ) .

since september 1 , 2006 , all cattle leaving their farm of origin must be tagged with a ccia - approved rfid tag consisting of a transponder with encoded chip and antenna .

according to the ccia , rfid benefits include exceptional tag retention and readability , increased data integrity , ability to read at a distance without line of sight , and future capabilities of full animal movement tracking .

ccia executive director kerry st. cyr , estimated that , as of march 2009 , the nationwide compliance rate for canadian cattle id was between 99-100% .

with respect to privacy issues , st. cyr stated that all personal information associated with ear tag number is securely maintained within the national database and is only accessed by authorized personnel in the event of an animal health issue .

ccia's repository — the canadian livestock traceability system ( clts ) — houses the national id and traceback systems for a variety of industry and species groups including dairy , beef , bison , sheep , pork , and poultry .

the canadian sheep and hog identification programs gained mandatory status in 2004 and 2008 , respectively .

australia the national livestock identification system ( nlis ) is australia's system for identification and traceability of livestock .

nlis is a permanent whole - of - life system that allows individual animals to be identified electronically and tracked from property of birth to slaughter .

a mandatory system for cattle has been in place since july 1 , 2005 , while a tracing system has been operational for sheep and goats since january 1 , 2009 .

similar tracing systems are under development for pigs and alpacas .

australia began its animal identification system in the early 1960s in coordination with a national program to eradicate bovine tuberculosis and brucellosis .

a mandatory property identification system for cattle was started in 1967 that identified herds in relation to a parcel of land ; these were referred to as property identification codes ( pics ) — an eight - digit number that identifies the state , region , and specific location of a property — and provided the ability to trace all cattle back to their last property of residence .

in the mid - 1990s , the established visual - read - only pic system was converted to an electronic ( using radio frequency identification devices ( rfids ) ) whole - of - life individual cattle identification system on the grounds that it was only a matter of time before such a system would be needed to ensure biosecurity , food safety and market access .

in 1998 , in response to a trading partner , individual identification was made compulsory for producers supplying the european union ( eu ) market to provide meat from hormone growth promotant - free cattle .

in 1999 , the nlis was introduced .

in a 2004 audit of the nlis — the national livestock tracing audit — all of the animals identified using nlis were traced to their property of origin within 24 hours .

in contrast , only 41% of cattle without nlis tags were located within 24 hours .

in 2005 , nlis expanded to mandatory animal identification for all cattle leaving their property of birth , and all stock movements must be read at points of transfer including saleyards and slaughterhouses .

in australia , at slaughter each individual animal is assigned a unique id number that is attached to a bar code .

as a result , individual animal id information is linked not only to live animals , but can also be linked to carcasses , hides , and byproducts of each animal .

however , unless specific agreements are reached between producers and harvesting facilities , the animals are generally grouped into lots by harvest date and time , and the individual animal information ( carcass data ) is not available .

australia's nlis is a joint commitment and working partnership between the australian government at federal and state levels and australian industry .

however , the federal government has an overall policy coordination role and supplies funding to underpin the national system .

state governments have legal jurisdiction over the movement and health of livestock .

the state governments work with industry in joint management committees to develop and implement legislation that underpins the animal identification program .

this committee in each state coordinates extension and producer education programs such as demonstration sites , an assistance hotline and industry seminars that assist producers with on - farm use of technology .

the state governments have established a registry of pics , are responsible for ordering of identification devices and have assisted with establishing the reading infrastructure and more recently auditing device performance and monitoring compliance with legislative requirements .

a private industry company , meat and livestock australia ( mla ) , currently administers the database for nlis .

as a result , data collected through the nlis are protected from australian freedom of information ( foi ) .

privacy and "commercial - in - confidence" provisions of the australian foi act offer additional protection via exemptions for this type of data .

european union the european union ( eu ) explicitly classifies animal identification as part of its "food safety" programs and has mandatory programs in place for the major commercial animal species .

the basic objectives for eu rules on the identification of animals are the localization and tracing of animals for veterinary purposes for the control of infectious diseases .

eu species - specific id systems have evolved over time in response to particular disease events including the outbreaks of classical swine fever in 1997 and foot - and - mouth disease in 2001 , as well as the 1997 bse crisis .

as the various animal id systems evolved within the eu , they have each incorporated trace back and general traceability as a system goal along with animal identification .

in april 1997 , in response to the bse crisis , the council of the european union implemented a mandatory system of permanent identification of individual bovine animals enabling reliable traceability from birth to death .

all bovine animals were required , by january 1 , 2000 , to be identified with double ear tags that identify individual animals , a register must be maintained at each animal location ( farm , market , etc .

 ) , cattle passports to record movements , and a computerized electronic national database includes both id and tracking information .

on july 17 , 2000 , an additional regulation was passed that fully implemented and made mandatory the bovine id and traceability system that is currently in place in the eu .

in addition to tracking animals from birth through harvest , the eu regulations stipulate the labeling of meat products in the following way: ( 1 ) a reference number that links the meat product to the animal or animals of origin ; ( 2 ) identification of the member state where the meat was harvested and processed ; and ( 3 ) the harvesting or fabrication facility's approval number ( s ) .

mandatory food traceability has been a part of the general food law of the eu since january 1 , 2005 .

since july 1 , 2000 , it is compulsory for all equidae moving within the eu to be accompanied by a passport during their movements ( on foot and during transport ) .

a mandatory identification system for porcine animals went into effect on august 28 , 2008 .

initially adopted in december 2003 , the eu's id system for ovine and caprine animals was entered into in full force in july 2005 .

japan japan has a mandatory bovine id and traceability system ( in place since december 1 , 2004 ) that identifies and tracks individual domestic animals from birth through the production chain until purchased by consumers .

imported beef is presently not subject to the same traceability requirements as domestically produced beef .

however , political pressure for such a requirement appears to be building .

in response to a series of food safety crises in the early 2000s , including the discovery of bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse ) in japan's domestic cattle herd and a series of labeling scandals , the japanese government implemented a series of animal traceability regulations and food safety oversight .

the first phase began in july 2002 when the law relating to special bse countermeasures was enacted .

as part of this new law , japan implemented a set of bovine animal traceability and identification laws that required traceability of domestically produced beef from farms to slaughterhouses by december 1 , 2003 .

in the second phase , japan's diet passed the food safety basic law on may 23 , 2003 , establishing the food safety commission .

then , in june 2003 the beef traceability law was enacted that required traceability be extended from slaughterhouses to processors , distributors , and retailers by december 1 , 2004 .

as a result , japanese retailers and restaurants now display animal identification numbers to allow consumers to reference information about the domestic beef that they buy and eat .

in june 2003 , japan's ministry of agriculture , forestry , and fisheries ( maff ) also announced a new japan agricultural standard ( jas ) program to certify the traceability of imported beef .

to gain certification , exporters must be able to provide all the same information required under the law relating to special bse countermeasures — date of birth , sex , breed , name and address of owner , location of fattening , date fattening commenced , and slaughter date — plus the names of all feeds and pharmaceuticals used in producing the animal .

south korea south korea has a mandatory domestic beef traceability system ( bts ) .

initiated in 2004 as a voluntary program , the bts became mandatory for domestically produced beef in 2009 .

the bts requires individual identification and registration in a central database system ( known as the beef traceability database ) .

the bts operates as a whole - of - life traceability system , tracking each individual animal from birth to the consumer .

for domestic beef produced under the bts , korean consumers can access a range of animal - specific information including the sex , breed , quality grade , location of birth and subsequent premises , owner's personal information , feed administered , medications given , location and date of slaughter , date of inspection , and location of processing .

in july 2009 , a south korean agriculture official reported that the south korean government intends to impose traceability requirements on imported beef as soon as december 2010 .

new zealand new zealand does not have a fully functioning national animal id system .

in august 2004 , the animal identification and traceability working group ( aitwg ) was established when industry approached the government to work together to improve animal traceability in new zealand .

in march 2006 , an animal identification and traceability governance group ( aitgg ) was established to oversee the development of a new animal id system under the name nait ( national animal identification and tracing ) .

as of early 2009 , nait still exists more as a project under development than as a functioning system .

currently new zealand has several partial systems that allow for traceability at herd levels but fail to provide effective traceability for individual animals .

in addition , these partial systems leave substantial coverage gaps at the national level .

the current focus is on developing traceability for cattle and deer populations .

the ministry of agriculture and forestry ( maf ) has stated that the addition of other species — whether flock / group or individual identification — to the nait system should only be considered once the system is up and running for cattle and deer .

new zealand's existing animal id systems began under the bio - security act of 1993 which provided for two systems of partial bovine animal id: the management information system for dairy administration ( minda ) and the national bovine tuberculosis identification program ( nbtip ) .

minda is a voluntary livestock and herd management system that has very high dairy herd participation ( 97% ) in new zealand .

however , minda was not designed and does not function well for animal traceability .

in contrast , the ntbip is a mandatory , herd - based system that requires the identification of cattle and deer before movement from their property of origin .

in addition to these two systems , several other private and governmental traceability databases are available for producers' use on a voluntary basis .

a new mandatory animal identification system for cattle and possibly deer is proposed to be in place by june 2011 .

the inclusion of deer is dependent on confirmation of the in - field performance of radio frequency tags .

brazil in 2001 , brazil created the brazilian bovine and buffalo identification and certification system ( sisbov , now renamed eras ) as a farm - level identification system for cattle .

in september 2006 , sisbov was extended to include the entire beef chain rather than just producers .

initially , sisbov was intended as a mandatory program for identification of individual animals with a target date of 2008 for mandatory national participation ; however , brazil's domestic market had little demand for origination information and brazilian cattle producers resisted adoption .

as a result , sisbov remains a voluntary program focused primarily on those premises engaged in providing animals to slaughterhouses that supply products destined for foreign markets that require origination information — most notably the eu which was brazil's largest beef export market at that time and which requires substantial identification and traceability criteria for imported animal products .

in addition , instead of identifying individual animals , animal classification has been by group lot under sisbov .

the eu has accepted individual tags for each group of cattle sold to export slaughterhouses .

since 2003 , successive audits of sisbov conducted by the eu's food and veterinary office ( eu / fvo ) have found severe shortcomings in brazil's animal identification and traceability system .

in 2008 , the eu imposed a near - total ban on beef imports from brazil , unless they were sourced from farms that had been approved by brussels .

however , in a report released on august 4 , 2009 , the eu / fvo suggests that the situation in brazil was getting worse .

europe has two major concerns: a lack of robust information , and the fear that foot - and - mouth disease could inadvertently enter the eu from brazil .

argentina in 2003 , argentina established a limited mandatory system of animal identification and traceability — the argentine animal health information system ( sgs ) — directed at animal products destined for the eu .

the argentine system included farm - of - origin information and permits that document cattle movements including whether the animals have been in areas exposed to fmd .

however , as in brazil , argentina operates its animal identification system primarily for identifying cattle ( generally in group lots ) destined for export markets .

starting in 2007 , official id tagging has been required for all calves born after september 2007 .

the compulsory cattle identification program will facilitate tracking cattle from birth to slaughter ; however , the entire argentine beef herd is not expected to be tagged until 2017 .

because argentina has traditionally been unable to control disease outbreaks — particularly foot and mouth disease ( fmd ) — its beef exports to the united states have been primarily restricted to thermo - processed beef ( heated to a specific temperature for a specified amount of time ) .

these export limitations provide ample incentive for argentina to improve its animal identification and traceability system .

uruguay uruguay is very dependent on external markets for selling a large portion of its annual domestic production .

an estimate 68% of uruguay's annual beef production was sold in foreign markets during the 2004-2008 period .

as a result , uruguay has a strong incentive to provide animal identification and traceability information as demanded by foreign buyers ; however , it is only since late 2006 that uruguay has been able to institute a comprehensive national program .

on september 1 , 2006 , uruguay's ministry of livestock , agriculture , and fisheries ( magyp ) implemented a mandatory animal identification system called the national livestock information system ( snig ) .

under snig , all individual animals must be identified ( i.e. , tagged ) before six months of age or before they are transported from their property of birth .

two tags are required for all cattle , one highly visible and one electronic , for example , an rfid device .

in addition , the appropriate paperwork that tracks cattle from birth to slaughter must accompany each animal .

the uruguayan government plans to have all herds registered and all cattle tagged by 2010 .

at that point , the government will require traceability be extended , not just to the point of slaughter , but also to all cuts of beef back to specific animals at their farm of origin .

snig builds on uruguay's national premises identification system ( dicose ) — established in 1973 — which , for participating producers , provided information on each individual animal in their herds .

private individuals or companies registered within snig must be used for movement notification .

termination records are recorded by magyp .

the snig database then includes premises and animal identification , movements , and termination data .

snig does not yet mandate further traceability to consumers , although this is under consideration .

the uruguayan government currently pays for the id tags , although it plans to shift the cost to the producers at some point in the future .

countries not implementing animal id programs not all countries with large animal populations have ongoing animal id programs — examples include bangladesh , india , indonesia , and russia .

reasons for the non - existence of animal id programs in these countries include the following .

many of these countries have large land masses consisting of mainly agrarian populations that are not technologically advanced .

also , several of these countries lack national distribution chains for animal products , instead relying on local production and marketing processes .

alternately , in many poorer countries of the world , consumers are simply unable financially to be overly discriminating in their choice of animal products .

as a result , many lower - income consumers are not willing to pay a premium for food that is identified and traceable .

