the supreme court in skilling v. united states held that the honest services class of mail and wire fraud offenses proscribes only bribery and kickbacks .

in doing so , the court took the middle ground between those who had urged that the definition be found unconstitutionally vague and those who favored sweeping and severe condemnation of public and private corruption .

the federal mail and wire fraud statutes , 18 u.s.c .

sections 1341 and 1343 , have been described as federal prosecutors' "true love," because they provide a basis for criminal liability in a broad spectrum of instances , and perhaps because they now carry a 20-year maximum sentence .

for the purpose of mail and wire fraud prosecutions , federal jurisdiction is triggered when a person utilizes the federal postal service or an interstate carrier or sends a wire or radio communication .

for example , the statutes may apply to schemes in which a fedex package or an e - mail was sent .

convictions are obtained after a prosecutor achieves the more difficult step of proving that an intent to further a "scheme or artifice to defraud" accompanied the use of mail or wire .

over time , the scope of "scheme or artifice to defraud" has been a subject of contentious debate , particularly with regard to schemes to defraud victims of rights unrelated to pecuniary assets .

congress enacted the honest services statute , 18 u.s.c .

section 1346 , in 1988 to incorporate within the ambit of the federal mail and wire fraud statutes schemes infringing on a victim's right to an official's or employee's "honest services" ( i.e. , an employee's honest work on behalf of a company or an official's honest public service ) .

high - profile examples include a guilty plea by the lobbyist jack abramoff to conspiracy to commit honest services fraud and the indictment of former illinois governor rod blagojevich on honest services fraud and related charges .

in the private sector , a notable case involves the conviction of jeffrey skilling , a former enron executive .

although it is generally agreed that congress has the authority to regulate the federal mail system and interstate wire communications , the sparse text and potential breadth of the honest services statute have prompted concerns regarding its constitutionality .

critics of the statute have argued that its mere "28 words" form a vague and unfair basis for federal criminal jurisdiction in many cases .

likewise , in an opinion dissenting from the supreme court's decision to deny review in a 2008 honest services case , justice scalia suggested that the statute's vague language invites federal prosecution of seemingly commonplace actions , such as "a mayor's attempt to use the prestige of his office to obtain a restaurant table without a reservation. .

prompted by these and other considerations , federal courts have employed judicial interpretation techniques to avoid an overly broad reading of the statute .

however , the federal courts of appeals disagreed regarding the appropriate approach .

perhaps in part to address the disagreement among the courts of appeals , the supreme court granted writs of certiorari in three cases , weyhrauch v. united states , black v. united states , and skilling v. united states .

the cases provided the court's first opportunity to interpret the honest services fraud statute since it was enacted .

particularly with the decision to review skilling , a highly publicized case connected with the collapse of enron , the grants of certiorari garnered significant media attention .

the court's granting of the three writs within a relatively short time frame , less than a year after justice scalia's strongly worded dissent from the denial of certiorari in a case from the court's 2008 term , prompted speculation that the supreme court might construe the statute narrowly .

the court in skilling hardly wrote upon a clean slate .

in 1872 , congress enacted the mail fraud statute "to curtail an epidemic of 'large - scale swindles , get - rich - quick schemes , and financial frauds.' .

in 1952 , it established an analogous federal crime , wire fraud , which applies to frauds committed by the use of wire , radio , or television communications in interstate commerce .

because the triggering activities for federal jurisdiction — use of mail or wire , including the internet — are very common modes of communication , the federal mail and wire fraud statutes , 18 u.s.c .

sections 1341 and 1343 , provide federal criminal jurisdiction over a broad range of fraudulent schemes .

except for the instrument ( the mail system versus radio or wire ) used to trigger federal jurisdiction , the mail and wire fraud statutes involve identical criminal conduct and are generally interpreted in the same manner by the federal courts .

the mail fraud statute subjects anyone to criminal liability who , "having devised or intending to devise any scheme or artifice to defraud , or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses , representations , or promises," deposits or causes to be deposited , knowingly causes to be delivered , or takes or receives , any "matter or thing whatever" in a post office or "authorized mail depository" or with "any private or commercial interstate carrier ... for the purpose of executing [a fraudulent] scheme. .

the wire fraud statute includes the same "having devised or intending to devise any scheme or artifice to defraud ..." and "for the purpose of executing such scheme" language but applies to transmittals of "any writings , signs , signals , pictures , or sounds" "by means of wire , radio , or television communication in interstate or foreign commerce. .

generally speaking , criminal convictions require the government to prove both an actus reus ( action ) and a mens rea ( mental state ) .

as mentioned , the actus reus component of the federal mail and wire fraud statutes is satisfied with proof of a relatively innocuous action — namely , the very common act of using mail or telecommunications .

for example , in united states v. weyhrauch , the defendant's alleged scheme involved voting a particular way on state legislation regarding taxation of oil companies in exchange for an oil company hiring the defendant to provide legal services .

however , the event triggering jurisdiction for purposes of the mail fraud statute was the defendant mailing his resumé to the oil company .

furthermore , in most cases , a prosecutor need not prove that a person actually used the mail or sent a wire or radio communication .

instead , it is generally sufficient that a defendant knew or should have foreseen that mail or wire would be used .

in addition , it is usually not necessary to prove that a victim was actually harmed ( i.e. , that a person was deprived of property or other rights ) .

thus , the success of mail or wire fraud prosecutions typically turns on whether a defendant had the requisite mental state — namely , whether he or she intended to devise a "scheme or artifice to defraud. .

for both crimes , a prosecutor must prove that a defendant had specifically intended to perpetrate a fraud .

thus , the statutes are sometimes described as having a "specific intent" requirement .

in the public corruption context , some courts of appeals have adopted relatively strict interpretations of this requirement .

for example , the court of appeals for the first circuit has noted that the intent requirement in the mail and wire fraud statutes requires that a prosecutor "indicate wrongdoing by a public official , [but] also demonstrate that the wrongdoing at issue [was] intended to prevent or call into question the proper or impartial performance of that public servant's official duties. .

other decisions have tempered the extent of the specific intent hurdle , however .

in a later case , the first circuit allowed that the "prosecution may prove this requisite intent to defraud through circumstantial evidence. .

in addition , the scope of activities which may constitute fraud for the purpose of fulfilling the intent requirement is relatively broad .

the supreme court has held that "scheme or artifice to defraud" extends to "any act or omission that 'wrong[s] one in his property rights by dishonest methods or schemes and usually signif[ies] the deprivation of something of value by trick , deceit , chicane or overreaching.' .

materiality presents a final component to the analysis in mail and wire fraud cases .

in general , federal courts require that a scheme to defraud must be material ; that is , it must have a natural tendency to induce reliance to the victim's detriment or to the offender's benefit .

however , as discussed , mail and wire fraud are typically punishable regardless of the ultimate success of a fraudulent scheme .

the honest services statute , 18 u.s.c .

section 1346 , states that for the purposes of the federal crimes of mail and wire fraud , "the term 'scheme or artifice to defraud' includes a scheme or artifice to deprive another of the intangible right of honest services. .

because of its sparse text but broad application , questions persisted regarding the scope of the statute and the range of situations to which it applied .

the provision's historical context , together with case law predating the provision and various constitutional considerations , informed judicial interpretation of the statute .

the courts of appeals had generally recognized a "need to find limiting principles to cabin the broad scope of § 1346. .

when explaining the need for such standards , courts referenced the constitutional concerns discussed supra .

some courts had also asserted that the text of the honest services statute would otherwise seemingly justify absurd convictions .

for example , at least one court had suggested that in private sector cases , "the plain language of the 'honest services' doctrine codified in § 1346 suggested that 'dishonesty by an employee , standing alone , is a crime.' .

thus , although "[u]nder such an application of the statute , [a defendant's] conduct [might be] clearly within the scope of § 1346 ... courts generally [had] been reluctant to apply § 1346 in a way that would expose employees to mail fraud prosecution for 'every breach of contract or every misstatement made in the course of dealing.' .

dissenting to denial of certiorari in an honest services case , justice scalia appeared to agree that a limiting principle was necessary .

he stated: "without some coherent limiting principle to define what 'the intangible right of honest services' is , whence it derives , and how it is violated , this expansive phrase invites abuse by headline - grabbing prosecutors in pursuit of local officials , state legislators , and corporate ceos who engage in any manner of unappealing or ethically questionable conduct. .

despite a general agreement that some limiting principle was necessary , however , the lower federal courts could not agree on a single approach .

some established special requirements before a defendant could be convicted for mail and wire fraud based on an honest services theory .

as discussed below , the three most prominent requirements include the "private gain," a "state law violation," and a "foreseeable harm" requirement .

others had declined to adopt tests applicable only to honest services cases .

they relied instead on specific intent and materiality requirements , required elements for mail and wire fraud convictions generally .

the court of appeals for the tenth circuit has perhaps articulated this view most forcefully .

in united states v. welch , it criticized the special tests as requiring courts "to judicially legislate by adding an element to honest services fraud which the text and the structure of the fraud statutes do not justify. .

defendants in the case were members of the salt lake city olympic bid committee who allegedly bribed members of the international olympic committee in an effort to secure salt lake city's chances to host the 2002 winter olympic games .

in rejecting various proposed limiting principles , the tenth circuit stated that the honest services statute "'must be read against a backdrop of the mail and wire fraud statutes , thereby requiring fraudulent intent and a showing of materiality'" and concluded that these existing requirements provided sufficient checks against the statute's potential overbreadth .

in september 2009 , the court of appeals for the ninth circuit took a similar approach in united states v. inzunza , a case involving former members of the san diego city council .

it joined what it characterized as the "majority rule," holding that the intent and materiality requirements implicit in the mail and wire fraud statutes rendered special tests unnecessary .

although courts sometimes characterized materiality and specific intent requirements as alternatives to the limiting principles established for honest services , they tended to emphasize that such tests were "inherent" in the mail and wire fraud framework rather than having been judicially created specifically for honest services cases , as are the following tests .

the united states supreme court heard argument in the honest services cases of weyhrauch v. united states , black v. united states , and skilling v. united states , in its 2009 term .

in their petitions for review , some appellants argued that the honest services statute was unconstitutionally vague .

although , as mentioned , justice scalia had signaled some willingness to consider that issue , a majority of the court ultimately decided to construe the statute narrowly in order to avoid due process vagueness concerns .

the supreme court used skilling for its principal decision ; it issued a separate confirming opinion in black ; and ordered weyhrauch returned to the lower courts for disposition consistent with its skilling opinion .

six members of the court joined in justice ginsburg's majority opinion which limited honest services mail and wire fraud to those cases that involve either bribery or kickbacks ; the other three members of the court would have found the honest services definition unconstitutionally vague .

in the lower court , the court of appeals for the fifth circuit upheld the conviction of former enron executive jeffrey skilling .

as enron's former chief operating officer and former chief executive officer , skilling was convicted of engaging in a conspiracy to overstate the company's financial position in order to artificially inflate the company's short - run stock price .

before the fifth circuit , skilling argued that his actions did not breach his fiduciary duty to enron , because he had acted in the company's interest .

the court of appeals rejected that argument , primarily because it appeared that enron had not approved the deceptive measures taken by skilling .

the court clarified that where an employer did not sanction a fraudulent scheme , a defendant may be found to have violated an underlying state law fiduciary duty even if he purports to have acted in his employer's best interest .

in his petition for certiorari , skilling argued that the supreme court should adopt the "private gain" test to limit the scope of the statute , and that without such a construction , the statute is unconstitutionally vague .

as conceived by the seventh circuit in bloom and thompson , the private gain test appeared to require an illicit intended gain or a gain otherwise outside of normal channels of compensation .

skilling's argument was that "there is no allegation ... that skilling sought to advance private interests instead of enron's," and any gain he received was through proper channels and thus would not qualify as "private gain" under the seventh circuit's test .

the supreme court neither endorsed the private gain test nor found the honest services statute unconstitutionally vague .

instead , it determined , as it announced at the outset of its opinion , that , "[i]n proscribing fraudulent deprivations of 'the intangible right to honest services,' §1346 , congress intended at least to reach schemes to defraud involving bribes and kickbacks .

construing the honest - services statute to extend beyond that core meaning ... would encounter a vagueness shoal. .

beginning in the mid - 19 th century , the court observed , an intangible honest services theory of fraud had gained some acceptance among the lower federal courts .

in 1987 , however , the court "stopped the development of the intangible - rights doctrine in its tracks" with mcnally v. united states .

concerned about the "ambiguous" nature of the doctrine and its implications for federal - state relations , the court in mcnally confined the mail and wire fraud statutes to the prosecution of schemes designed to deprive victims of money or other property , not merely honest services .

"congress responded swiftly" with the honest services statute which provides that , "for purposes of th[e] chapter [of the united state code that prohibits , inter alia , mail fraud , §1341 , and wire fraud §1343] , the term 'scheme or artifice to defraud' includes a scheme or artifice to deprive another of the intangible right of honest services. .

the court in skilling declined to find the honest services statute unconstitutionally vague .

it looked rather to pre - mcnally cases to ascertain how to accommodate congress's intent with the amorphous wording of the statute .

there it found the bribery and kickback fraud cases the most common and most consistently applied , and concluded that "[c]onfined to these paramount applications , §1346 presents no vagueness problem. .

beyond those cases , however , the court found the chaos and uncertainty incompatible with due process .

the government urged that the third most common among the pre - mcnally fraud cases — the self - dealing - conflicts - of - interest ( private gain ) cases — be admitted to the fold .

this , the court rejected in light of splits among the pre - mcnally lower federal courts and in the interests of lenity ( i.e. , when a criminal statute admits to two interpretations , the more lenient should prevail ) .

congress might of course include this category of offenses within the definition of honest services , but the court recommended that it do so with care: if congress desires to go further , we reiterate , it must speak more clearly than it has .

[if congress were to take up the enterprise of criminalizing undisclosed self - dealing by a public official or private employee , it would have to employ standards of sufficient definiteness and specificity to overcome due process concerns .

the government proposes a standard that prohibits the taking of official action by the employee that furthers his own undisclosed financial interests while purporting to act in the interests of those to whom he owes a fiduciary duty , so long as the employee acts with a specific intent to deceive and the undisclosed conduct could influence the victim to change its behavior .

that formulation , however , leaves many questions unanswered .

how direct or significant does the conflicting financial interest have to be ? .

to what extent does the official action have to further that interest in order to amount to fraud ? .

to whom should the disclosure be made and what information should it convey ? .

these questions and others call for particular care in attempting to formulate an adequate criminal prohibition in this context. .

as for skilling himself , it was clear to the court that the conduct with which he was charged and for which he was convicted did not constitute honest services fraud as construed by the court .

it left for the lower courts the question of whether this tainted his conviction on other grounds .

skilling raised a second constitutional issue — namely , that pre - trial publicity made skilling's trial presumptively unfair .

here , the court affirmed the holding of the lower court .

the court felt the trial court committed no error when it denied skilling's motion for a change of venue given the steps it took to ensure selection of an impartial panel .

nor , the court concluded , did actual prejudice taint the jury that convicted skilling .

justices sotomayor , stevens , and breyer contended that the trial court's voir dire of prospective jurors should have been more thorough and accordingly dissented from that portion of the opinion .

the court's skilling construction of the honest services statute doomed the jury instructions in black's honest services case as well .

the court wrote a second opinion , however , to address a separate issue raised there .

the seventh circuit had held that black forfeited his right to challenge the erroneous honest services jury instruction when he objected to separate jury verdicts on the government's alternate honest services fraud and money or property fraud theories .

not so , ruled the supreme court .

"[b]y properly objecting to the honest - services jury instructions at trial , defendants secured their right to challenge those instructions on appeal .

they did not forfeit that right by declining to acquiesce in the government - proposed special - verdict forms. .

black afforded the supreme court an opportunity to pass on the foreseeable harm limitation on the honest services statute .

the defendants were executives of a publicly held corporation , hollinger international , inc .

they were also majority stockholders in a canadian private corporation , ravelston corp. ltd. , which in turn held a controlling interest in hollinger .

rather than receive their compensation from hollinger directly , the executives were paid by ravelston out of management fees that ravelston charged hollinger .

in order to take greater advantage of canadian tax laws , the executives arranged for , and were compensated from , non - compete agreements between themselves and a hollinger subsidiary .

there was a factual dispute regarding the extent to which hollinger's board had knowledge of this arrangement .

the defendants argued that the board had been aware of the deal and that the payments they received constituted legitimate compensation for the do - not - compete agreements .

in contrast , the government alleged that the do - not - compete payments were actually management payments received without corporate approval .

the defendants urged the lower court to adopt the foreseeable harm test .

they argued that their convictions would fail under that test because they had arranged for the do - not - compete agreements in order to take advantage of a favorable canadian tax ruling rather than to harm their employer corporation .

however , the seventh circuit rejected the test , which it characterized as an argument equivalent to "no harm , no foul. .

instead , the court applied the private gain test .

thus , it focused on whether the defendants intended to reap a private gain by fraudulent means .

affirming a jury instruction which relied on the private gain test , the court upheld the defendants' convictions .

skilling established that the seventh circuit's ruling on the honest services jury instruction was clearly wrong .

the court left for the lower courts the determination of whether the error was harmless or warranted overturning the convictions of the black defendants and ordering a new trial .

weyhrauch presented only an honest services issue , and consequently the court simply returned it to the lower court with instructions to dispose of the case in manner consistent with the court's opinion in skilling .

in united states v. weyhrauch , the court of appeals for the ninth circuit had declined to adopt the state law limiting principle .

the defendant was an alaska state legislator who allegedly failed to disclose a conflict of interest regarding his relationship with an oil company prior to his vote on a bill addressing the taxation of oil production .

at trial , federal prosecutors sought to introduce legislative ethics publications which recommend that such conflicts be disclosed , together with evidence suggesting that alaskan legislators customarily disclose them .

however , there was no evidence that the defendant had violated any state statute .

the question on appeal was whether a mail fraud conviction on an honest services theory required a showing that a defendant's actions violated state law .

the court of appeals found that no evidence in the statutory text or the legislative history indicated a congressional intent to limit the honest services statute to only those cases that involve a breach of a state - law duty .

it also emphasized that congress has sufficient constitutional authority to regulate and punish the use of mail and interstate wire communications when they are used for fraudulent purposes and that the circuit had "never limited the reach of the federal fraud statutes only to conduct that violates state law. .

in his petition for certiorari to the supreme court , weyhrauch argued , in part , that as interpreted by the ninth circuit , the honest services statute allows a federal common law basis for conviction in conflict with principles of federalism .

the supreme court opted simply to resolve the case on honest services grounds .

skilling holds that an honest services fraud prosecution must involve bribery or a kickback .

congress may prefer more expansive coverage , modeled perhaps after one of the standards previously suggested by the lower courts .

if so , the court recommended that congress speak with clarity and precision .

