recent fire seasons have been getting more severe , with more acres burned and more damage to property and resources .

more acres burned in 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , 2007 , 2011 , and 2012 than in any other years since record - keeping began in 1960 .

many assert that the threat of severe wildfires and the cost of suppressing fires have grown because many forests have unnaturally high amounts of biomass to fuel the fires , as well as because of climate change and the increasing numbers of homes in and near forests ( the wildland - urban interface ) .

further , many believe that federal efforts to reduce biomass accumulations to historically natural levels have been hindered by public concerns about the impacts ; others contend that some proposed activities will lead to commercial timber harvests with little or no fire protection benefits .

congress is considering proposals to authorize and / or fund various activities to reduce biomass fuels and to alter the public review processes for some of those actions ( eg , h.r .

1345 , h.r .

1526 ) .

this report examines wildfire biomass fuels .

it begins with a discussion of fuel characteristics and their relation to wildfire intensity and spread .

this is followed with a description of actions proposed to reduce biomass fuel levels , their effectiveness for protecting property and resources from wildfires , and their impacts on other resource values .

it concludes with an examination of the federal authorities for fuel reduction activities on federal and nonfederal lands , together with data on the funding provided under each of these authorities .

severe wildfires have been burning more structures and more area .

many believe a significant cause is unnaturally high accumulations of biomass , and have proposed that congress provide more funding and broader authority for activities that reduce biomass fuels , and thus reduce the extent and severity of wildfires .

the principal tools to reduce biomass fuels are prescribed burning — deliberate use of fire primarily to eliminate fine fuels — and thinning — cutting some vegetation to reduce understory growth , the density of the forest canopy , and the fuel ladders that can allow fires to move from the surface into the canopy .

the existing authorities for federal agencies to reduce biomass fuel for wildfire protection are broad , though indirect .

congress enacts annual appropriations for hazardous fuels treatments and for other management activities that can encompass fuel reduction efforts .

however , the reporting on hazardous fuel treatment funding for the various types of fuel reduction activities and on accomplishments are insufficient for congress to assess progress in reducing biomass fuels .

also , information on funding ( from annual appropriations and mandatory accounts ) used for thinning and other activities that are substantially intended for wildfire protection , and reporting on results , are inadequate to compare the benefits and costs of these activities and funds .

distinguishing data on funding and accomplishments via prescribed burning , thinning , and other fuel reduction efforts by ecosystem or fire regime , and separating results from wildland fire use , would likely improve the understanding of the nature , extent , and results of appropriations .

improved reporting on funding and on results , with information disaggregated by ecosystem or fire regime , may help congress in its deliberations over appropriate funding allocations among activities and agencies .

all biomass is potentially fuel for wildfires .

in temperate ecosystems , wildfires are inevitable , because dry conditions and ignitions ( natural , such as lightning , and anthropogenic , such as matches and campfires ) occur .

some wildfires are low - intensity , surface fires that burn the surface fuels ( eg , grasses , needles , leaves ) .

other fires , under certain conditions , become high - intensity conflagrations ( crown fires ) that burn through the forest canopy , killing many of the standing trees .

whether a wildfire is a surface fire ( which can be controlled readily ) or a crown fire ( which cannot ) depends on the fuel characteristics and the weather ( wind , recent precipitation , and recent and current relative humidity ) .

since weather is uncontrollable , fire protection efforts focus on altering fuel characteristics to try to prevent or minimize the damages caused by crown fires .

many have proposed reducing fuel loads to increase the ability to suppress wildfires and to reduce the likelihood of crown fires , and thus reducing the extent and damage of wildfires .

as noted above , this has been documented as a valid presumption in some ecosystems , and possibly valid in others .

it is , however , not appropriate for all ecosystems .

furthermore , reducing fuel loads has little , if any , benefit for protecting structures and communities from wildfires .

reducing the risk of crown fires might seem to provide protection for infrastructure in the wildland - urban interface , but evidence from the hayman fire in 2002 ( the largest wildfire in colorado history ) shows the potential futility of such efforts .

of the 132 homes burned in the hayman fire , 70 ( 53% ) "were destroyed in association with the occurrence of torching or crown fire in the home ignition zone .

sixty - two ( 47% ) were destroyed by surface fire or firebrands. .

a total of 662 homes ( 83% of the homes within the hayman fire perimeter ) survived relatively unscathed , despite more than half the area being in high - severity ( 35% ) and moderate - severity ( 16% ) burns ; some of these homes ( the number and portion were not documented ) likely survived despite crown fire around them .

reducing fuel loads might reduce the extent of wildfires in surface - fire ecosystems , but many observers have suggested the need to expand the area burned in low - intensity surface fires to maintain lower fuel loads and other more historically natural conditions and values .

nonetheless , reducing fuel loads and eliminating fuel ladders may be necessary to the relatively safe existence and use of low - intensity wildfire and prescribed fire in surface - fire ecosystems .

a variety of activities have been proposed for reducing fuel loads and otherwise modifying fuel characteristics .

the most common proposals are prescribed burning and thinning — alone or in combination — while other activities ( eg , release , pruning , salvage logging ) are occasionally suggested .

some observers have cautioned , however , that such activities do not always reduce the risk of crown fires: thinning and prescribed fires can modify understory microclimate that was previously buffered by overstory vegetation … thinned stands ( open tree canopies ) allow solar radiation to penetrate to the forest floor , which then increases surface temperatures , decreases fire fuel moisture , and decreases relative humidity compared to unthinned stands — conditions that can increase surface fire intensity …[and] may increase the likelihood that overstory crowns ignite. .

five federal agencies are responsible for wildfire protection of the federal lands they administer: the forest service ( fs ) in the department of agriculture , and the bureau of land management ( blm ) , national park service ( nps ) , fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , and bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) in the department of the interior ( doi ) .

none of the agencies is explicitly authorized or directed to reduce biomass fuels on its lands .

rather , each is implicitly authorized to reduce fuels for wildfire protection within its mandate to preserve and protect the lands and resources under its jurisdiction .

since 1897 , for example , the fs ( and its predecessor agencies ) has been directed to "make provisions for the protection against destruction by fire and depredations upon the public forests and forest reservations" ( renamed national forests in 1907 ) .

in 1916 , when the nps was created , congress directed management "to conserve the scenery and the natural and historic objects , and the wild life" of its lands .

implicit blm authority was provided in the federal land policy and management act of 1976 ( flpma ) : the public lands shall be managed in a manner that will protect the quality of scientific , scenic , historical , ecological , environmental , air and atmospheric , water resource , and archeological values ; that , where appropriate will preserve and protect certain public lands in their natural condition ; that will provide food and habitat for fish and wildlife and domestic animals ; and that will provide for outdoor recreation and human occupancy and use.… fws management direction is similarly broad: "for the conservation , management , and where appropriate , restoration of the fish , wildlife , and plant resources and their habitats … for the benefit of present and future generations of americans. .

the bia has the most explicit direction ; indian forest land management activities are defined to include ( c ) forest land development , including forestation , thinning , tree improvement activities and the use of silvicultural treatments to restore or increase growth and yield to the full productive capacity of the forest environment ; [and] ( d ) protection against losses from wildfire , including … construction of firebreaks , hazard reduction , prescribed burning ... [emphasis added] despite the general , broad , generic authority for biomass fuel reduction activities ( prescribed burning , thinning , and more ) , the agencies have both specific funding programs and the authority to use general management funds for these types of activities .

below is a description of each agency's relevant programs .

the forest service has several accounts which fund activities that can reduce biomass fuels .

the primary funding for prescribed burning is the hazardous fuels sub - account , within the other operations account of the wildland fire management line item .

although this sub - account is the primary source of funds for prescribed burning , it can be used for other fuel reduction activities , such as thinning , as well .

how much hazardous fuels funding is used for prescribed burning or for other activities , and which ecosystems ( specifically or by fire regime ) the activities occur in , are not reported .

as shown in table 1 , hazardous fuels funding rose substantially in fy2001 , then continued to rise steadily through fy2008 , before jumping again in fy2009 due to the substantial funding in the economic stimulus legislation ( p.l .

111-5 ) , and then declining over the last few years to more than half of the fy2009 funding total .

thinning — for fuel reduction as well as for other purposes ( eg , enhancing timber production ) — is funded within the vegetation and watershed management account of the national forest system line item .

this account also includes reforestation , rangeland improvements ( eg , grass seeding ) , watershed protection ( eg , slope stabilization ) , noxious weed control and eradication , and air quality ( eg , smoke ) management efforts .

in fy2008 , about 20% of appropriations to this account funded thinning and related activities ( eg , pruning ) ; however , the portion used for thinning varies from year to year .

in addition , the portion of thinning funded through vegetation management that is primarily intended to improve wildfire protection is unknown .

the fs has three mandatory spending accounts that also provide funds for activities that can reduce biomass fuels .

one is brush disposal ( bd ) ; this account collects deposits from timber purchasers to be used by the fs to treat the slash from logging operations in the national forests .

slash treatments include mechanical efforts ( crushing , bulldozer - piling ) , manual efforts ( eg , lopping - and - scattering , hand - piling ) , and prescribed burning ( broadcast burning , burning slash piles ) .

although the funds are to be used on timber sale areas , slash treatment following thinning operations is also sometimes funded through the bd account .

these activities are typically not counted as fuel reduction efforts , but the primary purpose of slash treatment is to reduce fire hazards .

another mandatory spending account is the knutson - vandenberg ( k - v ) fund .

this account also collects deposits from timber purchasers , to be used by the fs to reforest and otherwise improve the forest following logging operations ( such as through thinning , watershed protection , etc. ) .

thus , k - v funds can be used in a manner similar to vegetation and watershed management appropriations .

again , how much funding is used for thinning and the portion of thinning that improves wildfire protection are unknown .

the third relevant fs mandatory spending account is stewardship contracting .

the fs is authorized to include forest stewardship activities , such as thinning for fuel reduction , as requirements in these timber sale contracts .

deposits to this account occur when the contracts generate net receipts ( i.e. , the value of the timber harvested exceeds the cost of the stewardship activities ) .

the funds can then be used on a variety of activities , including thinning .

the agency does not report how much thinning is funded and the portion that improves wildfire protection .

the four agencies within doi receive appropriations in accounts similar to the fs accounts .

the hazardous fuels sub - account , within the other operations account of the wildland fire management line item , provides the majority of funding for prescribed burning , although the funds can be used for other fuel reduction activities .

the portion used for prescribed burning , and the ecosystems treated by each method , are not reported .

wildland fire management is now funded as a department - wide program ; prior to fy2008 , wildland fire management was funded through the blm , with the blm allocating funds to each of the other agencies .

as shown in table 1 , doi fuel reduction funding in the hazardous fuels sub - account jumped in fy2001 , and has been relatively stable since .

other fuel reduction activities , such as thinning , are funded through general land and resource management accounts for each of the doi agencies .

these funds can be used for various activities that might improve wildfire protection by reducing fuel loads .

for the blm , the principal account is land resources , within the management of lands and resources line item ; the blm also receives funds for the western oregon resources management account within the oregon and california ( o&c ) grant lands line item .

funds from both accounts could be used for activities that reduce biomass fuels .

the nps has two accounts , park protection and resource stewardship , both within the operation of the national park system line item ; both fund activities to protect and restore natural and cultural resources , and thus could fund fuel reduction activities that reduce wildfire threats .

for the fws , several accounts within the resource management line item could fund activities that reduce wildfire threats to migratory birds , wildlife habitats , and the national wildlife refuge system .

the bia has several sub - accounts within the trust — natural resources management account of the operation of indian programs line item that could fund activities that reduce wildfire threats on indian lands .

however , the portion of the funds from each of these accounts used for fuel reduction activities is unknown .

the blm has one mandatory spending account that can be used for activities that reduce biomass fuels to improve wildfire protection: the forest ecosystem health and recovery fund .

these funds can be used for a variety of activities , including reducing wildfire risk for damaged forests ( eg , having high tree mortality due to an insect infestation or disease epidemic ) .

the portion that might be used to improve wildfire protection is unknown .

as with fuel reduction authorities for federal lands , federal authorities for assisting fuel reduction on nonfederal lands are indirect , at best .

the fs has two wildfire protection assistance programs that can include fuel reduction .

none of the other agencies have financial and technical assistance programs for state or local governments or private landowners that can be used for biomass fuel reduction activities .

one fs wildfire protection assistance program is state fire assistance ( also called rural fire protection ) .

funding is authorized for technical and financial assistance to states for fire prevention , fire control , and prescribed burning for fire protection .

allocation to the states is based on a non - statutory formula ( at the agency's discretion ) , and the portion used for fuel reduction via prescribed burning is at each state's discretion .

the other fs wildfire protection assistance program is volunteer fire assistance .

the fs is authorized to provide technical and financial assistance for fire prevention , fire control , and prescribed burning for fire protection .

eligibility is limited to rural volunteer fire departments , defined as "any organized , not for profit , fire protection organization that provides service primarily to a community or city" of up to 10,000 people "whose firefighting personnel is 80 percent or more volunteer , and that is recognized as a fire department by the laws of the state …" allocation is at the agency's discretion , and any funding used for fuel reduction is at the local fire department's discretion .

the fs is also authorized to support community wildfire protection .

the program was created in the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) in part to expand homeowner and community outreach and education ( including community wildfire protection planning ) and to establish defensible space around private homes and property .

the fs is authorized to reduce biomass fuels on private lands ( among other things ) with the landowner's consent .

to date , no funds have been appropriated for this program , although state fire assistance funding could be used to implement the program .

the fs also has other technical and financial assistance programs that might be used to assist in reducing fuels on nonfederal lands .

various programs provide financial and technical assistance for forest stewardship ( including thinning ) , forest health protection ( including insect and disease control ) , and emergency restoration for forests damaged by natural disasters ( including clearing downed trees ) .

the portion of funds appropriated to these several programs that might contribute to wildfire protection through biomass fuel reduction is unknown .

