currently , there is a moratorium on the conduct of omb circular a - 76 competitions that has been extended through fy2012 .

the moratorium was extended through the passage of section 733 of h.r .

2055 , the consolidated appropriations act for fy2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) .

this moratorium prohibits the conduct of all public - private competitions pursuant to omb circular a - 76 throughout the federal government .

this moratorium is consistent with section 2461 of title 10 , united states code ( usc ) , which prohibits the conversion of any work currently performed ( or designated for performance ) by civilian personnel to contract performance , unless certain conditions are met .

congress has enacted legislation to require several reports to evaluate dod's conduct of a - 76 competitions .

these reports are listed in table 1 below .

the moratorium on the conduct of a - 76 competitions cannot be lifted until all of these reports have been completed .

a more detailed discussion follows table 1 .

some in congress view the current moratorium period as an opportunity to examine the omb circular a - 76 policy , to review the inventory of contracted services to determine how much work is contracted out to private contractors , and to ascertain whether contractors perform work that is inherently governmental .

some others in congress view the current moratorium as an unnecessary restraint on achieving further efficiencies and cost - savings .

while the issue of continuing or suspending the moratorium is in debate , questions will likely continue to be raised as to whether the federal government should continue to invest time and resources in conducting future a - 76 competitions .

some potential oversight issues may include the following: the dod moratorium was imposed , in part , because of gao and dod inspector general reports which concluded that dod components were unable to demonstrate that a - 76 competitions consistently resulted in savings to the government .

some reports questioned whether there was complete and reliable cost data related to the conduct of a - 76 competitions that make it possible to determine the overall savings to dod .

some reports stated that if savings could not be satisfactorily demonstrated , perhaps a - 76 competitions should not resume .

the dod inspector general reported as early as 2003 that the standard 12% rate was not a fair estimate for calculating general and administrative overhead costs for a - 76 competitions , and dod officials who met with gao in august 2011 stated that dod would review the procedures used to estimate and compare costs of different configurations of military , civilian , and contractors .

should congress give dod an opportunity to better refine its methodologies used to help make better decisions on the total workforce mix before lifting the moratorium ? .

to what degree have the problems that led to the moratorium been resolved ? .

how would the omb circular a - 76 process be any different today if the moratorium were lifted ? .

in the house armed services committee report on h.r .

4310 , an amendment was offered to remove the moratorium preventing dod from using omb circular a - 76 to conduct public - private competitions .

the amendment failed in a roll call vote , 25-36 .

h.amdt .

1112 to h.r .

4310 , was introduced on may 17 , 2012 .

the amendment would have reintroduced competition by ending the current moratorium on the conduct of circular a - 76 competitions , as described here .

the amendment failed in a recorded vote , 209-211 .

my amendment will strike the law that prevents the secretary of defense from utilizing private sector competition to provide new products or services .

it replaces those restrictions with the ability to competitively bid out for new commercial products or services and select the most cost - effective option .

further , it removes criteria that compel the pentagon to insource competitive contracts currently being performed .

h.amdt .

1056 to h.r .

5326 , the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act for fy2013 , was introduced on may 8 , 2012 , and sought to strike a provision ( section 212 ) which would prohibit the conduct of future circular a - 76 competitions for work performed by employees of the bureau of prisons or of federal prison industries , as described below .

the amendment failed to pass , 199-211 .

sec .

212 .

none of the funds appropriated by this act may be used to plan for , begin , continue , finish , process , or approve a public - private competition under the office of management and budget circular a 76 or any successor administrative regulation , directive , or policy for work performed by employees of the bureau of prisons or of federal prison industries , incorporated .

