south korea's shifting political landscape has had a significant impact in recent years on the nation's external relations , including its political and strategic relationship with the united states .

current south korean president lee myung - bak , who belongs to the right - of - center grand national party ( gnp ) , came to power in february 2008 pledging to boost domestic economic growth , improve alliance relations with the united states , and enhance south korea's international status .

a former business tycoon , lee's promise of a "pragmatic," business - like approach to economic policy resonated with korean voters hoping for more stable and sustained economic growth .

lee also promised to end the policy of unconditional engagement of north korea practiced by his left - of - center predecessor , roh moo - hyun .

the president has instead pursued a "reciprocal" relationship with the north korean regime .

but a series of political setbacks early in the lee administration , including the contentious april 2008 agreement to lift a ban on most u.s. beef imports , have hampered momentum toward some of the president's key policy objectives , such as efforts to enhance the bilateral alliance with the united states .

although lee's approval ratings have improved in recent months due to better - than - expected economic performance , his support rate is fragile and his plans for the bilateral alliance remain vulnerable to the polarized domestic political climate .

many believe that lee's problems stem in part from his own handling of issues , but they are also symptomatic of the complexities of the south korean political culture and system .

south korea's emergence from an authoritarian state to a democracy — in just over two decades — has unleashed an outburst of participatory democracy that is marked by a burgeoning civil society , a generally free and highly critical mass media , a fluid political party system , and a sophisticated use of the internet to galvanize and mobilize massive anti - government public demonstrations .

after decades of authoritarian rule that ended in the late 1980s , south korean leaders are now exposed to intense public scrutiny and are more dependent on public support to implement their policy agendas .

yet for all its accomplishments , south korea's democratic development is still considered by many to be a work in progress .

the legislative branch of government , comprising the 299-member unicameral national assembly , is structurally weak compared to the presidency and the central bureaucracy .

limited to a single , five - year term , korean leaders nonetheless risk becoming lame - ducks soon after taking office .

south korean political parties form , disband , and merge regularly , in part because they tend to be regionally - based and centered around charismatic personalities rather than substantive issues .

the fractious nature of the south korean political system complicates policymaking in seoul , particularly over politically - charged issues involving north korea and the united states .

concerns about the current political system have spurred a growing movement in south korea to revise the constitution in order to allow further structural and institutional improvements to the domestic political system .

 ( for more on the current south korean political system see the appendix . ) .

all of these factors exist in the backdrop of south korea's evolution from a developing , authoritarian state to the world's 13 th - largest economy and rapidly maturing democracy — a transition that has not yet reconciled traditional insecurities about south korea's position vis - à - vis surrounding great powers and growing aspirations to become an advanced nation in its own right .

this tension has immediate consequences for south korean foreign policy and relations with the united states , which has been south korea's most important partner since helping to found the nation in 1948 .

at times resentful of u.s. influence , south korean public attitudes toward the united states have been on an upswing of late amid ongoing bilateral efforts to work out sensitive alliance management issues .

lee's shift toward a conditional relationship with north korea also has reshaped seoul's regional diplomacy .

in particular , the move has realigned south korea with the united states and japan in their attempt to pressure pyongyang to abandon its nuclear weapons program , while diverging somewhat from pro - engagement china .

public support for this approach , along with lee's vision of a "global korea" and efforts to strengthen the bilateral u.s. - south korea alliance , may be lost if the president fails to maintain his political standing until his term ends in february 2013 .

a year and a half into his five - year , single term presidency , president lee has encountered multiple political challenges that have damaged his popularity throughout much of his administration .

the president's early political troubles destroyed much of his political "honeymoon" period and made it difficult for him to navigate attacks from both his left and right flanks .

this has hampered many of lee's policy priorities , including the revitalization of alliance ties with the united states .

one of the initial signs of trouble in the lee administration was the massive anti - government protests that followed the april 2008 u.s. - korea beef deal .

the protests dropped lee's approval ratings to the 20% - 30% level , compared with the 49% of the vote the former mayor of seoul and hyundai businessman captured in the five - candidate presidential election on december 19 , 2007 .

many analysts believe that lee also took a political hit as a result of the lee government's initial response to external economic shocks , particularly the global financial crisis , which contributed to a slowdown in korea's economic performance .

some polls indicate that lee's approval ratings in the early fall of 2009 climbed back into the high 40% range , principally due to slightly improved economic forecasts for south korea .

the 2008 beef protests , which for weeks virtually paralyzed policy - making in seoul , appear to have been fueled by a coalescing of several factors , including a perception that the beef deal symbolized lee's allegedly "arrogant" decision - making style ; a feeling that the avowedly pro - american lee was too willing to concede to the united states on an issue of public safety ; increased angst over south korea's deteriorating economic situation , caused in part by rising inflation and global financial disruptions ; and a desire by the main opposition party , the democratic party , to reverse electoral setbacks that had deprived its predecessor party of the presidency ( in a december 2007 election ) and control of the national assembly ( in april 2008 parliamentary elections ) .

the beef agreement also tapped into many south koreans' widespread resentment of what they perceive to be an unequal relationship with the united states .

although the protests dwindled considerably after the announcement of a renegotiated u.s. - south korean deal on beef on june 21 , 2008 , they significantly eroded lee's ability to take political risks and promote his policy agenda at the very start of his administration .

throughout 2008 and much of 2009 , lee has had to back off many of the ambitious policy initiatives he either campaigned on or launched after assuming office , including a plan to link seoul to pusan by water by digging a "grand canal. .

perhaps most significantly for the united states , lee's weakened position has meant that he has had less political capital — let alone political will — to spend on measures to achieve his goal of upgrading the u.s. - south korean alliance , including overcoming opposition to relocating u.s. bases in south korea .

south korea's diplomatic approach toward neighboring northeast asian nations has changed significantly since president lee succeeded roh moo - hyun in 2008 .

this is , in part , a corollary of the shift both in seoul's policy toward north korea and the united states after the change of administrations in south korea in 2008 .

the roh administration's generally unconditional engagement of pyongyang often put it at odds with the harder line advocated by japan and the united states , while aligning south korea more closely with pro - engagement china in the six - party talks aimed at resolving the north korea nuclear crisis .

roh described south korea as a "strategic balancer" between what he saw as the pro - engagement camp ( china and russia ) and the hard - line camp ( the united states and japan ) that sought to pressure pyongyang into dismantling its nuclear weapons program .

the balancer role seemed to diminish the solidarity of the u.s. - rok alliance which , along with roh's calls for greater independence from washington , severely strained seoul's ties with the bush administration .

over time , as south korean threat perceptions of north korea increased throughout the decade , so did south koreans' public approval ratings of the united states , weakening support for key aspects of roh's overall foreign policy .

president lee entered office in 2008 pledging to restore alliance relations with the united states and demanding a "reciprocal" relationship with pyongyang .

his tougher stance toward the regime repositions south korea in the u.s. - led camp , as seoul seeks to enhance coordination with tokyo and washington in presenting a unified front against north korean provocations .

although this shift in policy has strained inter - korean relations , it has arguably led to a net , if modest , improvement in south korea's overall diplomatic outlook in the region .

lee's focus on an alliance - oriented approach to north korea has , at least , eased tensions with washington and provided a pretext for closer political and strategic cooperation with japan .

the closer coordination between seoul , tokyo and washington has not noticeably damaged south korean diplomatic ties with china .

lee's active diplomatic outreach since coming to office may have helped to ease potential concerns in beijing about south korea's strategic direction .

indeed , beijing has not taken explicit steps to discourage lee from repositioning his nation outside the pro - engagement camp .

over the past year , a flurry of diplomatic activity between seoul and beijing leaves little doubt that smooth relations with china remain a priority for south korea , despite rising competition between the two countries over export markets and natural resources .

seoul has also enhanced its leadership role in multilateral institutions and regional fora as it seeks to carve out a higher profile in a region dominated by china , japan and the united states .

in september 2009 , lee announced that south korea would chair and host the november 2010 g - 20 meeting , a gathering that will showcase south korea's leadership in the global financial crisis .

in may / june 2009 , president lee hosted a summit with the ten - member nations of the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) .

in addition to signing an investment - protection treaty as part of the concluding terms of a free trade agreement ( fta ) with asean , south korea offered to enhance development assistance , cooperation on clean energy initiatives , training and education , and other measures to deepen ties with the region .

analysts believe these steps are , in part , aimed at expanding and deepening south korea's ties with key export markets and is a sign of increasingly assertive regional leadership from seoul .

in many respects , u.s. - rok relations are more stable today than they have been in years , yet experts warn that this stability is precarious at best and will need careful diplomacy to be sustained beyond the immediate future .

for the united states , which has had a long and complicated history of involvement in korea , policies toward either end of the korean peninsula tend to reverberate powerfully in south korean sociopolitical spheres .

as the united states pursues its own interests and priorities in korea and the east asian region , it will inevitably set off negative reactions in south korea from time to time .

many believe that , without compromising key u.s. objectives , the united states can achieve more with south korea if it is mindful of south korean sensitivities that could morph into latent anti - americanism .

of perhaps paramount importance is for u.s. policymakers to fully appreciate south korea's ongoing transition , from a once client - like relationship with the united states to an increasingly important international power in its own right .

this transition is not complete , either in terms of korea's democratic development or in the collective psyche of the nation .

but it is clear , as experts point out , that south korea increasingly desires greater respect from washington as it continues along this process .

indeed , in at least a tacit acknowledgement of south korea's increased clout , the bush administration took a number of steps — such as negotiating the korus fta , admitting south korea into the u.s. visa waiver program , and agreeing to move u.s. troops from the yongsan base in seoul — that were sought by south korea .

over the near term , there are several areas that may test u.s. forbearance in the eyes of the south korean public and policy elite .

one fundamental concern is perceived u.s. involvement in south korean domestic affairs .

the election of president lee in december 2007 brought to power an administration that promised closer ties with the united states than its predecessor .

while there are certain advantages to this change , the outcome of the beef protests in 2008 highlights the political perils of a south korean leader appearing to be too closely aligned with washington .

experts stress that the perception of undue u.s. involvement in south korean politics , or seemingly overt support for one political leader over another , can lead to a public backlash that ultimately harms bilateral relations .

given the relatively similar outlook shared by korean conservatives and the u.s. government , some experts suggest that washington should enhance efforts to cultivate ties with opposition lawmakers — thus lending greater credibility to the united states as a fair and impartial supporter of south korean democracy .

north korea policy is another inherently sensitive issue that requires careful implementation by washington .

so far , both the lee and obama administrations have closely coordinated their approach toward pyongyang — presenting a united front , along with japan , against continued north korean provocations .

yet signs that the obama administration may be willing to negotiate bilaterally with north korea to bring the regime back to the six - party talks have raised some concern in seoul that the close coordination with washington may be in jeopardy .

as the obama administration seeks to find a diplomatic solution to the north korea crisis , experts advise that it will be critical for washington to continue to consult closely with seoul on any developments that may arise during bilateral talks with north korea .

this would likely go a long way toward demonstrating u.s. recognition of south korea's stake in the stability of the korean peninsula .

another delicate bilateral issue relates to the implementation of planned changes to the u.s. - rok alliance , including measures to realign u.s. military bases in korea and to transfer wartime operational command ( opcon ) from u.s. to south korean forces .

both measures , which are aimed at giving the united states military a less dominant presence and role in south korea , touch on anxieties within the korean national security establishment about the sustainability of the u.s. strategic commitment .

yet it is likely that the u.s. military will move forward on these measures as scheduled , partly because north korea's conventional military forces continue to deteriorate .

as it proceeds with the implementation phase , some analysts believe the united states must take care to coordinate these changes in close cooperation with korean policymakers and in a timetable and manner that is acceptable to seoul .

failure to do so , analysts believe , could lead to a crisis in the bilateral alliance relationship .

other analysts argue that the timetable for transfer should be pushed to a later date , in part because they believe south korea is not yet militarily ready and in part because the change is opposed by many south korean conservatives .

an issue that is of particular concern to congress is the fate of the u.s. - rok free trade agreement ( korus fta ) , which both governments signed in june 2007 .

should the korus fta fail to be ratified by congress , the implications for the u.s. - rok relationship and for the political situation in seoul could be significant .

the potential rejection or prolonged delay of the korus agreement , as it currently exists , would likely require skillful diplomacy by u.s. officials to avoid significant political repercussions in south korea .

the damage could be magnified if , as expected , the administration were to highlight or even exaggerate the korus fta's strategic rather than economic value .

while raising the stakes may increase the agreement's chances of passage in congress , it also increases the symbolic costs to the alliance — particularly in south korea — if the agreement is not ratified .

alternatively , the current agreement could be renegotiated or amended to give it a better chance of ratification by congress .

experts warn that modifying the korus agreement would involve restarting a complex and delicate negotiating process with seoul that could further deplete president lee's political capital at home .

the lee administration therefore may ask for some form of quid pro quo to provide political cover for any modification that appears to be a concession to the united states .

despite lingering challenges in u.s. - rok relations the trajectory of bilateral ties appears generally promising over the long - run .

south korea's growing stature on the world stage creates increased opportunities for the bilateral relationship to evolve beyond its traditional scope of counterbalancing north korea .

indeed , president lee's plan to enhance his nation's international profile along the lines of a "global korea" complements the "joint vision" that he signed with president obama in june 2009 — an agreement that provides a conceptual roadmap for upgrading bilateral cooperation to the global level .

assuming that the challenges outlined above are adequately addressed , the next test in the u.s. - rok relationship will be implementing aspects of the joint vision and determining further areas for bilateral cooperation on the world stage .

background for most of the first four decades after the country was founded in 1948 , south korea was ruled by authoritarian governments .

ever since the mid - 1980s , when widespread anti - government protests forced the country's military rulers to enact sweeping democratic reforms , democratic institutions and traditions have deepened in south korea .

in 1997 , long - time dissident and opposition politician kim dae - jung ( commonly referred to as "dj" ) was elected to the presidency , the first time an opposition party had prevailed in a south korean presidential election .

in december 2002 , kim was succeeded by a member of his left - of - center party , roh moo - hyun , a self - educated former human rights lawyer who emerged from relative obscurity to defeat establishment candidates in both the primary and general elections .

roh campaigned on a platform of reform — reform of korean politics , economic policymaking , and u.s. - rok relations .

lee myung - bak's victory in the december 2007 election restored conservatives to the presidency .

a striking feature of the election was how poorly the left - of - center candidates performed , after a decade in power , receiving only around 30% of the vote .

a structurally weak legislative branch nominally , power in south korea is shared by the president , who is elected to one five - year term , and the 299-member unicameral national assembly .

of these , 245 members represent single - member constituencies .

the remaining 54 are selected on the basis of proportional voting .

national assembly members are elected to four - year terms .

the next national legislative elections will be held in april 2012 , which is also the year of south korea's next presidential election ( scheduled for december ) .

since the assembly's powers were enhanced in the 1987 constitution , it has at times altered the political climate by providing opposition parties with a forum to freely criticize , inspect , and embarrass the executive branch .

indeed , one of the assembly's major accomplishments since 1987 has been to institutionalize its oversight of the executive ; executive branch officials regularly appear before committees , helping to make south korean policy - making more transparent than before .

also , from time to time , opposition parties have used assembly proceedings to successfully stymie presidential initiatives , usually by boycotting legislative sessions .

in 2004 , the conservative - dominated national assembly voted to impeach then - president roh moo - hyun , a vote that was overturned by south korea's constitutional court .

in reality , however , the president and the state bureaucracy continue to be the dominant forces in south korean policymaking , as formal and informal limitations prevent the national assembly from initiating major pieces of legislation .

for instance , by law the assembly can only cut funds from the president's budget , not propose any increases or alter the executive's budgetary allocations .

south korean legislators suffer from numerous other limitations .

the typical seoul legislative office , for instance , is staffed by only three salaried , full - time workers .

even the prime minister , who has little power , is nominated by the president .

the fact that parties in the assembly repeatedly have resorted to the brinkmanship tactic of the boycott reflects the legislative branch's weakness .

the most recent boycott occurred in june 2008 , when the opposition democratic party refused to participate in the new assembly's session .

institution - building by the national assembly in recent years , the national assembly has sought to increase its resources through the creation of a national assembly budget office ( modeled on the u.s. congressional budget office ) and the national assembly research service ( modeled on the u.s. congressional research service , and the government accountability office ) .

the assembly's other powers a bill in the national assembly may be introduced by members or by the executive branch .

if passed , a bill is sent to the executive for presidential promulgation within 15 days .

the president may veto the bill and send it back to the national assembly for reconsideration .

if the assembly overrides the veto with the concurrence of two - thirds or more of members present , the bill will become law .

with respect to the judiciary , the consent of the national assembly is also required for the presidential appointment of all supreme court justices .

also required is the ratification by the assembly of treaties and agreements as well as international acts or conventions to which south korea is a signatory .

the declaration of war , the dispatch of troops abroad , or the stationing of foreign troops in south korean territory requires the consent of the assembly as well .

political parties south korean political parties form , disband , and merge regularly , in part because they tend to be regionally - based and centered around charismatic personalities rather than substantive issues .

it is not uncommon for members of the national assembly to jump from one party to another .

presently , there are three major political parties in south korea: president lee myung - bak's conservative gnp ; the opposition center - left democratic party ; and the hard right liberal forward party , which is primarily a platform for former gnp heavyweight lee hoi - chang .

both the gnp and the democratic party are riven by competing factions and ideological differences over major issues , particularly over the appropriate policies to take toward north korea and the united states .

regionalism south korean politics is highly regionalized .

the gnp's base is in the southeastern and industrialized kyongsang ( also known as yongnam ) region , where lee won over 60% of the vote in the 2007 election .

 ( if lfp party head lee hoi - chang's total is added to lee's , the conservative candidates won around 80% of the yongnam vote ) the dp's base lies in the southwestern and more rural cholla region ( also known as honam ) , where its candidate chung dong - young won nearly 80% of the vote .

before kim dae - jung's victory in the 1997 presidential election , south korea's military governments gave preferential treatment to the kyongsang region , leading cholla residents to accuse the government of discrimination .

the greater seoul area , which is the home of nearly half of the south korean electorate , has emerged as the crucial swing vote in presidential elections .

there has been discussion of combating regionalism by adopting multiple - seat constituencies in the national assembly .

ngos since the end of military rule , non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) have increased dramatically in south korea , particularly in the past ten years .

the groups exist on both the local and national levels , range widely in size , and focus on a wide array of issues , including the environment , government and corporate corruption , disability rights , women's rights , crimes committed by u.s. forces in korea , revising the u.s. - rok status of forces agreement ( sofa ) , and returning land used by u.s. forces .

in contrast to the student - led , class - based groups of the 1980s that spent much of their time organizing militant anti - government and anti - u.s. protests , an increasing number of ngos have hired permanent staff , held fundraisers , and opened research offices .

as they have begun to professionalize their operations , they have had a greater impact on south korean domestic and foreign policy .

south korean ngos have been particularly adept at forming loose , temporary coalitions with one another to organize large - scale protests on a particular issue .

many of the most successful examples of citizen activism in south korea involved the formation of umbrella organizations that pool the resources of member groups .

the country's rapid adoption of the internet — south korea has one of the world's highest rates of internet usage — has facilitated such networking by enabling groups to quickly establish linkages , coordinate activities , and spread the word about protest activities .

the spring 2008 beef protests and anti - american protests in 2002 are two illustrations of this point .

decentralization the influence of korean civil society groups has been possible in part because of the growing decentralization of power in south korea .

in the early and mid - 1990s , new laws were passed creating local assemblies and establishing popular election of local officials for the first time since the 1950s .

increased local autonomy has encouraged political consciousness and activism , as south koreans have come to expect local and national elected leaders to be more responsive and accountable to their constituents .

despite these changes , seoul remains the locus of political power in south korea , in part because local governments have little authority to impose their own taxes .

former president roh attempted further decentralize political power by giving more autonomy to the provinces and by transferring certain executive offices to locations outside of seoul .

