in the climate change policy debate , methane capture projects have garnered attention for their ability to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions .

methane capture projects prevent the release of methane , a potent greenhouse gas ( ghg ) , into the atmosphere .

the captured methane is generally flared or used for energy purposes .

the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) has identified four sources of methane with the greatest potential for capture in the near term: landfills , coal mines , agriculture , and oil and gas systems .

the amount of methane captured from each will depend on legislative developments , regulations , economics , technology , and outreach .

methane ( ch 4 ) constituted approximately 8% of u.s. ghg emissions in 2008 .

anthropogenic ( human - related ) sources of methane in the united states include enteric fermentation , landfills , natural gas systems , coal mines , and manure management .

efforts to reduce emissions of methane — the second - most important ghg after carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) — could play a significant role in climate change mitigation .

this report will discuss the policy options for addressing methane capture ( and their implications ) , legislative proposals for methane capture , domestic and international sources of methane , opportunities and challenges for methane capture , and federal programs that support methane capture .

if policymakers decide to address methane emissions , multiple strategies are available that would either encourage or require methane capture: market - based legislative approaches , such as a cap - and - trade program or emissions fees ; carbon offsets or credits as a complementary design element of a market - based approach ; emission performance standards ; and / or maintaining existing programs and incentives .

policymakers may consider using different strategies for different methane emission sources .

these strategies and related issues are discussed below .

the 111 th congress introduced numerous bills related to methane emissions .

one group of bills specified methane as a ghg , promoted biogas production , supported landfill gas recovery projects , and addressed or promoted methane capture .

another set of bills not related to methane capture prohibited permit issuance under the clean air act for methane emissions from biological processes associated with livestock operations , among other provisions , and expanded methane hydrate research .

h.r .

2454 , which passed the house on june 26 , 2009 , contained numerous energy provisions , including a ghg emission cap - and - trade system .

if enacted , the cap - and - trade program would have allowed some methane capture activities to generate offsets .

however , some methane sources might have been subject to emission performance standards .

one enacted piece of legislation ( p.l .

111-5 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ) extended and expanded existing incentives for open - loop biomass and landfill gas electricity production and created a new incentive for the same activities .

methane — a colorless , odorless gas with the molecular formula ch 4 — is produced by "methanogenic" bacteria that decompose organic matter in the absence of oxygen .

sometimes referred to as "marsh gas," methane is flammable , can cause suffocation , and can be explosive in low concentrations in air .

it is the primary component ( 70% - 90% ) of natural gas fuel .

roughly 27% of total u.s. energy consumed in 2009 was natural gas .

consumption is spread across a wide array of economic sectors , with electric power generation and industrial consumption accounting for roughly 62% of total volume delivered to consumers ; residential use , 23% ; and commercial use , 15% , in 2009 .

capturing methane from various sectors of the u.s. economy requires different strategies because some strategies may be more economically feasible for specific emission sources or locations .

policy laid out in forthcoming energy and environmental proposals may further provide technical and economic incentives to overcome barriers — past and present — to methane capture .

the following section summarizes opportunities and challenges for methane capture from the top four sources of methane: agriculture , landfills , oil and natural gas systems , and coalbed methane ( see table 3 ) .

periodic reports to congress from the executive branch , as well as hearing testimony , have conveyed the significance of methane capture since the early 1990s .

congress and the executive branch have supported methane capture projects through voluntary programs , energy management programs , and research and development programs .

this section highlights existing efforts .

the methane - to - markets partnership is an international initiative for methane capture and reuse from four sources: oil and gas , coal mines , landfills , and agriculture .

the partnership is administered by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , which supports the voluntary efforts of the 38 country partners .

national governments , research institutions , and the private sector have collaborated since 2004 to develop cost - effective , near - term methane capture projects globally .

the partnership receives its legal authority from the clean air act , section 103 ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 7403 ) , and the national environmental policy act ( nepa , 42 u.s.c .

§§ 4321-4347 ) .

approximately $4.6 million was appropriated to the partnership for fy2010 .

supplemental funding for the partnership is received from the u.s. department of state .

other u.s. government partners — the department of energy , the department of agriculture , the agency for international development , and the trade and development agency — have the discretion to provide funds to support the partnership .

financial support from government partners varies in amount and by fiscal year .

epa facilitates a number of voluntary programs related to the methane - to - markets initiative that seek to reduce domestic methane emissions from different sectors .

many of these programs receive broad legislative authority from the clean air act , section 103 ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 7403 ) .

epa provides some technical assistance and educational material .

the agstar program supports biogas capture and use at livestock operations managing liquid and slurry manures .

the coalbed methane outreach program ( cmop ) works with the coalbed methane industry to reduce coal mine methane emissions via methane capture and reuse .

the natural gas star program specializes in promoting the reduction of methane emissions from the oil production and natural gas sector .

the landfill methane outreach program ( lmop ) encourages landfill gas energy projects .

epa's domestic methane programs avoided the release of more than 20.3 million metric tons of co 2 e into the atmosphere in 2008 , out of the roughly 308 million metric tons of co 2 e of the methane emissions reported for the landfills , natural gas systems , petroleum systems , and coal mining categories .

the department of energy's ( doe's ) federal energy management program ( femp ) addresses energy management at federal facilities and doe , as well as fleet and transportation management .

one component of the program is converting landfill gas to energy for use at federal facilities .

doe has implemented three landfill gas recovery projects .

femp receives its legislative authority from the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 ) and was appropriated $32 million for fy2010 .

several federal tax incentives subsidize methane capture from landfill and agriculture sources .

these tax incentives are broadly broken down into three categories: ( 1 ) incentives to produce electricity from captured methane gas ; ( 2 ) incentives to build facilities that produce electricity from captured methane gas ; and ( 3 ) incentives to produce alternative fuels using captured methane gas .

two federal tax incentives subsidize the production of electricity from methane .

the production tax credit is allowed for the production of electricity from qualified energy resources at qualified facilities , including open - loop biomass and municipal solid waste facilities .

in general , open - loop biomass and municipal solid waste facilities placed in service after august 8 , 2005 , and before december 31 , 2013 , may claim a tax credit equal to 1 cent per kilowatt - hour of electricity generated during the first 10 years of production .

in addition , a one - time investment tax credit equal to 30% of eligible investment costs is available , in lieu of the production tax credit , for open - loop biomass and municipal solid waste facilities placed in service after december 31 , 2008 .

in addition , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) allowed a grant in lieu of tax credits for property placed in service in 2009 and 2010 .

three tax - preferred bond finance options exist to help finance methane capture facilities used to produce electricity .

qualified energy conservation bonds ( qecbs ) , clean renewable energy bonds ( crebs ) , and new clean renewable energy bonds ( new crebs ) are a type of bond instrument , tax credit bonds , that offers the holder a federal tax credit instead of interest .

the rate of credit for crebs is intended to be set such that the bonds need not be sold at a discount ( for a price less than the face value ) or with interest costs to the issuer , while the credit rate for qecbs and new crebs is set for a credit rate of 70% .

all three bond options are available to finance qualified energy production projects , including open - loop biomass facilities and landfill gas facilities .

qecbs , crebs , and new crebs are all subject to national limits , $2.4 billion , $1.2 billion , and $2.4 billion , respectively .

crebs and new crebs are allocated by the secretary of the treasury to eligible projects in inverse to their size , while qecbs are allocated to the states based upon their share of total u.s. population .

issuing authority for qecbs is without expiration , while creb and new creb authority expired at the end of 2009 .

in addition , two tax incentives are available where methane gas is used to as a production input for alternative fuels .

facilities with binding construction contracts in place before december 31 , 2010 , and placed in service before january 1 , 2014 , are eligible to expense one - half of the cost of qualified property in the facilities first year of service .

the remaining 50% of the cost is depreciated under an accelerated five - year depreciation period .

further , compressed or liquefied gas and liquid fuel derived from biomass is eligible for the $1.00 per gallon alternative fuel tax credit for fuel produced through december 31 , 2011 .

methane is not captured from naturally occurring gas hydrates because it is bound in the gas and not released .

however , recent attention has been directed toward the extraction of methane from gas hydrates as a potential source of energy .

the objective of the doe methane hydrate research and development program is to develop knowledge and technology to allow commercial production of methane from gas hydrates by 2015 .

the doe program completed a gulf of mexico offshore expedition in may 2009 aimed at validating techniques for locating and assessing commercially viable gas hydrate deposits .

the program is planning a two - year production test in alaska that is expected to provide critical information about methane flow rates and sediment stability during gas hydrate dissociation .

both projects have international and industry partners .

methane hydrate research by doe was initially authorized by the methane hydrate research and development act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-193 ) .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 , subtitle f , § 968 ) extended the authorization through fy2010 and authorized total appropriations of $155 million over a five - year period .

the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) , provided $20 million in fy2009 for natural gas technologies r&d , to include no less than $15 million for gas hydrates r&d .

congress appropriated $15 million for the gas hydrate r&d program in fy2009 .

the obama administration requested $25 million for the natural gas technologies program for fy2010 , which includes gas hydrate r&d .

congress appropriated $17.8 million for the program in fy2010 , which would also fund research and development into unconventional gas production from basins containing tight gas sands , shale gas , and coal bed methane , as well as for gas hydrates .

