a resolution of inquiry is a resolution that formally calls on the executive branch to provide specified factual information to congress .

the use of resolutions of this type as a tool of oversight dates to the earliest days of congress .

although there are historical examples of resolutions of inquiry being used in the senate , they are far more common in the house of representatives , and this report examines their use only in that chamber between 1947 and october 20 , 2017 .

house resolutions of inquiry are simple resolutions ( designated "h.res .

" ) , which are submitted in the same manner as other legislation .

under house rules and precedents , however , resolutions of inquiry , if properly drafted and under specific circumstances , are afforded a privileged parliamentary status .

clause 7 of house rule xiii makes a resolution of inquiry privileged for consideration at any time after it is reported or discharged from committee , consistent with the normal three - day layover period required of most committee reports .

if a resolution of inquiry is not reported to the house within 14 legislative days after its introduction ( not counting the days of introduction and discharge ) , a motion to discharge a committee from its further consideration is in order on the house floor .

should the committee or committees of referral report ( or be discharged under a time limit imposed by the speaker ) within the 14-day period , however , only a member acting at the formal direction of the committee may move to proceed to its consideration on the floor .

thus , even when a house committee opposes a resolution of inquiry , the committee will virtually always mark it up and report it , often adversely , in order to retain control over the measure and prevent a supporter from making the privileged motions on the house floor to discharge the committee and call up the resolution .

to retain the privileged parliamentary status described above , resolutions of inquiry may not contain a preamble and must call only for facts within the executive branch's control .

such resolutions may not seek opinions or require an investigation and are traditionally framed as "requesting" the president or "directing" the head of a cabinet - level agency to respond .

as is the case with other types of privileged business , committee reports accompanying resolutions of inquiry are presented from the floor , rather than submitted through the hopper .

if the house chooses to consider a resolution of inquiry , it is considered under the one - hour rule .

when raised , such resolutions may be agreed to , rejected , or tabled by majority vote .

in prior eras it was common for the majority party member managing a resolution of inquiry on the house floor to quickly move to table it , either because he or she opposes its provisions , or because the request has been rendered moot by the executive branch having provided some or all of the requested information .

finally , but importantly , as simple resolutions , resolutions of inquiry have no legal force .

thus , compliance by the executive branch with the house's request for factual information in such a resolution is entirely voluntary , resting largely on a sense of comity between coequal branches of government and recognition of the necessity for congress to be well - informed as it legislates .

while there is no direct way for the house to enforce its request for information , executive branch compliance with resolutions of inquiry might be indirectly influenced by a general respect for congressional legislative and oversight power , including congress's power to appropriate or withhold money for agency functions .

an examination of resolutions of inquiry introduced in the house between 1947 and october 20 , 2017 , raises several questions for the potential consideration of policymakers .

overall , the data suggest that resolutions of inquiry have become more common in some recent congresses , have resulted in more work at the committee level , and have increasingly been used by minority party members in the house .

as noted , the data examined raise the question of whether increases in the number of house resolutions of inquiry submitted in some recent congresses are affecting the workload of certain chamber committees .

if policymakers were to determine that this is the case , and that it merits action , they might consider whether changes in the treatment of such resolutions under house rules are warranted .

the house might respond , for example , by making such resolutions privileged only if a house committee chose to report them favorably .

or , the house might choose instead to extend the time period that committees have to report a privileged resolution of inquiry from the present 14 legislative days to a longer period of time .

a change of this latter type might preserve the traditional use of resolutions of inquiry for all members and give committees more freedom to choose when they will act on them .

it might also discourage resolutions of inquiry from being introduced in an attempt to gain political advantage by highlighting important , but transient , hot - button political issues .

perhaps the clearest picture emerging from a systematic examination of resolution of inquiry activity in the post - wwii period , however , relates to the efficacy of such resolutions .

although the data show that in some cases — particularly in earlier eras — such resolutions have produced information , half the time it is unclear if resolutions of inquiry result in the production of any information to the house , and if so , to what degree .

the possibility that the standing committees of the house are spending an increased amount of time acting on resolutions whose efficacy is largely unknown may lead policymakers to try to institute a more rigorous accounting of future resolutions of this type .

lawmakers might do so in a number of ways .

committees , for example , might direct the agencies they oversee to formally catalogue and submit to them what response , if any , they have made to recently introduced resolutions of inquiry .

committees might be encouraged to report this information to the house in the activities report they are already required to submit to the house each congress under clause 1 ( d ) ( 1 ) of rule xi , or by some other mechanism .

executive branch communications to the house in response to a resolution of inquiry might be designated as such in the congressional record , or noted in a special category when received by the clerk of the house , so that the cause and effect ( or lack thereof ) of such resolutions might become clearer .

policymakers might also consider standardizing the procedures house committees use to handle resolutions of inquiry , for example , by requiring them to transmit the resolution to the executive branch within a stated time frame with a letter from the chairman formally requesting executive comment on the resolution .

other options also exist .

the house committee on rules , as the panel with jurisdiction over chamber rules , might examine whether resolutions of inquiry , as a mechanism rooted in the earliest days of congress , should continue to enjoy privileged parliamentary status considering advances in information technology , including the development of oversight tools available to members in recent decades .

the house oversight and government reform committee , which has special duties under house rule x to report committee oversight plans to the house along with any recommendations to promote "more effective and coordinated oversight," might also consider examining the use of such resolutions as oversight tools .

whether policymakers ultimately determine that changes in the use of resolutions of inquiry are warranted or not , such an examination might arguably give all members of the house a better understanding of the resolution's use in the ongoing oversight relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government .

