a common theme in controversies over the endangered species act ( esa ) is that a conflict is triggered by the need for the same dwindling resources by humans and a listed species .

the parties to the debate often have struggled for years over the basic allocation of those resources , from the tellico river , to prairie grasslands , to the california delta .

the debate over esa and species protection typically signals an intensification of an underlying and usually much larger struggle .

sagebrush habitat in the west is diminishing and becoming fragmented due to urbanization , global climate change , roads , fences , grazing , energy development , water scarcity , power lines , etc .

while the remaining habitat is vast , its fragmentation presents special problems , especially for sage grouse , which need large treeless areas to discourage the roosting of additional avian predators .

thus , fences , roads , and utility poles can produce a very substantial change in the sagebrush habitat , even though the actual surface disturbance is minimal .

loss of habitat is the most common factor leading to species' decline .

the story of listing the sage grouse under the esa is a tale of petitions , missed deadlines , and lawsuits .

petitions have been filed under the esa to protect the gunnison grouse , the greater sage grouse , a western subspecies of the greater sage grouse , the bi - state population , and the columbia river basin population .

to date , no member of this genus has been listed at any taxonomic level .

however , on january 11 , 2013 , the fish and wildlife service ( fws or service ) proposed listing the gunnison grouse as endangered .

in a court settlement , fws agreed to decide whether to list the bi - state population by the end of fy2013 and the columbia sage grouse population and the greater sage grouse by the end of fy2015 .

the esa is intended to protect plants and animals from becoming extinct .

it authorizes creating a list of protected species , either endangered ( defined as being in danger of extinction ) or threatened ( defined as likely to become endangered in the foreseeable future ) .

the esa also prohibits taking these species , with limited exceptions .

in addition , federal agencies are prohibited from destroying or adversely modifying their designated critical habitats .

fws is the federal agency that manages most species under the esa .

 ( the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) supervises most marine mammals and oceanic species. ) .

the secretary of the interior , acting through fws ( or the secretary of commerce , through nmfs , where relevant ) , is charged with the decision of whether to list a species .

the listing decision is based on five criteria: habitat loss , over - harvesting , disease , inadequacy of existing regulatory protection , and other factors affecting its existence .

in making the determination , fws is charged with relying "solely on the basis of the best scientific and commercial data available. .

fws may list a species independently , or citizens may petition the agency to make a listing .

when a petition is filed , certain deadlines are imposed by statute .

fws must determine and publish a decision in the federal register within 90 days of the filing of the petition on whether the petition presents substantial evidence in support of a listing .

within 12 months of filing the petition , fws must publish whether listing is warranted or not .

a final decision must be made one year after the 12-month notice .

fws receives more petitions than it has resources to address , and has the option of publishing a determination at the time of a 12-month finding that a listing is "warranted but precluded" due to limited fws resources .

failure to meet the deadlines can be a basis for suit .

in addition to listing entire species , the esa authorizes listing distinct population segments ( dps ) of vertebrates .

this term refers to a portion of a listed species separated from the rest of the species by genetic distinction and range .

according to fws policy established in 1996 , in order to be designated a dps , a population must be discrete ( separated as a consequence of physical , physiological , ecological , or behavioral factors ) and significant ( meaning its demise would be an important loss of genetic diversity ) .

as noted above , one consideration in an esa listing determination is whether existing regulatory mechanisms are adequate to conserve the species .

strong conservation programs at the federal , state , local , or private level may be sufficient to avoid listing a species .

existing conservation programs at these levels for sage grouse and gunnison grouse are described below ( see appendix a and appendix b ) .

these programs help illustrate another issue in sage grouse management: until a species is listed under federal law , it is managed under state law , even on federal lands .

the federal role can be limited to habitat protection on those lands .

the bureau of land management ( blm ) manages more than half of the 57 million acres of sagebrush habitat , with 40 million of those acres either current grouse habitat ( 30 million acres ) or suitable for habitat ( 10 million acres ) .

this authority is significant , as efforts to accelerate development of federal land for energy advance projects across more federal land .

even alternative energy sources create conflict in sagebrush habitat .

as development proceeds in sagebrush territory , habitat for sage grouse and gunnison grouse diminishes .

this habitat loss in combination with increased fire threats from cheatgrass and climate change could put the sage grouse at risk of extinction .

fws has been petitioned on many occasions to review the statutory factors to determine whether gunnison grouse , sage grouse , and / or its subspecies , and populations , should be listed under the esa , and , following litigation , has found that listing was warranted but precluded for all of these groups .

states are taking action to protect the sage grouse , in part to protect a game bird , but also to forestall the listing that many see as an obstruction to development of the sagebrush territory that covers so much of the western united states .

congressional pushes for more energy development , both for oil and gas and for green energy such as wind farms and solar collectors , may end up conflicting with the grouse and the protections offered by the esa .

wyoming sage grouse policy regarding core population areas while the sage grouse in wyoming is classified as a game bird , the state is attempting to protect it .

a 2011 executive order from the wyoming governor replaced 2008 and 2010 executive orders directed at sage grouse protection .

the 2011 order continues the 2008 practice of using core population areas identified by the governor's sage grouse implementation team .

the 2011 order affects up to two - thirds of the state's sage grouse habitat and is intended to direct energy production to those areas with the highest predicted yields and lowest numbers of sage grouse .

the 2011 order alters the 2008 order , however , by specifically approving certain energy corridors through core habitat areas , provided construction occurs within established dates .

the state of wyoming appears to have no general description of its sage grouse plan under the 2013 sage grouse executive order ( sgeo ) , but it has published a list of frequently asked questions ( faqs ) .

below are extracts from that document with minor modifications for clarity .

what activities are affected by the sgeo ? .

letters from the wyoming game and fish department will determine whether a project complies with the process and stipulations outlined in the sgeo , and may provide recommendations on whether the permit should be issued and / or recommendations on how impacts to the bird may be minimized .

these recommendations may be accepted by the permitting agency and incorporated in the conditions of the permit .

if there are changes to the project , the proponent should complete the density and disturbance calculation tool ( ddct ) review process again .

what counts as suitable sage grouse habitat ? .

"suitable" sage - grouse habitat ( nesting , breeding , brood - rearing , or winter ) is within the mapped occupied range of sage - grouse , and it 1. has 5% or greater sagebrush canopy cover ( for nesting , brood - rearing and / or winter ) as measured by the point intercept method .

"sagebrush" includes all species and subspecies of the genus artemisia except the mat - forming sub - shrub species: frigida ( fringed ) and pedatifida ( birdfoot ) ; 2. is riparian , wet meadow ( native or introduced ) or areas of alfalfa or other suitable forbs ( brood rearing habitat ) within 275 meters of sagebrush habitat with 5% or greater sagebrush canopy cover ( for roosting / loafing ) ; 3. is reclaimed habitat containing at least two native grasses ( at least one bunchgrass ) and two native forbs ( see "reclamation" in attachment b of the sgeo ) and no point within the grass / forb habitat is more than 60 meters from adjacent 5% or greater sagebrush cover ; or 4. is "transitional" sage - grouse habitat , which is land that has been treated or burned prior to 2011 , resulting in < 5% sagebrush cover but is actively managed to meet a minimum of 5% sagebrush canopy cover with associated grasses and forbs by 2021 ( as determined by analysis of local condition and trend ) and may or may not be considered "disturbed. .

land that does not meet the above vegetation criteria by 2021 should be considered disturbed .

what counts as a surface disturbance ? .

any anthropogenic development activity or wildfire event that results in removal of sagebrush vegetation or loss of sage - grouse habitat is considered surface disturbance in the ddct calculation .

surface disturbance includes , but is not limited to , roads , well pads , mining operations , agricultural fields , buildings , some vegetation treatments , wind turbines , power lines , pipelines , or other oil and gas infrastructure .

some linear features are considered exempt from ddct calculations .

is there a de minimis exemption ? .

for what ? .

activities that are designated as de minimis , and exempted from the plan's requirements , include the following: 1 .

existing animal husbandry practices ( including branding , docking , herding , trailing , etc. ) .

2 .

existing farming practices ( excluding conversion of sagebrush / grassland to agricultural lands ) .

3 .

existing grazing operations that utilize recognized rangeland management practices ( allotment management plans , natural resource conservation service grazing plans , prescribed grazing plans , etc. ) .

4 .

construction of agricultural reservoirs and aquatic habitat improvements less than 10 surface acres and drilling of agriculture and residential water wells ( including installation of tanks , water windmills and solar water pumps ) more than 0.6 miles from the perimeter of the lek .

within 0.6 miles from leks , no review is required if construction does not occur march 15 to june 30 and construction does not occur on the lek .

all water tanks shall have escape ramps .

any terrestrial habitat improvements < 10 acres will require compliance with the sgeo .

5 .

agricultural and residential electrical distribution lines more than 0.6 miles from leks .

within 0.6 miles from leks no review is required if construction does not occur march 15 to june 30 and construction does not occur on the lek .

raptor perching deterrents shall be installed on all poles within 0.6 miles from leks .

6 .

agricultural water pipelines if construction activities are more than 0.6 miles from leks .

within 0.6 miles from leks no review is required if construction does not occur march 15 to june 30 and construction is reclaimed .

7 .

pole fences .

wire fences if fitted with visibility markers where high potential for collisions has been documented .

8 .

irrigation ( excluding the conversion of sagebrush / grassland to new irrigated lands ) .

9 .

spring development if the spring is protected with fencing and enough water remains at the site to provide mesic ( wet ) vegetation .

10 .

herbicide use within existing road , pipeline , and power line rights - of - way .

herbicide application using spot treatment .

grasshopper / mormon cricket control following reduced agent - area treatments protocol .

11 .

existing county road maintenance .

12 .

cultural resource pedestrian surveys .

13 .

emergency response .

what are the core population areas , as defined by the 2011 sgeo , and how do they differ from areas mapped in 2008 ? .

a map of the core population areas is shown below , with comparison of the 2008 core areas ( version 2 ) , and the more recent 2011 areas ( version 3 ) .

what are the stipulations on activities regarding sage grouse ? .

these stipulations are complex and include both general stipulations and industry - specific stipulations .

the most comprehensive source is found in attachment b of the governor's executive order: these stipulations are designed to maintain existing suitable sage - grouse habitat by permitting development activities in core areas in a way that will not cause declines in sage - grouse populations .

general stipulations are recommended to apply to all activities in core areas , with the exception of exempt ( "de minimis" ) actions defined herein ( attachment c of the sgeo ) or specifically identified activities .

the specific industry stipulations are considered in addition to the general stipulations .

greater detail on both general and industry - specific stipulations are also in attachment b of the sgeo .

plans affecting the gunnison grouse the gunnison grouse's known range is the gunnison basin in western colorado and eastern utah .

 ( see table b - 1 , figure b - 1 , and figure b - 2 . ) .

multiple conservation plans at the federal , state , and local levels have addressed grouse protection .

both loss and fragmentation of habitat affect this species: low genetic diversity , genetic drift from small population sizes , habitat issues ... the interaction of these with predator communities , and impacts of drought are the most significant threats facing gunnison sage - grouse .

of these , by far the greatest threat is the permanent loss , and associated fragmentation and degradation of sagebrush habitat associated with urban development and / or conversion .

multi - party conservation plan in 2005 , state and federal agencies completed a gunnison sage - grouse rangewide conservation plan ( rangewide conservation plan ) .

according to the plan , its purpose is "to identify measures and strategies to achieve the goal of protecting , enhancing , and conserving [gunnison sage grouse] and their habitats. .

the plan integrates local strategies as well as range - wide goals .

the primary goal is to prevent permanent habitat loss in occupied areas .

grazing management practices , wildfire management , and minimizing impacts from mining , oil and gas production , power lines , and utilities are all addressed .

state conservation efforts under colorado law , the species is not protected as a threatened or endangered species .

nor is it listed as a species of concern in the state's sagebrush and sage species conservation strategy .

instead , the gunnison grouse is listed as a game bird , although it has no hunting season and the bag limit is set at zero .

the colorado department of wildlife ( cdow ) entered into a candidate conservation agreement with assurances ( ccaa ) issued by fws for the gunnison grouse .

according to the agreement , "the conservation goal of this agreement is to achieve the protection and management necessary to preclude listing by obtaining agreements for grouse habitat protection and / or enhancements on private lands. .

however , as noted earlier in this report , fws has proposed listing the gunnison grouse as endangered .

in the gunnison grouse ccaa , cdow and other cooperating landowners agreed to take conservation measures as outlined in the rangewide conservation plan .

the measures include modifying grazing practices and preventing invasive species by landowners , and habitat improvement and monitoring for the government entities .

participating landowners are covered from incidental takes by the incidental take permit issued by fws to cdow .

also , the ccaa provides esa regulatory assurances for participating landowners .

according to the agreement , "there will be a significant measure of security for participating landowners in the knowledge that they will not incur additional land use restrictions if the species is listed under the esa in the future. .

those assurances may prove necessary in light of the proposed listing and critical habitat designation of january 2013 .

under the ccaa , the state of colorado will also take conservation steps .

for example , cdow plans to monitor predators and manage recreational uses , as well as establish a captive breeding facility in case grouse populations need to be augmented .

local efforts in addition to actions by private landowners covered in the state agreement discussed above , other local efforts target gunnison grouse protection .

gunnison county , co , in which the largest population of the grouse lives , has local legislation addressing habitat issues .

a 2007 resolution addressed multiple activities that could disturb the grouse , including domestic pets , lighting and noise , recreation , fencing , utility lines , and land use projects .

the law added gunnison sage - grouse lek and occupied habitat maps to those maps the county must consider when reviewing a land use change permit application .

the lek map shows private lands within 0.6 miles of known leks .

this is the key radius for the other restrictions in the law .

while for the occupied habitat map , occupied habitat is defined as an area "of suitable habitat as delineated within the gunnison sage - grouse rangewide conservation plan ( rcp ) and known to be used by gunnison sage - grouse within the last 10 years from the date of mapping. .

on february 17 , 2009 , the county adopted the gunnison basin sage - grouse strategic plan ( strategic plan ) .

the strategic plan referred to the rcp as the "overarching document for gunnison sage - grouse efforts" and also provided additional detail for county planning .

the county requires land use change permits for projects located on a parcel "wholly or partially within a 0.60-mile radius of a gunnison sage - grouse lek. .

this includes building permits , individual sewage system permits , access permits , and reclamation permits .

projects having major or minor impacts on wildlife will be referred to cdow for consultation .

construction and recreational activities will be limited when mating , nesting , or brood rearing is occurring on lands within that radius .

additionally , the 2007 resolution directs the county to recognize perpetual conservation easements and other documented management agreements that are beneficial to the grouse .

to satisfy county law , the conservation easement must have sufficient restrictions to show that adverse impacts are "substantially or wholly mitigated" by the easement .

