gasoline taxes affect both the national economy and the decisions of individual consumers .

if set at a sufficiently high level , they can reduce gasoline consumption to levels that some say reflect the adverse effects of gasoline use , including environmental damage and national security costs .

however , these taxes can also slow the level of macroeconomic activity , although they might contribute to lowering the trade deficit by reducing the need for imported oil .

if , as in the united states , federal gasoline tax revenues are directly tied to financing highway construction and maintenance , they can also create jobs and improve the national infrastructure .

if the gasoline tax is designed in such a way that it contributes to stabilizing the price of gasoline , more informed decisions concerning the purchase of fuel - efficient vehicles and the funding of mass transit might also be made .

it is widely believed that the federal gasoline tax is unpopular with consumers and that increasing the tax will likely generate opposition .

the perceived unpopularity of the tax could make renewing it when the legislation expires at the end of fiscal 2011 controversial .

however , the federal tax on gasoline is relatively low , only about 5% of the average price per gallon in august 2011 , and less than 5% of the average price earlier in 2011 , the most recent peak in gasoline prices .

the tax raises revenue for highway construction and maintenance , which is directly related to automobile and gasoline use , suggesting that the tax can be viewed as a user charge .

many attempts to increase the tax since the early 1970s , especially those tied to energy policy initiatives , have been defeated ; however , over that period the tax increased in several steps from 4 cents per gallon to the current rate of 18.4 cents per gallon .

although the federal gasoline tax is collected at the refinery , it is believed to be passed on to consumers , along with state and local taxes , and is included in the pump price .

this report examines the effects of the federal excise tax on gasoline and analyzes the positive and negative effects of the tax .

the report also evaluates the incentive structure that a higher gasoline tax would likely create , and examines a revised version of the tax , a variable gasoline tax .

excise taxes are , in effect , sales taxes levied on specific goods .

the tax may be set either as a percent of the value of the good , an ad valorem tax , or as a set dollar value per unit of the good , a unit tax , as in the case of the federal gasoline tax .

excise taxes have been used to provide general , or dedicated , revenue and deficit reduction , but in some cases , for example , as in the taxes on liquor and cigarettes , there is some presumption that discouraging consumption , in addition to raising revenues , is a motivating factor in enacting the tax .

the first excise tax on motor fuels in the united states was enacted by oregon in 1919 .

within 13 years , every state and the district of columbia had enacted similar taxes ranging from 2 to 7 cents per gallon .

the federal government levied its first excise tax on gasoline in 1932 at the rate of 1 cent per gallon as a general revenue tax .

the federal excise tax became permanent in 1941 under section 521 ( a ) ( 20 ) of the revenue act of 1941 .

gasoline for use on highways is currently taxed by the federal government at 18.4 cents per gallon .

of this 18.4-cents - per - gallon tax , 18.3 cents per gallon is earmarked for the highway trust fund , and 0.1 cents per gallon is allocated to the leaking underground storage tank ( lust ) trust fund .

the total excise taxes on gasoline , at the retail level , are in the range of approximately 40 cents to over 50 cents per gallon , depending on the specific state and local taxes that are added to the federal tax .

federal , as well as most state and local levies , are unit taxes , and as such , do not vary with the price of gasoline , as a tax based on ad valorem rates would .

while opposition to the federal gasoline tax has existed since its inception , the direct tie to the highway trust fund , the expansion of the interstate highway system , and highway projects to ease road congestion , have led to the view that the tax might be a proxy for a user charge , or price , to consumers who directly benefit from services provided through the tax , easing opposition to some extent .

after the oil embargo of 1973-1974 , interest in the use of the gasoline tax as a policy instrument expanded to areas beyond highway financing .

the nixon administration considered using a gasoline tax increase as a way of reducing inflationary pressures in the economy .

during the ford administration , representative al ullman introduced legislation to increase gasoline taxes to fund alternative energy sources by allocating revenues to a proposed trust fund .

the carter administration embraced the idea of escalating gasoline taxes as a part of an energy program in 1977 designed to reduce oil consumption and increase u.s. energy security .

after the fall of the shah of iran in 1979 and the iran - iraq war that began in 1980 , gasoline prices increased to then - record levels , and interest in gasoline taxes as a way to reduce foreign oil dependence was suggested by independent presidential candidate john anderson .

the carter administration proposed an oil import fee in march 1980 that was intended to approximate the effect of a gasoline tax .

none of these proposals were successfully passed into law by congress .

in 1982 , the reagan administration proposed an increase in the federal gasoline tax for the purpose of improving and repairing the nation's highways , based on the user - fee nature of the tax .

within the administration , the fact that the tax was likely to create jobs was also considered as a reason for the tax increase , although president reagan did not support government - funded jobs programs , or tax increases .

the reagan gasoline tax increase passed in both the house and the senate and was signed into law on january 5 , 1983 .

it raised the federal tax from 4 cents per gallon to 9 cents per gallon .

a further increase in the gasoline tax was included in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 , but the rationale for the tax increase was deficit reduction .

president george h. w. bush initially opposed the tax increase , but then reversed himself and supported it , and signed the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 into law on november 5 , 1990 , raising the federal gasoline tax to 14.1 cents per gallon .

president bill clinton initially supported a broad - based energy tax rather than a gasoline tax .

the administration decided to propose a tax on the energy content of fuels , a british thermal unit ( b.t.u. ) .

tax .

this tax proposal failed to gain support in congress , and , as an alternative , an increase in the gasoline tax to 18.4 cents per gallon was passed by congress and signed by president clinton , and took effect in december 1993 .

the revenue from the tax increase , 4.3 cents per gallon , was restricted to be allocated to deficit reduction .

the latter part of the 1990s was characterized by declining federal deficits as tax revenues rose , as well as low gasoline prices , taking increases in the gasoline tax off the policy agenda .

president george w. bush's administration did not propose any increase in the gasoline tax .

however , there were calls for a temporary reduction in the tax to help american drivers who paid record high prices for gasoline in the summer of 2008 .

the obama administration has opposed an increase in the gasoline tax during the recession .

however , it has advocated a number of policy objectives — greenhouse gas reduction , energy security , economic stimulus , more fuel efficiency , and moving toward alternative energy sources — that have been discussed in the past as justifications for gasoline tax increases .

a number of tax provisions related to highway trust fund financing are scheduled to expire on september 30 , 2011 .

these include , along with internal revenue code section , all but 4.3 cents per gallon of the federal tax on highway gasoline , diesel fuel , kerosene , and some alternative fuels ( §§4041 ( a ) and 4081 ( d ) ( 1 ) ) , the reduced rate of tax on partially exempt methanol , or ethanol , fuels ( §4041 ( m ) ) , the tax on the retail sale of heavy highway vehicles ( §4051 ( c ) ) , the tax on heavy truck tires ( §4071 ( d ) ) , and the annual use tax on heavy highway vehicles ( §4481 ( f ) ) .

in addition , the lust trust fund financing rates , sections 4041 ( d ) ( 4 ) and 4081 ( d ) ( 3 ) , are set to expire at the same time .

the purpose of a tax is to fund government through a transfer of resources from the taxpayer to the government .

as a result , every tax leaves the taxpayers with less purchasing power than they had before the tax was levied .

however , the government may use the resources acquired through levying the tax to finance the provision of public goods and services for the benefit of the taxpayers .

because it is unlikely that every taxpayer can , or will , agree concerning the proper mix and level of every public good and service , as well as every choice and level of tax instrument , taxes are unlikely to be voluntary , and the government must use the force of law to levy and collect taxes .

in addition , taxes can have a wide variety of economic effects , from altering consumer decisions concerning mix of goods to purchase , to national macroeconomic issues of economic growth , employment , and inflation .

the obama administration has expressed interest in reduced carbon emissions , reduced dependence on imported oil , and the development of alternative , renewable energy sources .

the highway trust fund is in need of an increase in stable funding .

these goals might be attained through a renewal of , and possibly an increase in , the federal excise tax on gasoline .

to facilitate consistent economic decision - making the tax could be set with variable rates , or levels , which would also enhance the predictability of the revenue base .

however , a gasoline tax increase is also likely to be unpopular with consumers .

it might also drain purchasing power , especially from an economy that remains weakened by recession .

