a rise in illicit drug trafficking in africa in recent years has drawn the attention of u.s. policy makers .

the 110 th congress , for instance , passed p.l .

110-417 , requiring the department of defense ( dod ) to author a report to congress laying out a counternarcotics strategy for the region , among other related goals .

the issue has also arisen in the 111 th congress .

on june 23 , 2009 , the senate foreign relations committee ( sfrc ) held a hearing entitled confronting drug trafficking in west africa , and other recent hearings , such as a late 2009 sfrc hearing on u.s. counterterrorism activities in africa's sahel region , have also referenced this issue .

president barack obama has also highlighted the challenge posed by drug trafficking in africa , which he has stated "threatens stability" throughout west africa .

africans have been involved in the global illicit drug trade for several decades , both in africa and elsewhere , but as a region , sub - saharan africa played a generally peripheral role in large - scale global drug trafficking prior to the mid - 2000s .

this was due , in part , to its geographic distance from traditional key centers of non - cannabis illicit drug production and consumption and from primary transit routes between them .

while commercially significant amounts of some drugs , particularly heroin , reportedly transited the region in the 1980s and 1990s , the amounts trafficked were generally much smaller than those in most other global regions .

with the exception of cannabis , local drug demand and supply incentives also remained low by global standards for several reasons .

these included a relative lack of purchasing power as a result of low average household incomes across much of sub - saharan africa ( "africa" hereafter , except where otherwise noted ) , along with widespread cultural unfamiliarity with and exposure to the main non - cannabis , illicit narcotics common in other parts of the world .

africa's historically relative peripheral status vis - à - vis the global trade in non - cannabis illicit narcotic drugs appears , however , to be ending .

hotspots of illegal drug activity have emerged in west africa and east africa , as well as in southern africa .

diverse signs of drug trafficking activity in west africa during the past five years indicate that this sub - region is emerging as a key warehousing and transshipment hub for large - scale consignments of south american cocaine being smuggled en route to europe .

in recent years — albeit not in late 2008 or 2009 , an anomaly discussed below — the region has witnessed a sharp rise in record - sized multi - ton cocaine seizures and a rise in reported cocaine criminal cases involving diverse foreign and african individuals , including african state officials and latin american drug syndicate members .

according to analyses by government and multilateral agencies , kenya and ethiopia are notable transshipment hubs for heroin from afghanistan and pakistan .

east africa is the primary smuggling conduit for moving heroin from southwest asia to africa for further transshipment around the globe , according to the international narcotics control board ( incb ) .

south africa has become a source and transshipment point for synthetic drugs , like methamphetamine and other amphetamine - type drugs , for both domestic consumption and foreign destinations in europe and south asia .

there are also reports that multiple countries in africa are being used as hubs for the illicit diversion of chemical precursors used to manufacture illegal drugs .

according to the incb , africa "has emerged as a major area" for the diversion to the americas and elsewhere of the key methamphetamine precursor chemicals ephedrine and pseudoephedrine .

local drug consumption trends are generally not well documented because of a paucity of data on illicit drug usage rates .

cannabis use rates in africa , however , are reportedly among the highest worldwide , while available data indicate that use of other drugs , including cocaine , heroin , and amphetamines , is generally below the use rates of other world regions but is growing in some african countries .

historically , u.s. and international policy makers directed relatively little attention to counternarcotics issues in africa , largely because the potential consequences for the united states and other non - african countries arising from drug trafficking in the region were typically viewed as limited .

the perception that such activity may indeed threaten u.s. and other international interests has grown , however , as africa's role in global trafficking has expanded .

some u.s. observers now argue that the rise in drug trafficking in africa has been so rapid and large — an indication that international drug trafficking patterns are in flux — that it must now be given heightened consideration within the context of global u.s. counternarcotics goals and strategies .

the extent of this rise also suggests that such activities have the potential to threaten diverse u.s. security , foreign policy , and economic interests within africa .

u.n. data also suggest that regional consumption of heroin , cocaine , cannabis , and amphetamine - type drugs is increasing , likely as a side effect of the continent's growing prominence in the global drug trade ( see table 9 ) .

south africa has long been the largest consumer of illegal drugs in africa .

there is a well - established trade in all major illicit drugs in south africa , where cannabis , methaqualone ( known locally as mandrax ) , methamphetamine ( known locally as tik ) , and mdma ( ecstasy ) are produced for domestic consumption and international export .

east africa is reportedly a growing transit point for heroin from southwest asia mainly to europe , and heroin abuse is a relatively small but growing problem in kenya , mauritius , south africa , and zambia , as well as in egypt , in north africa .

as drug abuse continues to grow in africa , the incb has raised concerns about the absence of sufficient medical facilities available for drug treatment and rehabilitation .

in the 1980s and 1990s , nigerian - dominated criminal organizations active in many countries became key players in the international smuggling of heroin , particularly into the united states , drawing the concern of u.s. policy makers .

apart from heroin , however , west africa long remained a minor destination and transshipment point for other illegal drugs from regions outside of africa .

during the past half decade , west africa has become a prominent locus of international drug trafficking , especially with regard to cocaine being trafficked onward to europe , as previously discussed .

in general , u.s. policy responses to the rise in drug trafficking through africa remain in the formative stages .

many african countries lack effective law enforcement agencies and judicial systems , which fundamentally limit counternarcotics efforts in the region .

in many cases , substantial u.s. and european operational cooperation or capacity - building assistance has accompanied african government efforts to increase drug trafficking monitoring , detection , and seizure rates .

a fundamental challenge confronting policy makers is how to develop a strategy and find the resources to both stem the rising flow of drug trafficking through africa — particularly west africa — in the short term , through such means as effective interdiction operations , and simultaneously address the underlying , long - term law enforcement capacity weaknesses that make the region vulnerable to drug trafficking .

several u.s. government agencies are currently developing policy strategies to achieve such ends , and the amounts of personnel , financial , and other resources being devoted to anti - drug efforts in the region are increasing .

these efforts include the establishment of at least one new dea office in ghana , and potentially more in other countries in the region in the future , including in nairobi , kenya .

total africa - related state department counternarcotics assistance is gradually expanding ; it rose from approximately $0.5 million in fy2006 to $1.6 million in fy2009 .

the obama administration requested $7.5 million for such purposes in africa in fy2010 .

in february 2010 , the white house office on national drug control policy ( ondcp ) released highlights from its fy2011 budget request .

in it , the administration requested $13.2 million for west africa counternarcotics programs conducted by the state department to enhance law enforcement investigative skills and justice sector capabilities to prosecute and convict drug traffickers .

p.l .

111-117 ( consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ) did not explicitly allocate funds for africa - specific counternarcotics efforts , as it did for some other countries and regions , although the bill does fund a variety of programs that are likely to support such ends in africa .

levels of funding for counternarcotics efforts in africa remain small compared to some other regions , but there are indications that greater policy attention — in terms of strategy development , programming , resources , and international cooperation — is being devoted to combating the illegal drug trade in west africa and elsewhere on the continent .

in addition to the united states , multiple african and donor governments and multilateral organizations are involved in combating drug trafficking in africa .

in general , while most actors involved at the multilateral and regional level agree that drug trafficking through africa is a growing phenomenon and poses a variety of law enforcement challenges , a shared consensus on how to address these challenges has not emerged .

limited resources and , in some cases , limited political will , often hamper the effectiveness of african and multinational efforts to combat the illegal drug trade .

for these and other reasons , some african policy makers reportedly do not view drug trafficking as a priority problem .

as one report explains: "for such poor countries ... unless funded from abroad , the advantages of directing policing resources to countering narcotics trafficking are not as apparent as in the rich consumer states that they supply. .

nevertheless , there is growing support among african governments for efforts to address the drug situation , both at the national level and in multilateral fora .

some west african countries , notably cape verde , senegal , ghana , and sierra leone , have recently won praise from u.s. officials for their efforts to mount effective law enforcement responses to the problem , and for their willingness to cooperate with u.s. and international counternarcotics efforts .

forty - five of 53 african countries have signed all three international u.n. drug control conventions .

a growing focus on the issue of drug trafficking in africa by various u.n. agencies and analogous concerns at the national level has also brought the issue to the attention of the u.n. security council , which held a special session on drug trafficking as a threat to peace and security in africa on december 8 , 2009 .

the discussion focused on the "numerous security risks caused by drug trafficking ... in africa," among other world regions , including "serious threats posed" by linkages between transnational organized crime and the "increasing link , in some cases , between drug trafficking and the financing of terrorism. .

key multilateral , european , and african country groupings that are developing efforts to combat drug trafficking in africa include the following: u.n. office on drugs and crime ( unodc ) .

established in 1997 , unodc is mandated to assist member states in their efforts to combat illegal drugs , transnational crime , and terrorism .

unodc publishes an annual report on drug trafficking , called the world drug report , and collects data on drug cultivation , production , seizures , and other drug - related statistics .

in africa , unodc maintains five field offices: one in egypt , covering northern africa and the middle east ; one in kenya , covering eastern africa ; one in nigeria ; one in senegal , covering west and central africa ; and one in south africa , covering southern africa .

these offices report on drug trafficking and other criminal activity trends at the regional level .

they also help to build anti - crime policy and institutional capacities at the regional and country level , including with respect to counternarcotics efforts , through programs that foster drug law enforcement mentoring and training , justice and penal sector reform , and drug demand reduction .

unodc also supports data for africa , a project launched in 2005 that is designed to increase the amount and reliability of data and information on african crime and drug trends .

u.n. office for west africa ( unowa ) .

established in 2001 by the u.n. security council , unowa is mandated to further the united nations' peace and security objectives in west africa .

unowa focuses on cross - border illicit activity in the sub - region , among other issues , and helps to raise west african government's awareness of the challenges posed by drug trafficking .

it also facilitates related multilateral security and political cooperation in the sub - region .

african union ( au ) .

established in 2002 , the african union is a regional multilateral grouping of all states in sub - saharan and north africa except morocco .

the african union has addressed drug trafficking through its revised au plan of action on drug control and crime prevention ( 2007-2012 ) .

in march 2009 , the a.u .

commission and the unodc launched a joint project to support the implementation of the a.u .

plan of action , building on earlier joint efforts focused on drug demand reduction and drug trafficking , among other crime prevention and criminal justice issues .

economic community of west african states ( ecowas ) .

established in 1975 , ecowas is a 15-member multilateral grouping of west africa states that promotes regional economic integration and security cooperation .

recently , ecowas has begun to play a greater role in combating drug trafficking in the region .

in october 2008 , an ecowas ministerial conference , organized in collaboration with the unodc and unowa and held in praia , cape verde , adopted a draft political declaration on prevention of drug abuse , drug trafficking and organized crimes in west africa .

it adopted a medium - term ecowas regional action plan to address drug trafficking , organized crime , and drug abuse in west africa .

in july 2009 , united nations agencies and interpol launched the west africa coast initiative , which seeks to support the implementation of the ecowas regional plan .

a key part of this initiative will be to establish transnational crime units ( tcus ) , initially in cote d'ivoire , guinea bissau , liberia , and sierra leone .

financial action task force ( fatf ) and fatf - style regional bodies ( fsrbs ) in africa .

established in 1989 , fatf is a multilateral organization that establishes international standards for legislative and regulatory reform to combat money laundering , including drug - related money laundering and terrorist financing .

south africa is the only african member of fatf .

however , two african fsrbs―the eastern and south african anti - money laundering group ( esaamlg ) and the intergovernmental action group against money laundering in west africa ( giaba , its french acronym ) ―support and promote the standards established by fatf .

international narcotics control board ( incb ) .

the incb is an independent and quasi - judicial control organ that monitors the implementation of u.n. drug control treaties .

in 2007 , the incb conducted a program to monitor and prevent illicit trade in precursor chemicals through africa , called operation crystal flow .

the findings from that operation proved that africa is a transshipment point for international trade in illegally diverted precursor chemicals .

in its recent annual reports , the incb has urged african countries and donor nations to continue to take steps to curtail cocaine trafficking and the emergent precursor trade in africa .

interpol .

established in 1923 , the international criminal police organization , or interpol , is a 187-member state organization that facilitates international police co - operation and efforts to prevent and combat international crime .

with respect to counternarcotics issues , interpol assists its member states to identify new drug trafficking trends and criminal organizations , and supports law enforcement efforts to combat drug trafficking .

in africa , interpol launched project cocaf ( cocaine trafficking from western africa to europe ) in 2006 , which facilitates information sharing between european and african law enforcement agencies to identify and target emerging drug trafficking routes , particularly cocaine shipment on commercial air flights from west africa .

interpol has also facilitated two other related efforts , project proteus , which was designed to combat cocaine trafficking originating in south america and transiting western africa en route to europe , and project drum , an effort to target the diversion of precursor chemicals in africa .

interpol is also involved in policy capacity building in africa , through a project called oasis africa ( providing operational assistance , services , and infrastructure support to african police forces ) .

the organization also deploys response teams that provide specialized expertise and investigative aid to countries facing major or serious police issues or cases .

european union ( eu ) .

in december 2007 , the eu committed to greater counternarcotics cooperation with and assistance for africa in the joint eu - africa strategy , adopted at the lisbon summit .

the european commission ( ec ) and several european countries also provide counternarcotics assistance to some african countries at the bilateral and regional or sub - regional levels , and through international multilateral institutions , like the unodc and the dublin group .

two additional initiatives that are partially funded by the ec include the maritime analysis and operations center — narcotics ( maoc - n ) , located in portugal and established in 2007 , and the mediterranean anti - drug coordination center ( ceclad - m ) , located in france and established in 2008 .

these efforts support maritime surveillance and intelligence coordination pertaining to drug trafficking interdiction operations along maritime routes between africa and europe .

ecowas and the eu ministerial troika also meet regularly to promote mutual security cooperation , including with respect to counternarcotics efforts .

the eu is reportedly planning to allocate between €18 and 22 million for drug interdiction and information gathering ; in addition , the ec has pledged to provide €15 million in support of institutional development issues in the law enforcement and judicial sectors under an effort dubbed the "dakar initiative. .

congress is involved in many aspects of u.s. international drug control policy .

members regularly appropriate funds for counterdrug initiatives , conduct oversight activities on federal counterdrug programs , and legislate changes to agency authorities and other counterdrug policies .

recent activities , as discussed above , include the 110 th congress's passage of p.l .

110-417 , which required a dod counternarcotics strategy for africa and the senate foreign relations committee's conduct of a june 23 , 2009 , hearing entitled confronting drug trafficking in west africa .

during the hearing , the chair and ranking member each expressed their concern regarding the issue , and stated that further policy efforts to halt rising drug trafficking in africa are necessary .

the possible nexus of cocaine trafficking and terrorism also featured prominently in a november 2009 sfrc subcommittee on african affairs hearing u.s. counterterrorism priorities and strategies in the sahel region .

congress may also respond to increasing executive branch prioritization of counternarcotics assistance efforts in africa , as previously discussed .

key africa - related counternarcotics issues that congress may consider , among others , include the following .

the analysis of drug trafficking and use trends in africa — and , in turn , the formulation of policy solutions to combat drugs in africa — is inherently limited by the frequent lack of basic crime and law enforcement statistics , drug - related health and social indicators , and security and justice sector evaluations in africa .

data on domestic drug use are often unavailable or cover limited time periods .

statistics on drug - related arrests , prosecutions , incarcerations , seizures , and other related trends are often unreliable or non - existent .

there is also a paucity of actionable intelligence data in the region ; as the unodc has reported , many of the largest drug seizures in recent years in africa were detected through foreign tips , as a result of non - african law enforcement actions .

similarly , several of the largest cocaine seizures undertaken by african law enforcement appear to have arisen from accidental detection and other coincidental circumstances , rather than as a result of systematic intelligence gathering or other law enforcement operations .

as a result of the lack of data on drug trafficking trends and patterns , estimates of the amount of cocaine currently transiting africa vary widely , with estimates ranging from 40 metric tons to 300 metric tons per year , as previously discussed .

in the absence of better data on seizures and traffic volumes , accurate projections of emergent and prospective trafficking - related trends and developments — which may provide the basis for allocating resources and formulating policy responses to the problem — are likely to be difficult to generate .

while cocaine trafficking through africa has risen sharply in recent years , it remains unclear whether a reported drop in seizures in 2009 , for instance , is indicative of a short - term or a long - term trend .

several observers have argued that more and better intelligence and data collection on the nature of the drug threat in africa is needed .

this could take the form of increased human intelligence collection and the increased deployment of technology - based methods for detecting and monitoring drug flows transiting the region .

efforts to increase such africa - related law enforcement resources , however , are nevertheless likely to be countered by contending pressures to devote greater resources to similar objectives in other parts of the world where the drug threat is viewed as being greater .

in the absence of better information on the drug threat in africa , some observers may argue that significant shifts in u.s. attention to the region may not be warranted .

others may argue that without good information on the problem , policy makers may be prone to formulate policies that ineffectively respond to current challenges , or do not address key aspects of the problem , such as the reported involvement in african drug trafficking of criminal organizations targeted by the united states in other regions .

given that many african countries lack effective law enforcement agencies and judicial systems and resources to fund them , many observers have argued that donor countries , including the united states , should consider scaling up and expanding existing counternarcotics capacity - building assistance programs in africa .

such recommendations raise questions over how to achieve that end .

some policy makers may contend that , given the urgency and extent of the drug trafficking threat faced by african countries , an immediate rise in u.s. and european interdiction operations , quick impact training and equipping programs , and other short - term operational activity are necessary .

others , however , may argue that in the absence of a comprehensive law enforcement and judicial system capacity - building , the results of such short - term assistance are likely to be fragmentary and ineffective in the immediate terms , and negligible with regard to long - term trends .

without a capacity to ensure fair trials ; effectively prosecute potentially wealthy , high - profile defendants ; properly control seized drugs for evidentiary purposes and subsequently destroy them ; enforce prison sentences ; or to deter police corruption , for instance , overall efforts to curtail drug trafficking may founder .

such capacity - building assistance would likely include a broad but integrated combination of law enforcement , rule of law , and government infrastructure and process training and assistance , as well as facility construction or upgrades and providing operational equipment .

ultimately , questions over the relative mix of immediate impact and long - term development that may be necessary boil down to decisions on policy prioritization and resource allocation .

some policy makers are likely to argue that both short - term interventions and long - term capacity - building efforts may be necessary .

in a budgetary context in which federal fiscal resources are increasingly limited , however , decision makers will need to carefully consider what mix of resources is likely to have the greatest effects with respect to both time frames .

while some may be inclined to provide such aid , others may question whether a substantial level of u.s. counternarcotics assistance for africa is warranted at all , since much of the recent growth in cocaine traffic through west africa is believed to be destined to europe , not the united states .

as a result , some may suggest that european countries should provide the bulk of counternarcotics assistance in africa .

a related line of debate may center on whether the extent and effectiveness of current european counterdrug efforts in africa are adequate , and whether individual european countries or the eu plan to increase their counterdrug presence in the region .

such views , however , may be countered by those who contend that drug trafficking in africa poses a variety of direct threats to u.s. national security and foreign policy interests in africa .

currently , the u.s. counterdrug footprint in africa is expanding in terms of resources and personnel .

the mix of resources being devoted to such efforts reflects short term and long - term policy objectives and emphasizes the importance of cooperation with multilateral and u.n. agencies and with european governments and the eu .

the state department's fy2009 estimated level of funding for such purposes is 13 times as large as that for fy2006 , and during the same period , the number of african recipient countries targeted to receive such assistance has grown from just one country ( nigeria ) to six .

additional resources to combat drug trafficking through the region have also begun to flow through dod entities and initiatives , including africom , aps , and jiatf - south .

dea is also scaling up its presence , having recently augmented its three existing regional offices by opening a new office in accra , ghana .

dea also has provisional plans to expand its presence in other parts of africa farther by opening up five additional country offices and developing new law enforcement operations in five additional locations .

in addition , various other u.s. plans for other counterdrug training programs and other projects are also under development .

despite recent and prospective increases , counternarcotics efforts in africa remain relatively small when compared to u.s. counternarcotics programs in other parts of the world .

in fy2008 , for example , the state department obligated 0.12% of its total counternarcotics aid budget to africa , while the state department's fy2010 request for counternarcotics assistance to africa — which is significantly larger than that of any previous year — comprises just 0.49% of total global state department counternarcotics assistance .

personnel resources and attention devoted to drug trafficking in africa are also limited .

the state department has one transnational crime affairs officer stationed in the region ( in abuja , nigeria ) and has a limited diplomatic presence in some african countries affected by drug trafficking , such as guinea - bissau , where the state department maintains an office staffed only with guinea - bissau nationals .

u.s. government agency roles and responsibilities in combating drugs in africa are not yet clearly defined in a public strategy document for the region .

in practice , the state department's inl bureau has taken the lead on counterdrug matters in the region , focusing primarily on country assessments to inform future programming efforts .

inl , however , is only one of several u.s. government agencies or agency units that could play a role in counterdrug efforts in africa .

as u.s. assistance for such ends grows , the 111 th congress may see a need to weigh in on what agencies play which policy implementation and coordination roles , including with respect to the relative balance of civilian and military agency participation in such efforts , as did the 110 th congress with regard to the military's role .

in the absence of a clear integrated , inter - agency strategy for the region , several questions about agency participation in counterdrug efforts in africa and interagency coordination may arise .

one such question is whether an interagency coordination body should formally be established to ensure policy consistency and avoid program overlap and duplication across u.s. government agencies and offices .

presently , no such body formally exists , although informal inter - agency working group sessions have taken place on an ad hoc basis .

if policy makers decide that such a coordinating body is necessary , secondary questions include which agencies should participate in the group , which agency or agencies might chair or co - chair the group , and whether the members of the group should meet at the principal , deputies , or working group levels .

similar questions regarding program coordination on the ground in countries in africa may also arise .

a related question pertains to the emerging role of the u.s. military , particularly with respect to the role of the regional combatant command for africa , africom — and the proportion of african counternarcotics assistance currently provided by dod ( approximately $19.3 million in fy2009 compared to the state department's approximately $1.6 million in fy2009 ) .

some observers have questioned whether dod's growing role in counternarcotics activities and africom's prospective participation in these activities , and others that are widely seen as primarily civilian in nature , is appropriate .

proponents of an expanded dod counternarcotics role generally argue that the u.s. military is well - equipped with the resources and monitoring and detecting skills to help foreign governments counter powerful drug trafficking organizations and that the absence of dod's participation in counternarcotics assistance would lessen the effectiveness of u.s. programs .

some may also contend that protecting the integrity of national borders and territory from external threats , including drug trafficking , is an inherently military activity .

opponents , by contrast , may contend that counternarcotics foreign assistance is primarily a law enforcement and intelligence activity and not a core military mission .

in the view of some , the training of foreign militaries and police in counternarcotics operations could result in legal dilemmas and human rights controversies arising from a merging of civilian police and military roles , potentially resulting in serious political and diplomatic repercussions for the united states abroad .

