medical malpractice insurance has attracted congressional attention numerous times over the past few decades , particularly in the midst of three "crisis" periods in the mid - 1970s , the mid - 1980s , and the early 2000s .

these periods were marked by sharp increases in physicians' liability insurance premiums , difficulties in finding any liability insurance in some areas as insurers withdrew from providing coverage , reports of physicians leaving areas or retiring following insurance difficulties , and a variety of public policy measures at both the state and federal levels to address the market disruptions .

in each case , attention receded after a few years as premium increases moderated and market conditions calmed .

over time , the availability of medical liability insurance and premiums for such insurance has exhibited cyclical characteristics .

which public policy measures have been effective in addressing the successive insurance market disruptions has been a matter of debate .

sharply drawn conclusions about the causes of the crises have also been strongly debated .

in the early 2000s , the debate largely focused on implementing federal limits on the tort system .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has estimated that a nationwide limit on torts for medical malpractice would lower malpractice insurance premiums by approximately 10% .

other studies have found both higher effects and negligible effects from state tort reforms .

according to the latest summary information published by the medical liability monitor in 2010 , the market "remains 'soft' or perhaps 'flat' with 67 percent of all rates holding at last year's level. .

premiums for 2010 for malpractice insurance "have eased nationwide. .

data gathered by the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) indicate that total premiums for medical malpractice liability insurance have dropped every year from 2006 to 2009 .

although the current medical liability insurance market is not exhibiting widespread symptoms of market disruption , problems still exist with affordability of malpractice insurance for certain specialties and in particular geographic regions ; such problems , however , are not as acute as compared with other crisis periods .

thus , by extension , physicians and physician groups ( primarily the american medical association ) are not responding to current market conditions in the same manner as during periods in which they proclaimed a crisis .

for example , during such periods , physicians and physicians groups have engaged in more public displays of dissatisfaction such as participating in "strikes. .

however , even during a period of relative calm , the malpractice system experiences issues with equity and access .

for example , some observers have criticized the current system's performance with respect to compensating patients who have been harmed by malpractice , deterring substandard medical care , and promoting patient safety .

the current legislative interest in medical malpractice reform differs from the past in that it has been largely driven by overall health reform and issues of healthcare costs , rather than an immediate crisis in malpractice liability insurance .

as such , the focus of reforming medical malpractice may be broadened .

instead of narrowly addressing what can be done to stabilize premiums for malpractice insurance , congress may decide to focus on how changes to the medical malpractice system might affect the overall health care system .

in terms of direct costs , medical malpractice insurance adds relatively little to the cost of health care .

medical malpractice premiums written in 2009 totaled approximately $10.8 billion , while health expenditures estimated by cbo total $2.6 trillion .

indirect costs , particularly increased utilization of tests and procedures by physicians to protect against future lawsuits ( "defensive medicine" ) , have been estimated to be much higher than direct premiums .

these conclusions , however , have been controversial , in part because synthesis studies have claimed that national estimates of defensive medicine are unreliable .

cbo conducted its own analysis , as well as synthesized and analyzed previous studies on the relationship between medical malpractice and health care costs .

the most recent cbo analysis estimated that federal tort reforms would reduce national health care spending by about 0.5% in 2009 ( equivalent to approximately $11 billion ) .

this estimate is the cumulative impact of tort reform on both lowering medical malpractice insurance premiums and reducing use of health care services , and takes into account the fact that because some states have implemented tort reforms , a significant proportion of potential cost savings already has been realized .

other earlier studies have estimated the reduction of health care spending attributable to state tort reforms .

these studies compared pre - and post - reform spending within each state that implemented such reforms , and found varying impact ( eg , a set of studies found 4% - 9% reduction in hospital spending for medicare patients with heart disease ; another study found that state tort reforms reduced personal health care expenditures by 3% - 4% ) .

cbo also estimated the effect of malpractice tort reform on the federal budget .

in its latest analysis , cbo estimated that such reforms would reduce spending under medicare , medicaid , the children's health insurance program , and the federal employees health benefits program by approximately $41 billion from 2010 to 2019 .

in addition , congress's joint committee on taxation ( jct ) estimated that such reforms would lead to an increase in federal revenues by $13 billion over the same 10-year period .

by combining the impact of tort reform on mandatory health spending and tax revenues , cbo estimated that tort reforms could reduce the federal budget deficit by approximately $54 billion over 10 years .

addressing problems in the medical malpractice insurance markets can be challenging , as these markets react to three different systems , each of which is complex in its own right: health care , tort , and insurance .

the cyclical experience of medical malpractice insurers is reflected in aggregate data about the industry compiled and analyzed by the naic ( see figure 1 ) .

from 1992 to 1998 , direct incurred losses were relatively stable , varying from a low of $3.18 billion in 1994 to a high of $4.46 billion in 1998 .

however , from 1998 to 2003 , losses grew steadily year after year , to a high of $8.46 billion in that last year , coinciding with the last crisis period .

since 2003 , losses have fallen every year .

in 2009 , losses totaled $4.01 billion , the lowest amount in more than a decade .

 ( the loss data is in nominal dollar amounts. ) .

the trend in malpractice insurance premiums has roughly followed losses as those amounts have increased .

however , such premiums have not fallen nearly as much as losses in recent years .

the loss ratio , which compares losses to premiums , reflects this uneven trend ( see figure 2 ) .

a high ratio generally implies lower profits for insurers on the insurance portion of their operations .

the loss ratio for the industry rose steadily from 78.41% in 1997 to 126.83% in 2001 , tracking closely with the losses trend .

since 2001 , the loss ratio has rapidly decreased .

in 2008 , the loss ratio of 54.62% was the lowest one in nearly two decades and 2009's ratio was the second lowest at 55.66% , meaning that over the past two years , the industry experienced its highest profit margin on direct premiums earned in the calendar years analyzed .

insurers , who are strictly regulated by state insurance regulators , may also profit , or lose , from their investments .

in general , with such low loss ratios , theory would suggest that there is an increase in competition because insurers are entering the market in search of profits .

this , however , may not be happening as quickly as expected in medical malpractice if prospective insurers are wary due to past variations in medical malpractice losses , or if prospective insurers' capital has been depleted due to losses incurred during the recent financial crisis .

