this report summarizes the key provisions affecting private health insurance in title i of s. 1679 , the affordable health choices act , as ordered reported by the senate committee on health , education , labor and pensions ( help ) on july 15 , 2009 .

title i of the bill focuses on reducing the number of uninsured , restructuring the private health insurance market , setting minimum standards for health benefits , and providing financial assistance to certain individuals and , in some cases , small employers .

in general , the bill includes the following: individuals would be required to maintain health insurance , and employers with more than 25 employees would be required to either provide insurance or pay a fee , with some exceptions .

several market reforms would be made , such as modified community rating and guaranteed issue and insurance renewal .

both the individual and employer mandates would be linked to qualifying health insurance coverage .

qualifying coverage would include qualified health plans offered through a gateway , and employment - based and nongroup plans not offered through a gateway that meet specified criteria , including meeting required minimum standards and the market reforms established in the bill ; grandfathered employment - based plans ; grandfathered nongroup plans ; and other coverage , such as medicare and medicaid .

states could either establish a gateway ( referred to as an establishing state ) or request that the secretary of health and human services establish a gateway in the state ( referred to as a participating state ) .

in the case of a state that was not an establishing or participating state at the end of four years after enactment , the secretary would establish and operate a gateway in that state , deeming the state as a participating state .

gateways would offer private plans alongside a community health insurance option .

certain individuals with incomes below 400% of the federal poverty level could qualify for subsidies toward their premium costs ; these subsidies would be available only through the gateways .

currently existing plans offered by employers as well as plans offered in the individual market ( the nongroup market ) could be grandfathered indefinitely , but only if no substantial changes were made to benefits and cost - sharing .

new plans could also be sold in both the individual and group market outside of the gateway , but only those new plans that meet the minimum requirements would satisfy the mandates for individuals and employers .

most of these provisions would be effective one year after enactment , or on the date on which a state becomes a participating or establishing state .

this report begins by providing background information on key aspects of the private insurance market as it exists currently .

this information is useful in setting the stage for understanding how and where s. 1679 would reform health insurance .

this report summarizes key provisions affecting private health insurance in title i of the affordable health choices act , as ordered reported by the senate committee on health , education , labor and pensions ( help ) on july 15 , 2009 .

although the description that follows segments the private health insurance provisions into various categories , these provisions are interrelated and interdependent .

for example , the bill includes a number of provisions to alter how current private health insurance markets function , primarily for individuals who purchase coverage directly from an insurer or through a small employer .

s. 1679 would require that insurers not exclude potential enrollees or charge them premiums based on preexisting health conditions .

in a system where individuals voluntarily choose whether to obtain health insurance , however , individuals may choose to enroll only when they become sick , known as "adverse selection," which can lead to higher premiums and greater uninsurance .

when permitted , insurers often guard against adverse selection by adopting policies such as excluding preexisting conditions .

if reform eliminates many of the tools insurers use to guard against adverse selection then , instead , america's health insurance plans ( ahip ) , the association that represents health insurers , has stated that individuals must be required to purchase coverage , so that not just the sick enroll .

furthermore , some individuals currently forgo health insurance because they cannot afford the premiums .

if individuals are required to obtain health insurance , one could argue that adequate premium subsidies must be provided by the government and / or employers to make practical the individual mandate to obtain health insurance , which is in turn arguably necessary to make the market reforms possible .

in addition , premium subsidies toward plans with high cost - sharing ( i.e. , deductible , copayments , and coinsurance ) may provide individuals with health insurance that they cannot afford to use .

so , while the descriptions below discuss various provisions separately , the removal of one from the bill could be deleterious to the implementation of the others .

the private health insurance provisions are presented under the following topics , with the primary crs contact listed for each: individual and employer mandate: the requirement on individuals to maintain health insurance and on employers to either provide health insurance or pay a fee .

[[author name scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed]] private health insurance market reforms .

[[author name scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed]] gateway [chris peterson , [phone number scrubbed]] , through which the following two items can only be offered: community health insurance options .

[paulette morgan , [phone number scrubbed]] premium subsidies .

[chris peterson , [phone number scrubbed] .

americans obtain health insurance in different settings and through a variety of methods .

people may get health coverage in the private sector or through a publicly funded program , such as medicare or medicaid .

in 2008 , 60% of the u.s. population had employment - based health insurance .

employers choosing to offer health coverage may either purchase insurance or choose to self - fund health benefits for their employees .

other individuals obtained coverage on their own in the nongroup market .

however , there is no federal law that either requires individuals to have health insurance or requires employers to offer health insurance .

approximately 46 million individuals ( 15% of the u.s. population ) were estimated to be uninsured in 2008 .

individuals and employers choosing to purchase health insurance in the private market fit into one of the three segments of the market , depending on their situation — the large group ( large employer ) market , the small group market , and the nongroup market .

more than 95% of large employers offer coverage .

large employers are generally able to obtain lower premiums for a given health insurance package than small employers and individuals seeking nongroup coverage .

this is partly because larger employers enjoy economies of scale and a larger "risk pool" of enrollees , which makes the expected costs of care more predictable .

employers generally offer large subsidies toward health insurance , thus making it more attractive for both the healthier and the sicker workers to enter the pool .

so , not only is the risk pool larger in size , but it is more diverse .

states have experimented with ways to create a single site where individuals and small employers could compare different insurance plans , obtain coverage , and sometimes pool risk .

although most of these past experiments failed ( eg , california's pacadvantage ) , other states have learned from these experiences and have fashioned potentially more sustainable models ( eg , massachusetts's connector ) .

there are private - sector companies that also serve the role of making various health insurance plans easier to compare for individuals and small groups ( eg , ehealthinsurance ) , available in most , but not all , states because of variation in states' regulations .

less than half of all small employers ( less than 50 employees ) offer health insurance coverage ; such employers cite cost as the primary reason for not offering health benefits .

one of the main reasons is a small group's limited ability to spread risk across a small pool .

insurers generally consider small firms to be less stable than larger pools , as one or two employees moving in or out of the pool ( or developing an illness ) would have a greater impact on the risk pool than they would in large firms .

other factors that affect a small employer's ability to provide health insurance include certain disadvantages small firms have in comparison with their larger counterparts: small groups are more likely to be medically underwritten , have relatively little market power to negotiate benefits and rates with insurance carriers , and generally lack economies of scale .

allowing these firms to purchase insurance through a larger pool , such as an association , gateway or an exchange , could lower premiums for those with high - cost employees .

depending on the applicable state laws , individuals who purchase health insurance in the nongroup market may be rejected or face premiums that reflect their health status , which can make premiums lower for the healthy but higher for the sick .

even when these individuals obtain coverage , there may be exclusions for certain conditions .

reforms affecting premiums ratings would likely increase premiums for some while lowering premiums for others , depending on their age , health , behaviors , and other factors .

states are the primary regulators of the private health insurance market , though some federal regulation applies , mostly affecting employer - sponsored health insurance ( esi ) .

the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) requires that coverage sold to small groups ( 2-50 employees ) must be sold on a guaranteed issue basis .

that is , the issuer must accept every small employer that applies for coverage .

all states require issuers to offer policies to firms with 2-50 workers on a guaranteed issue basis , in compliance with hipaa .

as of january 2009 , in the small group market , 13 states also require issuers to offer policies on a guaranteed issue basis to the self - employed "groups of one. .

and as of december 2008 , in the individual market , 15 states require issuers to offer some or all of their insurance products on a guaranteed issue basis to non - hipaa eligible individuals .

most states currently impose premium rating rules on insurance carriers in the small group and individual markets .

the spectrum of existing state rating limitations ranges from pure community rating to adjusted ( or modified ) community rating , to rate bands , to no restrictions .

under pure community rating , all enrollees in a plan pay the same premium , regardless of their health , age , or any other factor .

only two states ( new jersey and new york ) use pure community rating in their nongroup markets , and only new york imposes pure community rating rules in the small group market .

adjusted community rating prohibits issuers from pricing health insurance policies based on health factors , but allows it for other key factors such as age or gender .

rate bands allow premium variation based on health , but such variation is limited according to a range specified by the state .

rate bands are typically expressed as a percentage above and below the index rate ( i.e. , the rate that would be charged to a standard population if the plan is prohibited from rating based on health factors ) .

federal law requires that group health plans and health insurance issuers offering group health coverage must limit the period of time when coverage for preexisting health conditions may be excluded .

as of january 2009 , in the small group market , 21 states had preexisting condition exclusion rules that provided consumer protection above the federal standard .

and as of december 2008 , in the individual market , 42 states limit the period of time when coverage for preexisting health conditions may be excluded for certain enrollees in that market .

in fact , while there are a handful of federal benefit mandates for health insurance that apply to group coverage , there are more than 2,000 benefit mandates imposed by the states .

one issue receiving congressional attention is whether a publicly sponsored health insurance plan should be offered as part of the insurance market reform .

some proponents of a public option see it as potentially less expensive than private alternatives , as it would not need to generate profits or pay brokers to enroll individuals and might have lower administrative costs .

some proponents argue that offering a public plan could provide additional choice and may increase competition , since the public plan might require lower provider payments and thus charge lower premiums .

some opponents question whether these advantages would make the plan a fair competitor , or rather provide the government with an unfair advantage in setting prices , in authorizing legislation , or in future amendments .

ultimately , they fear that these advantages might drive private plans from the market .

s. 1679 would establish new federal health insurance standards applicable to new , generally available health plans specified in the bill .

among the market reforms are provisions that would do the following: prohibit coverage exclusions of preexisting health conditions .

 ( a "preexisting health condition" is a medical condition that was present before the date of enrollment for health coverage , whether or not any medical advice , diagnosis , care , or treatment was recommended or received before such date. ) .

require premiums to be determined using adjusted community rating rules .

 ( "adjusted , or modified community rating" prohibits issuers from pricing health insurance policies based on health factors , but allows it for other key characteristics such as age or gender. ) .

under s. 1679 , premiums would only be allowed to vary based on age ( by no more than a 2:1 ratio across age categories specified by the commissioner ) , tobacco use ( by no more than 1.5:1 ratio ) , adherence to or participation in a reasonably designed program of health program and disease prevention , premium rating areas , and family enrollment ( for example , for single versus family coverage ) .

require coverage to be offered on both a guaranteed issue and guaranteed renewal basis .

 ( "guaranteed issue" in health insurance is the requirement that an issuer accept every applicant for health coverage .

"guaranteed renewal" in health insurance is the requirement on an issuer to renew group coverage at the option of the plan sponsor [eg , employer] or nongroup coverage at the option of the enrollee .

guaranteed issue and renewal alone would not guarantee that the insurance offered was affordable ; this would be addressed in the rating rules. ) .

require public reporting of the percentage of total premium revenue expended on reimbursement for clinical services , quality activities , taxes and fees , and on all other non - claims costs ( including an explanation of these costs ) .

impose new nondiscrimination standards building on existing nondiscrimination rules in group coverage and adequacy standards for insurers' networks of providers , such as doctors .

s. 1679 would also require new plans to cover certain broad categories of benefits , prohibit cost - sharing on preventive services , require out - of - pocket limits , prohibit lifetime or annual limits on benefits , continue coverage for dependents until age 26 ( but only if the plan chose to cover dependents ) , and meet the standards for the "essential benefits package," described below .

new individual policies and group policies issued post - enactment could be offered both inside and outside of a gateway .

existing group plans and nongroup insurance policies would be grandfathered as long as there are no significant changes to benefits and cost - sharing .

in addition to establishing new federal private health insurance standards , s. 1679 would enable and support states' creation of "american health benefit gateways," similar in many respects to the exchange proposed in h.r .

3200 and to existing entities like the massachusetts connector and ehealthinsurance .

gateways would not be insurers but would provide eligible individuals and small businesses with access to insurers' plans in a comparable way ( in the same way , for example , that travelocity or expedia are not airlines but provide access to available flights and fares in a comparable way ) .

gateways would be government or nonprofit entities that would have additional responsibilities as well , such as certifying plans , establishing risk - adjustment mechanisms to reimburse plans enrolling sicker - than - average populations , and identifying individuals eligible for medicaid , chip , and premium and cost - sharing credits .

if states adopt the federal private health insurance provisions described above , and if they agree to make state and local governments subject to the employer mandates , states would have the first opportunity to establish a gateway — to be an "establishing state" — or to request the secretary to set up a gateway — to be a "participating state. .

if four years after the date of enactment a state is not an establishing state or a participating state , there would be a federal fallback .

the secretary would establish and operate a gateway in the state , the federal individual - and group - market insurance provisions described above would become effective "notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law," and the state would be deemed a participating state .

under s. 1679 , within 60 days of enactment ( or as soon as possible thereafter ) , the secretary would make grant awards to states to create gateways .

the secretary's formula would consist of two parts: a minimum amount for each state and an additional amount based on population .

at least 60% of the total allotted amount would be toward the state - level minimum .

s. 1679 sets no limit on the total to be allotted ; the bill authorizes whatever sum emerges from the grand total of each state's allotment as calculated by the formula , although the actual appropriation may limit this .

a state's allotment could not be renewed after the second year after a gateway is established in the state .

ongoing operations would be financed by a surcharge on participating plans of up to 4% of premium amounts .

multiple gateways could operate in a state , but each would require a geographically distinct area .

a gateway could operate in multiple states .

individuals could enroll in a gateway plan if they are ( 1 ) residing in a participating or establishing state ; ( 2 ) not incarcerated , except individuals in custody pending the disposition of charges ; ( 3 ) not entitled to medicare part a , or enrolled in medicare part b ; and ( 4 ) not eligible for coverage under medicaid ( or a medicaid waiver ) , tricare , the federal employees health benefits program , or , in some cases , employer - sponsored insurance .

in an establishing state , the criteria for employers to offer gateway coverage , including employer size , would be set by the state .

in a participating state , criteria for qualified employers would be set by the secretary .

however , in both cases , the cut - off for small business participation in the gateway could not be lower than 50 .

if neither the secretary nor the state establishes criteria on employer size , the maximum employer size would be deemed to be 50 .

gateway plans would have to meet not only the new federal requirements of all private health insurance plans , but would also have their cost - sharing options somewhat standardized into the three cost - sharing / benefit tiers shown in the table below .

expenditures considered "out of pocket" would be defined as those considered "qualified medical expenses" in the internal revenue code for hsas .

under s. 1679 , the secretary of hhs would establish a community health insurance option through each gateway .

any individual eligible to purchase insurance through gateways would be eligible to enroll in the community option and may also be eligible for income - based premium credits .

the community option would have to meet the requirements that apply to all plans participating in the gateway unless otherwise excluded .

the requirements would include federal and state laws related to guaranteed renewal , rating , preexisting conditions and nondiscrimination .

the community health insurance option would provide coverage only for the essential health benefits , unless it is required by the state to include additional benefits .

the secretary would be required to establish premiums at a level sufficient to cover expected costs including claims , administration , and a contingency margin .

limited start - up funds would be available but would be repaid within 10 years .

the secretary would be required to negotiate with medical providers to set payment rates , subject to limits .

specifically , the payment rates in aggregate would not be allowed to be higher than the average rates paid by other qualified health plans offered in gateways .

subject to the rate negotiations , a state advisory council established by each state would be allowed to develop and encourage the use of innovative payment policies to promote quality , efficiency , and savings to the consumer .

this proposal does not address provider participation in the community health insurance option .

the secretary would be required to enter into no - risk contracts for the administration of the community health insurance option , in the same way the secretary enters into contracts for the administration of the medicare program .

the administrative contractor would have to meet specified criteria , including being a non - profit entity .

the fee paid to the contractor could vary based on its performance on specified quality and savings measures .

in addition , during the first two years and at the secretary's discretion thereafter , the secretary would be required to make risk corridor payment adjustments to the administrative contractor based on risk corridor payment adjustments made to medicare prescription drug plans under medicare part d during fy2006 and fy2007 .

a risk corridor payment adjustment is a method for limiting the losses ( or gains ) the contractor would experience if their costs ( or revenues ) fell outside of specified boundaries .

annually , the secretary would be required to study the solvency of the community option and submit a report to congress .

if the community option was found to be insolvent , the president would be required to submit proposed legislation to congress to address the insolvency .

congress would be required to consider the legislation .

the secretary would pay an annual premium credit to each gateway for qualified , enrolled individuals .

the gateway would remit the credit to the qualified health plan an individual is enrolled in .

the amount of the annual premium credit would be determined by the secretary so that an eligible individual whose agi is 400% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) would not have to pay more than 12.5% of income in premiums .

 ( individuals above 400% fpl would not be eligible for credits. ) .

eligible individuals with an income of 150% fpl or lower would pay no more than 1% of income in premiums .

between 150% fpl and 400% fpl , the percentage of income one would have to pay toward premiums would rise in a straight line from 1% of income to 12.5% of income , as illustrated in the solid line of figure 1 and the table below .

for a family of three in the 48 contiguous states in 2009 , 150% fpl is $27,465 , and 400% fpl is $73,240 .

the premium credit amount would also be based on the "reference premium" for the area .

for an individual whose family income is at or below 200% of poverty , the reference premium would be the weighted average annual premium of the three lowest - cost plans in tier c offered in the individual's community rating area .

for an individual whose family income is above 200% of poverty but is not above 300% of poverty , the reference premium would be the weighted average annual premium of the three lowest - cost plans in tier b offered in the individual's area .

for an individual whose family income is above 300% of poverty but is not above 400% of poverty , the reference premium would be the weighted average annual premium of the three lowest - cost plans in tier a ( basic plan ) offered in the individual's area .

 ( the community health insurance option could not be considered in determining the three lowest - cost plans. ) .

regardless of their credit amount , individuals could enroll in any qualified health plan , but would have to pay the difference between the premium and the credit , if any .

s. 1679 offers more generous plans with lower cost sharing to lower - income individuals in lieu of a separate cost - sharing credit ( as included in h.r .

3200 ) .

eligibility would be calculated based on ( 1 ) an applicant's agi from two years prior or ( 2 ) in the case of an individual seeking a credit based on claiming a significant decrease in agi , the applicant's reported or estimated agi for a most recent period .

for individuals who would receive a premium credit payment on their behalf for a year and who claim a significant decrease in agi in that year , the individual would file an income reconciliation statement .

based on the income reconciliation statement , the secretary would determine the size of overpayments or underpayments .

individuals would be liable to the secretary for overpayment amounts .

if such a person had a verified agi of no more than 400% of poverty , the amount of repayment could not exceed $250 for an individual tax filer or $400 for a joint filer .

the secretary would pay to the individual any deficit associated with underpayments .

the secretary would verify , through the internal revenue service ( irs ) , the income data received from individuals submitting applications for credits .

to be eligible to receive a credit , an individual would have to authorize the disclosure of tax return information .

the secretary would delegate to a gateway or state the authority to carry out these eligibility - determination activities .

the gateway could consult with the irs to verify income data received from individuals submitting applications for credits .

an individual who has been determined to be eligible for subsidies would be responsible to notify a gateway of any changes that might affect his or her eligibility status .

upon an individual's notice , the gateway would promptly re - determine the individual's eligibility .

the gateway would terminate payments on behalf of the individual , if the individual fails to provide the status change information in a timely basis or the gateway determines the individual is no longer eligible for the premium credits .

applications for this process could be done in person , by mail , telephone , and the internet .

the secretary would determine the form of the application and the manner of submission , and the application could require documentation .

an application could be submitted to the gateway or a state agency for determination .

no payments could be made for individuals who are not lawfully present in the united states .

necessary amounts to finance these credits would automatically be paid out of the u.s. treasury .

