in march 2010 , after more than a year of legislative deliberation , congress passed a pair of measures designed to reform the u.s. health care system and address the twin challenges of constraining rapid growth of health care costs and expanding access to high - quality health care .

on march 21 , the house passed the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ; h.r .

3590 ) , which the senate had approved on christmas eve , as well as the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( h.r .

4872 ) .

president obama signed the first measure ( p.l .

111-148 ) on march 23 and the second on march 30 ( p.l .

111-152 ) .

other health reform proposals were also put forth , such as the healthy americans act ( s. 391 ) , introduced by senators ron wyden and robert bennett , and the empowering patients first act ( h.r .

3400 ) , introduced by representative tom price .

on november 2 , 2009 , the house judiciary committee reported out the health insurance industry antitrust enforcement act of 2009 ( h.r .

3596 ) , which would limit antitrust exemptions provided by the mccarran - ferguson act ( p.l .

79-15 ) .

on february 24 , 2010 , the house passed the health insurance industry fair competition act ( h.r .

4626 ) on a 406 – 19 vote , which would amend the mccarran - ferguson act to enable more robust antitrust enforcement .

health care costs in the united states , which have risen rapidly in real terms in the last few decades , have strained state and federal budgets .

future growth in health care costs is projected to threaten the fiscal position of state and federal governments unless major policy changes occur .

additionally , for many americans , the lack of health insurance coverage complicates access to health care .

according to the u.s. census bureau , 46.3 million or 15.4% of the people in the united states lack health insurance coverage .

furthermore , even families with health insurance may become vulnerable to the financial burdens of a serious health condition or illness either because of the narrowness of plan benefits or the unpredictability of decisions about what care is covered .

increases in health insurance premiums , according to some research , has degraded access to health care .

health insurance markets are often highly concentrated with one insurer accounting for over 50% of the market .

concerns about concentration in health insurance markets are linked to wider concerns about the cost , quality , and availability of health care .

the market structure of the health insurance and hospital industries may have played a role in rising health care costs and in limiting access to affordable health insurance and health care .

some argue market concentration has led to higher health care prices .

higher prices for health care or health care insurance may then make health care less affordable and thus less accessible for some families .

consumers in the individual and small group markets typically face particularly challenging conditions .

others , however , contend that health insurers with strong bargaining leverage might help constrain health providers' ability to raise prices , and that the benefit of lower premiums resulting from that ability to bargain may be passed along to consumers .

some industry analysts have described competition among major health insurers as robust , and some pricing trends indicate that competition has strongly affected insurers' market strategies .

moreover , some contend that economies of scale along with state and federal regulation have contributed to the rising levels of concentration in health insurance markets .

the obama administration made reform of the american health insurance and health care system a top policy priority .

ppaca , according to the administration , will broaden access to health care by increasing the number of americans with health insurance coverage , by lowering the cost of insurance faced by individuals , by providing stronger incentives for individuals to acquire health insurance , and by restructuring parts of the health insurance market .

ppaca contains some measures intended to slow the growth of health care costs , although some policy analysts are uncertain whether those initiatives are likely to accomplish that goal .

some argue that a more fundamental reform of the health care sector and the health insurance market would be needed to change the projected trajectory of health care costs .

this report discusses whether or not the current health insurance market structure hinders the u.s. health system's ability to reach the policy goals of expanding health insurance coverage and containing health care costs .

the report describes the forces that have shaped the health insurance industry , including its historical evolution , characteristics of health care and health insurance , determinants of supply and demand for health insurance , and the nature of competition among health insurers .

reasons for high market concentration are discussed , along with profitability measures for the industry .

finally , options for congress regarding the health insurance industry are analyzed .

the market structure of the modern u.s. health insurance industry not only reflects the complexities and uncertainties of health care , but also its origins in the 1930s and its evolution in succeeding decades .

the first commercial health insurance policies were offered in 1847 in philadelphia , although those plans soon failed .

a few private insurers began to offer individual accident insurance in the 1860s .

in the last quarter of the 19 th century some railroad , mining , and timber firms began to offer workplace health benefits .

in the 1890s , burial and sickness policies became more popular , and the first group accident and health plans were developed .

as population shifted from rural agricultural regions to industrialized urban centers , workers were exposed to risks of occupational accidents , but had less support from extended family networks that provided informal insurance benefits .

many workers obtained accident or sickness policies through fraternal organizations , labor unions , establishment plans , or private insurers .

economic historian john murray estimated that roughly one - third of world - war - i - era male industrial workers had some form of accident , health , or burial insurance .

these policies were often indemnity plans , that would pay a set cash amount in the event of a serious accident or health emergency .

social surveys at the turn of century spotlighted the link between industrial accidents and poverty , leading progressive - era reformers and labor unions to push for compulsory social insurance , which helped lead to workers' compensation programs .

progressive movement reformers , however , were unable to convince unions , employers , and politicians to institute german - or united kingdom - style health insurance programs .

individuals and families typically buy insurance to avoid risks by paying a known premium in order to receive benefits if an adverse event were to occur during the insurance policy's term .

most individuals are willing to pay an insurer to assume the bulk of financial risks associated with unpredictable health outcomes of uncertain severity .

health insurance is a method of pooling risks so that the financial burden of medical care is distributed among many people .

some insured people will become sick or injured and incur significant medical expenses .

most people , however , will remain relatively healthy , thus incurring little or no medical expenses .

while it is difficult to predict who will incur high expenses , the average medical expense among a large group of people is more predictable .

insurance pools the medical expenses of the insured , who pay for the expenses through their premiums .

in essence , money is shifted from those who remain healthy to those who become sick or injured .

the health insurance market is tightly interrelated with other parts of the health care system .

consequently , many parties play a role in the health insurance market .

health insurers are intermediaries in the transaction of the provision of health care between patients and providers — health insurers are a third - party who reimburse providers on behalf of patients .

health insurers not only reimburse providers , but also typically have some control over the number and types of services covered and negotiate contracts with providers on the payments for health services — most health insurance plans are managed care plans ( hmos , ppos ) rather than indemnity or traditional health insurance plans that provide unlimited reimbursement for a fixed premium .

other parties involved in the health insurance market include employers ( most private health insurance is obtained through an employer ) , federal , state and local governments , and health care providers .

the federal government directly provides health insurance through medicare .

the department of veterans affairs ( va ) health system provides health care benefits , and military health systems provide both health insurance and health care benefits .

states and the federal government share responsibility for medicaid and private health insurance industry regulation .

the health insurance market has many features that push it far from the economic benchmark of perfect competition .

perfectly competitive markets , according to economic theory , allocate goods and services efficiently if certain conditions are met .

markets allocate goods and services efficiently when the social cost of the resources ( eg , labor , buildings , machinery , raw materials ) used to make the last unit sold equals the social benefit of consuming that unit .

conditions required to ensure the efficiency of competitive markets include the following: many buyers and sellers — each participant is small in relation to the market and cannot affect the price through its own actions ; neither consumption nor production generates spillover benefits or costs ; free entry and exit from the market — new firms can open up shop and existing firms can costlessly leave the market as conditions change ; symmetric information — all market participants know the same things so that no one has an informational advantage over others ; no transaction costs — the buyers and sellers incur no additional cost in making the transaction , and the complexity of decisions has no effect on choices ; and firms maximize profits and consumers maximize well - being .

competitive markets may allocate goods inefficiently if those conditions are not met .

most of these conditions often fail to hold in the health insurance market .

departures from these conditions can hinder markets and lead to inefficient outcomes .

reforms are most likely to be effective , according to some economists , when they are tied to underlying structural causes of poor market performance .

the lack of symmetric information plays a particularly important role in the health insurance market ; most consumers rely heavily on the specialized knowledge and expertise of intermediaries such as insurers , employers , labor unions , physicians , and others .

the health insurance market , according to many researchers , is highly concentrated in much of the united states .

if large health insurers in highly concentrated markets exercised market power when selling insurance , prices would be distorted and an inefficiently low level of health insurance coverage would be provided .

in simple economic models , firms with market power in product markets raise prices above and reduce output below competitive levels .

firms that exercise market power when buying from suppliers ( i.e. , hiring labor and buying inputs ) can lower payments and reduce output below competitive levels .

firms' profitability depends on market interactions with both consumers and suppliers .

for instance , a firm with a market position relative to its suppliers may be forced to pass along savings by strong competitive forces in the consumer market .

a buyer that exercises market power to lower supplier prices below competitive levels , however , reduces economic efficiency , whether or not gains are retained by the firm or passed onto consumers .

many have expressed concern about the rapid growth of health insurance premiums during the past half century .

rising premiums are linked to the growth of medical and other health care costs , which now make up about four - fifths of health insurance premium income .

many economists believe the extent of health insurance coverage has encouraged providers to increase the quantity of health care services , and over the longer term has led to higher prices for health care .

the portion of premiums not paid out as claims , often called the loading costs , includes administrative costs , taxes , and profits .

administrative costs include employee salaries , business overhead , marketing expenses , and other expenditures necessary to running an insurance firm .

the rest of this section discusses trends in health insurance companies' profitability .

evaluating the profitability of health insurers is complicated because insurers earn part of their profits from the difference between total premiums and total claims paid , and another part of their profits from the "float," that is , the lag between the payment of premiums and the payment of claims .

because claims lag premium payments , insurance companies can invest funds gathered from premiums until the claims are paid , thus allowing the insurer to collect investment income .

this lag is generally shorter for health insurers than for many other lines of insurance .

some insurers suffered sharp declines in investment income in 2007 and 2008 due to lower interest rates on bonds and other fixed income securities as well as to steep declines in asset values in the wake of the economic recession .

profitability data for those years may therefore be atypical .

insurers typically participate in multiple segments of the health insurance market ( large group , small group , individual , public insurance programs ) , but each segment differs in important ways .

while most policies are issued through employer - provided plans , some insurers obtain a significant portion of their earnings from public programs such as medicare advantage , the medicare part d prescription drug program , and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) .

medicare advantage ( ma ) may play a particularly important role in insurers' profitability .

the medicare payment advisory commission ( medpac ) has calculated that ma plan costs are 18% higher than traditional fee - for - service ( ffs ) medicare plan costs , in part because ma enrollees tend to be healthier than ffs enrollees .

generous reimbursement policies , in turn , have helped encourage insurers to grow ma enrollments .

some research has found that high market concentration in health insurance markets tends to accelerate increases in premiums on the consumer side , although one study found that hmo merger did not tend to higher premium growth rates .

another study failed to find evidence that higher hmo market concentration reduced physician reimbursement rates , although a different study found an association between hmo concentration rates and lower hospital reimbursement rates .

some economists believe that more empirical research is needed to explore links between health insurance market concentration and economic outcomes .

in the wake of health care reform measures enacted in march 2010 , congressional concern over health insurance policy is likely to persist , even if health reform takes a less central role in legislative deliberations .

congress could take several further actions to affect the behavior and structure of health insurance markets .

important policy details remain to be resolved through federal rule - making , agency actions , and possibly through further legislation .

the remainder of this section discusses some possible policy responses to perceived problems in the health insurance market .

evidence suggests that health insurance markets in many local areas are highly concentrated .

many large firms have reacted to market conditions by self - insuring , which may provide some competitive pressure on insurers , although this is unlikely to improve market conditions for other consumers .

the exercise of market power by firms in concentrated markets generally leads to higher prices and reduced output — high premiums and limited access to health insurance — combined with high profits .

many other characteristics of the health insurance markets , however , also contribute to rising costs and limited access to affordable health insurance .

some evidence suggests that insurance companies' profits are not large , especially during the current economic recession ; although some of those estimates exclude investment income .

even if health insurers were highly profitable , it is unclear how much reducing insurance industry profits would do to reduce total health care costs or even reduce administrative costs .

nor is it clear that more vigorous enforcement of antitrust laws and regulations would succeed in courts or would significantly reduce health insurance premiums or expanded health insurance coverage .

health insurance is intertwined with the whole health care system .

health costs appear to have increased over time in large part because of complex interactions among health insurance , health care providers , employers , pharmaceutical manufacturers , tax policy , and the medical technology industry .

reducing the growth trajectory of health care costs may require policies that affect these interactions .

policies focused on health insurance sector reform may yield some results , but are unlikely to solve larger cost growth and problems of limited access to health care if other parts of the health are left unchanged .

this appendix presents two indicators of health insurer profitability for the period 2000-2008 , and profits as a percentage of shareholder equity for fortune 1000 firms by industry in 2008 .

table a - 1 presents return - on - equity figures for major publicly traded health insurers over the period 2000-2008 .

return on equity measures a company's overall after - tax profitability from underwriting and investment activity , and is defined as the sum of after - tax net income and unrealized capital gains divided by equity .

return on equity provides a useful comparison to profits in other lines of business , but can be volatile , especially when accounting changes require adjustments of equity levels .

firms obtain capital through equity ( typically through the sale of shares that entitle shareholders to dividend payments and certain voting rights ) and debt ( typically through loans or bonds that require fixed or specified interest payments ) .

firms can increase return on equity by increasing their debt - to - capital ratio , but at an increased risk of bankruptcy in the event of adverse business conditions that make interest payments to debt holders hard to sustain .

table a - 2 presents return - on - revenue figures for major publicly traded health insurers over the period 2000-2008 .

return - on - revenue ratios are roughly analogous to return - on - sales figures in other industries .

return - on - revenue figures , unlike return - on - equity , measures profitability independently of how a firm raises its capital .

table a - 3 presents profits as a percentage of shareholder equity for fortune 1000 firms by industry in 2008 , which complements other profitability measures presented in table 4 .

shareholder equity can change dramatically when a firm's capital structure changes , and can be affected by the timing of major writedowns on a firm's financial statements .

as in table 4 , which presented profits as a percentage of revenues and as a percentage of assets , neither of the two health insurance sectors listed ( health care: insurance & managed care ; and insurance: life , health [stock] ) are in the top 20 industries in terms of profits as a percentage of shareholder value for 2008 .

