the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

93-288 , hereafter referred to as the stafford act ) is the principal federal authority for the response to and recovery from emergencies or major disasters declared by the president .

the law authorizes preparedness efforts and numerous response and recovery authorities , from the repair of infrastructure and the provision of temporary housing assistance to mitigation projects to lessen future damage .

it also provides authority for the president to call upon the resources of other federal departments to assist states in responding to and recovering from major disasters and emergencies .

the stafford act establishes the framework for the partnership between the federal and the affected state governments because , as the act states: disasters often disrupt the normal functioning of governments and communities , and adversely affect individuals and families with great severity ; special measures designed to assist the efforts of affected states in expediting the rendering of aid , assistance , and emergency services , and the reconstruction and rehabilitation of devastated areas , are necessary .

the principal areas of recovery programs authorized by the stafford act are individual assistance , focusing on aid to families and individuals , public assistance which addresses aid to state and local governments in the repair of infrastructure , and hazard mitigation assistance which provides grants to help states reduce the risk from future disaster or emergency events .

assistance for emergency sheltering under stafford act section 403 falls under the public assistance program as part of help to affected state and local governments carrying out this task .

in contrast to emergency sheltering , temporary housing assistance , through stafford act section 408 , is part of the individual assistance program .

federal disaster housing assistance has a long history that is not necessarily best understood by concentration on the exceptional circumstances presented by hurricane katrina and its aftermath .

while the katrina experience suggests a picture of general reliance on motel rooms and travel trailers , the great majority of disaster housing help comes in the form of home repairs and financial assistance for rental units .

direct assistance , that is trailers and mobile homes , is rare and generally considered a last resort when other housing options are not available .

but while the katrina experience was not a "normal" or "average" disaster , it tested every form of housing assistance offered by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

owing to its scope , and arguably other factors related to leadership , it overwhelmed those forms of help .

but that result opened an ongoing discussion on the best approaches to take to disaster housing .

this report reviews fema's traditional approach for temporary housing following a disaster , explaining each option and exploring the alternatives that are being developed .

is fema's current hierarchy of help effective and equitable for disaster victims ? .

has fema implemented the new housing - related authorities granted to it through post - katrina legislation ? .

what approaches can the 111 th congress consider to improve disaster housing for future events ? .

in the wake of a disaster , local and state governments and charitable organizations take immediate steps to shelter families and individuals whose housing has been made uninhabitable by the disaster event .

various stages of sheltering and housing assistance occur in the cycle of aid .

federal assistance often does not come early in this cycle , if at all .

while on average there have been about 50 disaster declarations per year , in many instances , federal help is neither requested nor granted .

in these cases , where no presidential declaration has been made , responsibility for housing those in need falls upon the state and the local community .

this form of emergency shelter is often provided by the chapters of the american red cross and other charitable providers or by the local governments themselves .

even in those instances where , at the request of the governor of the affected state , a presidential declaration is made , the supplemental federal help would likely not be instantaneous .

in the intervening period when disaster victims are registering to receive assistance from fema , they may be moved from an emergency shelter facility to an improved temporary shelter facility while awaiting more permanent housing help .

federal assistance following a declared major disaster or emergency is built upon a working relationship between the federal government and the state .

federal disaster assistance presupposes a leadership role by local and state officials , or at a minimum their input , in determining the best approach to meet the needs of their citizens .

in reconciling the needs and preferences of federal , state , and local actors , fema has developed approaches to housing based on several practical and theoretical considerations .

practical considerations include the agency's ability , working in concert with state and local governments , to house families and individuals safely , with proper forms of support , in a short time frame , and in proximity to their original residences and places of employment .

proper forms of support can include , as needed and appropriate , food assistance , transportation help , access to employment , security arrangements , and other aid that helps displaced residents begin to resume their lives while awaiting the repair of their former homes .

while cooperation with state and local partners is a fundamental part of fema's approach to post - disaster housing , the ultimate decisions on the courses pursued rest with fema .

as the stafford act explains: the president shall determine appropriate types of housing assistance to be provided under this section to individuals and households described in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) based on considerations of cost effectiveness , convenience to the individuals and households , and such other factors as the president may consider appropriate .

fema has that authority but does try to offer options to applicants and shape a housing solution that suits the particular needs of an applicant .

federal help is intended to supplement , not supplant , state efforts .

states can be victims themselves of the disaster incident and a catastrophe can limit their capacity to respond or participate in the early stages of the recovery effort .

in those cases , federal assistance must be rapid and comprehensive since the initial local and state response cannot be assumed .

but the state also has the responsibility to assist in the management of programs that provide help to families and individuals and to provide resources for the non - federal portion of the cost of that help .

attempting to provide practical , short - term help has led fema and its state partners to process questions concerning appropriate program stewardship , coupled with attention to accountability of funds .

in its national disaster housing strategy fema repeatedly emphasizes the role of the local and state governments as partners in the provision of temporary housing assistance .

a fundamental response principle is that all incidents should be managed at the lowest jurisdictional level possible , and this holds true for disaster housing assistance as well .

local governments and community - based organizations have a wealth of expertise and experience and can help shape disaster housing assistance to meet the unique needs of their community .

when disaster housing demands exceed the local resources and capabilities , states and regional organizations provide additional support .

many issues such as sheltering and providing temporary housing will require cooperative efforts among multiple states to develop mutually supportive plans .

as previously noted , states can be victims of an event that can greatly diminish their ability to assist in housing victims of major disasters or emergencies .

but beyond the impact of a disaster on a state is the fact that , while all states are equal in rights , they are not necessarily equal in their capacity to respond .

nor do all states make the equivalent commitment to disaster recovery work , including sheltering and housing .

one observer has noted the differences among states as follows: the size of the state , the tax - base and other resources , the level of professionalization within state government , the form of government ( i.e. , strong or weak executive ) , state - local politics , and the orientation of officials and the public to proactive government programs are factors that influence the organization and functions of the state emergency management system and its ultimate effectiveness .

similarly , the allocation of authorities and responsibility under state law also varies and can be widely dispersed .

myriad authorities exist at the state level , both for working with the federal government and receiving its help , and also for using state resources for these events .

in addition to accepting federal funds , the governors usually are authorized to accept services , equipment , supplies , materials , and other items on behalf of the state and local governments from federal and private sector sources .

a number of states require emergency management officials and political subdivisions to use the services , equipment , supplies and facilities of existing departments and offices to the maximum extent possible in responding to a disaster all of these factors directly affect a state's ability to be an effective partner with fema in .

providing housing help after a disaster .

this is an important point in assessing fema's performance ; a lack of assistance from the state , poor overall preparedness efforts , and inadequate state authority for action , as well as a lack of cooperation from local officials , can make the development of post - disaster housing a much greater challenge .

in some cases , the federal government may be better positioned than the states to lead post - disaster housing efforts .

fema , through its historical disaster operations experience , the regional offices' relationships with the states , and its assessment of state capacity and readiness through the grants administration process , is well positioned to know , in advance , the level of assistance it can expect from any given state and shape its housing help accordingly based on that assessment .

states may find it difficult to respond effectively , if they are forced to address multiple emergencies or disasters in any given year .

for fema such work , while taxing of its own resources as well as being potentially challenging and complex , is the essence of its mission and the agency is engaged in this work on a daily basis .

in addition , learning from hurricane katrina , fema has demonstrated an ability to collaborate during disaster housing missions with the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , the primary federal entity on housing issues .

as noted earlier , sheltering and housing , while part of a continuum , are carried out under different legislative authorities and may have different durations and forms .

defining those terms , as well as the approaches taken to accomplishing each function , may foster a better understanding of how they are carried out following disasters or emergencies large and small .

it can be argued that disaster housing has been driven by the assumption , by both fema and its state partners , of a temporary , short - term mission .

this assumption was based upon the shared experiences of most non - catastrophic disaster events .

additionally , the sometimes scant attention paid to longer term housing missions by the media and public officials resulted in a program of limited resources and vision that reflected efforts to respond to fleeting negative media reports rather than the design of comprehensive policies .

one researcher summarized the media approach to domestic events .

the media are often criticized for focusing upon dramatic events that are easy to cover .

events that are concentrated in time and space , provide for excellent visual footage , and can be encapsulated within a 90 second story are the essence of electronic journalism .

for example , crime and political events , fires and collisions are the stuff of local news .

more complex , slowly developing , diffuse issues , however , are often ignored .

the disaster housing work of fema , both its planning and its execution in concert with affected state and local governments and charitable groups , represents the type of "diffuse issue" that does not always garner extended media coverage or close attention .

some observers have asserted that while fema has at times devoted time and committed staff and financial resources to mitigating against future disaster damage or to improving its logistics chain , the same attention has rarely been paid to the housing part of its mission .

under the stafford act , disaster housing is a limited , temporary mission and as such was not expected to result in the same intense engagement over long periods as other fema public assistance or mitigation projects where the state is an active partner .

the lack of a sense of engagement on the part of states for disaster housing may be in part due to the fact that , in most cases , the state and local cost - share ( usually 25% of each project ) for such repair / construction / acquisition projects provokes an interest and involvement on the part of the state and local government that is missing from the housing mission .

some observers assert that with no investment of resources in housing , the amount of interest in the quality of disaster temporary housing can be commensurate with that investment .

also , due to the nature of housing itself , some may assume that nongovernmental social service agencies will provide the leadership at the state and local levels , as well as the remaining resources needed , to complete the disaster housing cycle .

accordingly , congress may wish to consider a federal - state partnership for the housing program that begins to incorporate more of a state role in its administration , similar to ona , since that program has demonstrated that state input can be useful in program decisions and implementation .

arguably , these circumstances − a lack of state and local commitment and limited resources within fema − have impeded innovative administration of disaster housing assistance .

since pkemra , however , new authorities have led to new focus on disaster housing issues .

technological advances at the national processing service centers ( npscs ) , which receive and process individual applications , have speeded response to those in need and have also improved the system's resistance to fraud .

even the privately contracted housing inspection services , which have been open to some criticism regarding the quality of their damage inspections , still have increased their speed and overall coverage within a disaster area .

although processing has been enhanced , the housing options themselves have changed little in three decades .

those options , particularly home repair assistance , have achieved some housing goals in some instances such as restoring a neighborhood's normal community life following most "average" size disasters .

new legislative authorities , as well as potential new options derived from the results of the pilot projects undertaken since the gulf coast hurricanes of 2005 , may change or expand the existing range of housing options .

it was only in the pkemra , following the impact of hurricane katrina , that fema gained authority for a far more flexible housing program .

pkemra authorized case management , payment of evacuated victims' transportation costs to return to the disaster area , lifting of the caps within the ihp program for repairs and replacement costs , authority to construct permanent and semi - permanent housing in some situations , and the pilot program for the repair of rental units .

those are significant additions to the fema "tool box," but it is unclear whether fema leadership at the time of pkemra's passage was apprehensive or unwilling to exercise those new authorities .

until those changes were enacted in the pkemra , fema did face constraints , within the stafford act , on any work that went beyond strictly temporary housing .

some options for improving fema housing include the previously discussed ia pilot program for restoring rental units and the "katrina cottages" program for creating new temporary housing .

another option is the suggestion of providing victims with a "one - time cash settlement based on historical costs of acquiring , providing , maintaining , repairing , and administering transitional housing. .

with further research , this may be a viable approach to empowering some victims to make their own choices for their future by providing enough resources .

but as with other suggestions of changes to the housing program , an acknowledgement to the breadth of the population being served is necessary .

while this option may be ideal for some people after a disaster , for others it might be overwhelming .

it is easy to imagine empowering a young couple by providing them the funds to make their own decisions .

but providing similar resources to an elderly person with physical limitations , and little family support , would not be as helpful in addressing their unique needs .

in part , it was in recognition of the disparate needs of the universe of disaster victims that congress provided fema with case management authority .

also , as the dhs ig notes , this type of alternative , a one - time cash settlement , would require very careful pre - screening before substantial resources are committed to avoid fraud or abuse .

fema has announced a "2009 disaster housing plan" that notes three "additional resources" at its disposal to provide temporary housing assistance .

the three areas noted are transitional sheltering assistance for those that cannot return to their homes for an extended period , a redefinition of the criteria for use of travel trailers ( noting the changes in the trailers to improve air quality ) and critical needs assistance .

the last category refers to limited financial assistance to be provided to displaced populations immediately after the disaster event .

this plan acknowledges past problems and attempts to demonstrate changes that have been made to anticipate future challenges .

in a sense , the "plan" appears to be another step in advancing the conversation on what disaster housing policy should be and also emphasizes the need for state - led housing task forces to help provide that definition and leadership .

in a general review of changes , alternatives , and new options for disaster housing it may also be useful to determine the improvements to the disaster housing program that are desirable outside of those recommended for catastrophic events .

voucher programs such as those administered by hud provide great flexibility to families and individuals in meeting post - disaster housing needs .

but other alternatives , such as the alternative housing pilot program ( ahpp ) now being evaluated along the gulf coast , may also provide new options for victims wishing to remain within their communities .

fema , through the work of the ahpp , has arguably constructed an evaluation process that is designed to consider the possible future use of the units that have been built as a part of the pilot .

however , given the timeline of the evaluation period , the results of the pilot program for alternative forms of disaster housing may not be available to congress until more than five years after the inception of the project .

congress may wish to review this timeline and consider whether it would want an accelerated evaluation to provide additional options for disaster housing in the near future .

conversely , it is also important to appreciate that the unique capacities being considered for a catastrophic event , for example , fema's work with hud and public housing authorities in the disaster and surrounding areas , may lend themselves to smaller , non - catastrophic disaster events as well .

this might be helpful for a disaster where the greatest losses are to the housing stock of an area for which a longer term , or at least a more creative , housing policy may be desirable .

whether of short duration or long , housing is a fundamental post - disaster need that has been addressed in law and practice .

recent reports and activity indicate that it will receive increased attention , particularly concerning the safety , quality , and location of the housing provided during the disaster recovery period .

