the financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations were provided through a consolidated budget bill ( h.r .

3288 ) that was signed into law ( p.l .

111-117 ) by president obama on december 16 , 2009 .

prior to the enactment of the consolidated bill , two continuing resolutions had provided funding for fsgg programs and activities between october 1 , 2009 , and december 18 , 2009 , generally at fy2009 rates .

the house passed h.r .

3170 , the financial services and general government appropriations act , fy2010 , on july 16 , 2009 .

the house approved $46.389 billion for fsgg programs and agencies , a 4.1% increase from fy2009 enacted appropriations .

the senate appropriations committee reported its fy2010 fsgg appropriations bill , s. 1432 , on july 9 , 2009 .

the senate bill would have provided $46.479 billion for fsgg programs and agencies , a 4.3% increase from fy2009 enacted appropriations .

p.l .

111-117 provides $46.435 for fsgg agencies , a 4.0% increase from fy2009 enacted levels .

table 1 , below , reflects the status of various fy2010 fsgg appropriations bills at key points in the appropriations process .

on february 1 , 2010 , president obama issued his fy2011 budget request .

on march 10 , 2010 , the chairman of the house appropriations committee announced that the committee "will not approve requests for earmarks directed to for - profit entities. .

also on march 10 , 2010 , the chairman of the senate committee on appropriations said that such a ban would "discriminate against for - profit organizations" and would not address "earmark growth" in the non - profit sector .

members of congress disclosed 279 earmarks in the enacted fy2009 fsgg appropriations bill , although it is not known how many were directed to for - profit and non - profit organizations .

on may 7 , 2009 , the obama administration delivered its fy2010 budget request to congress .

the administration requested $46.439 billion for fsgg agencies and programs , an increase of $1.857 billion ( +4.2% ) over fy2009 enacted appropriations .

the house approved $46.389 billion for fsgg agencies , an increase of $1.807 billion ( +4.1% ) over fy2009 enacted appropriations , and $50 million less than the administration requested .

the senate appropriations committee recommended $46.479 billion , an increase of $1.897 billion ( +4.3% ) over fy2009 enacted appropriations , and $40 million more than the administration requested .

p.l .

111-117 , consolidated appropriations act , 2010 , provides $46.265 billion for fsgg agencies in fy2010 , and p.l .

111-80 provides an additional $169 million for the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) , for a total of $46.435 billion .

table 2 lists the enacted amounts for fy2009 , emergency appropriations for fy2009 , the administration's fy2010 request , the house approved amounts for fy2010 , the senate appropriations committee's recommendations for fy2010 , and enacted appropriations for fy2010 .

this section examines fy2010 appropriations for the treasury department and its operating bureaus , including the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

table 3 shows the enacted amounts for fy2009 , the obama administration's budget request for fy2010 , the amounts for fy2010 in h.r .

3170 as passed by the house , and the senate appropriations committee's recommendations for fy2010 in s. 1432 and the enacted amounts for fy2010 .

the financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations bill provides funding for all but three offices under the executive office of the president ( eop ) table 4 shows appropriations enacted for fy2009 , amounts requested by the president for fy2010 , appropriations provided by the house in h.r .

3170 for fy2010 , amounts recommended by the senate committee on appropriations in s.rept .

111-43 for fy2010 , and appropriations provided by p.l .

111-117 for fy2010 .

as a co - equal branch of government , the judiciary presents its budget to the president , who transmits it to congress unaltered .

table 6 shows appropriations for the judiciary as enacted for fy2009 , as requested for fy2010 , as recommended by the house appropriations committee and passed by the house for fy2010 , as recommended by the senate appropriations committee for fy2010 , and as enacted for fy2010 .

the authority for congressional review and approval of the district of columbia's budget is derived from the constitution and the district of columbia self - government and government reorganization act of 1973 ( home rule act ) .

the constitution gives congress the power to "exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever" pertaining to the district of columbia .

in 1973 , congress granted the city limited home rule authority and empowered citizens of the district to elect a mayor and city council .

however , congress retained the authority to review and approve all district laws , including the district's annual budget .

as required by the home rule act , the city council must approve a budget within 56 days after receiving a budget proposal from the mayor .

the approved budget must then be transmitted to the president , who forwards it to congress for its review , modification , and approval .

on march 20 , 2009 , the mayor of the district of columbia submitted a proposed $8.9 billion general operating fund budget to the district of columbia council .

on july 16 , 2009 , the mayor forwarded a revised budget to the council for its approval .

district officials efforts to address a widening budget gap caused by revenue shortfalls resulting from the current economic recession delayed submission of the district's budget for congressional review .

because of efforts to close a combined $603 million budget gap for fy2009 ( $453 million ) and fy2010 ( $150 million ) , district officials did not complete legislation action on its general fund operating budget until august 26 , 2009 .

however , both the house and the senate took up consideration of other components of the district of columbia appropriations act ; namely , special federal payments and general provisions before the mayor signed the district of columbia budget request act .

on august 26 , 2009 .

both the president and congress may propose financial assistance to the district in the form of special federal payments in support of specific activities or priorities .

table 7 shows details of the district's special federal payments , including the fy2009 enacted amounts , the amounts included in the president's fy2010 budget request , and the amounts passed by the house , recommended by the senate appropriations committee , and enacted as a part of p.l .

111-117 , the consolidated appropriations act of fy2010 .

the financial services and general government appropriations language includes general provisions which apply either government - wide or to specific agencies or programs .

an administration's proposed government - wide general provisions for a fiscal year are generally included in the budget appendix .

most of the provisions continue language that has appeared under the general provisions title for several years as congress has decided to reiterate the language rather than making the provisions permanent .

the fy2010 budget proposed that some of the government - wide general provisions that were included in p.l .

111-8 , the omnibus appropriations act for fy2009 , be discontinued and these provisions ( the section numbers refer to the provisions as they were included in p.l .

111-8 ) are listed below .

whether the house - passed and senate - reported bills , and p.l .

111-117 continue a provision is noted .

communication with congress .

section 714 , which prohibits the payment of any employee who prohibits , threatens , prevents , or prevents another employee from communicating with congress .

the house - passed and senate - reported bills , and the law continue the provision at section 714 .

employee training .

section 715 , which prohibits federal training not directly related to the performance of official duties .

the house - passed and senate - reported bills , and the law continue the provision at section 715 .

non - disclosure agreements .

section 716 , which prohibits the expenditure of funds for implementation of agreements in non - disclosure policies unless certain provisions are included .

the house - passed and senate - reported bills , and the law continue the provision at section 716 .

publicity or propaganda .

section 717 , which prohibits other than for normal and recognized executive - legislative relationships , propaganda , publicity and lobbying by executive agency personnel in support or defeat of legislative initiatives .

the house - passed and senate - reported bills , and the law continue the provision at section 717 .

section 720 , which prohibits the use of funds for propaganda and publicity purposes not authorized by congress .

the house - passed and senate - reported bills , and the law continue the provision at section 720 .

release of non - public information .

section 719 , which prohibits funds to be used to provide non - public information such as mailing or telephone lists to any person or organization outside the government without the approval of the house and senate committees on appropriations .

the house - passed and senate - reported bills , and the law continue the provision at section 719 .

e - government .

section 733 , which concerns transfers or reimbursements for e - government initiatives .

the house - passed bill and the law continue the provision at section 733 .

the senate - reported bill does not include the provision .

midway atoll airfield .

section 734 , which provides funds for the midway atoll airfield .

the house - passed bill does not include the provision .

the senate - reported bill would continue the provision at section 733 .

the law continues the provision at section 734 .

privacy act .

section 740 , which prohibits use of funds in contravention of the privacy act and implementing regulations .

the house - passed and the senate - reported bills would continue the provision at section 736 and section 738 , respectively .

the law continues the provision at section 737 .

great lakes restoration .

section 742 , which requires omb to submit a report on budget information relating to great lakes restoration activities .

the house - passed bill would continue the provision at section 738 .

the senate - reported bill does not include the provision .

the law continues the provision at section 739 .

regulatory policy .

section 746 , which prohibits funds from being used to implement the provisions on regulatory policy officers in executive order 13422 .

on january 30 , 2009 , president barack obama issued executive order 13497 to revoke executive order 13422 .

energy and water efficiency .

section 748 , which provides that the federal government is expected to conduct its business in an environmentally , economically , fiscally sound and scientifically defensible manner in carrying out executive order 13423 related to energy and water efficiency and use of renewable fuels in the federal government .

the house - passed bill would continue the provision at section 741 .

section 744 of the senate - reported bill would repeal section 748 of p.l .

111-8 that made executive order 13423 permanent , as the fy2010 budget proposed .

the law , at section 742 , repeals section 748 of p.l .

111-8 .

executive branch workforce .

section 752 , which requires the omb director to submit a report by department and agency on the number of civilian , military and contract workers .

the house - passed and the senate - reported bills would continue the provision at section 742 and section 745 , respectively .

the law does not include this provision .

new general provisions that were proposed in the fy2010 budget included these: response to catastrophic event .

section 734 would provide that the head of a federal department or agency could , subject to prior written approval from the omb director , transfer any unobligated funds between appropriations within the department or agency in order to expedite a more rapid and effective response to a catastrophic event as provided in the national response plan under p.l .

107-296 .

the amounts transferred would be available for the purposes and subject to the limitations of the account to which the funds are being transferred .

the department or agency head would notify the house and senate committees on appropriations of such a transfer within 15 days of its occurrence .

federal real property management .

section 735 would permit agencies to retain the proceeds from the transfer or sale of real property , and use those proceeds for real property activities .

the section would also establish a pilot program to expedite real property disposal , and require gsa to allow the public to have access to a "single , comprehensive , and descriptive database of all federal real property assets under the custody and control of all executive agencies" other than properties excluded for national security reasons .

student loan repayment .

section 736 would provide that notwithstanding any other provision of law , a public or private institution of higher education could offer to provide to an officer or employee of the federal government or the district of columbia ( dc ) government who is a current or former student of the institution , financial assistance to repay a student loan or forbear repayment of the student loan .

an officer or employee of the federal or dc governments could seek or receive such assistance or forbearance .

the house committee on appropriations recommended the following new general provisions that were included in the house - passed bill: foreign terrorism suspects .

section 744 would have directed the attorney general to transmit to congress records regarding notification of rights under miranda v. arizona given to captured foreign terrorism suspects within 14 days of the act's enactment .

the law does not include this provision .

the conference report ( h.rept .

111-366 ) states that the conferees understand that this issue has been addressed in p.l .

111-84 .

•     auto dealers .

section 745 would require automobile companies that receive federal funds and are partially owned by the federal government to reinstate agreements with franchise dealerships to the extent that a valid dealer agreement existed prior to a chapter 11 proceeding .

the law includes this provision at section 747 .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended the following general provision on the pay adjustment for federal civilian employees .

federal civilian pay .

section 736 would have provided a 2.9% pay adjustment .

the house committee and the house - passed bill were silent on the pay adjustment , endorsing the 2.0% increase proposed in the fy2010 budget .

the law provides a 2.0% pay adjustment , allocated as 1.5% base and 0.5% locality , at section 744 ( a ) .

section 735 of p.l .

111-117 would prohibit the use of any funds appropriated by this act , or any other appropriations act for the same fiscal year ( fy2010 ) , to begin or announce a public - private competition .

the prohibition would apply to a "public - private competition regarding the conversion to contractor performance of any function performed by federal employees pursuant to office of management and budget circular a - 76 or any other administrative regulation , directive , or policy. .

that is , this section apparently would apply only to competitions that involve work being performed by federal employees , but it would not apply to public - private competitions involving work being performed by contractor employees .

conversion to contractor performance is only one of the possible outcomes of a public - private competition , however , which might lead some observers to conclude that the provision is somewhat ambiguous .

another provision that involves competitive sourcing , as well as other aspects of government procurement , is section 743 .

each agency that is subject to the federal activities inventory reform ( fair ) act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-270 ) , excluding the department of defense ( dod ) , is required to compile and submit to omb "an annual inventory of service contracts awarded or extended through the exercise of an option on or after april 1 , 2010 , for or on behalf of such agency. .

the initial inventory is due by december 31 , 2010 .

beginning in fy2011 , if an agency fails to submit an inventory to omb for the previous fiscal year , it "may not begin , plan for , or announce a study or public - private competition regarding the conversion to contractor performance of any function performed by federal employees…. .

in addition to the requirement that each agency make its inventory available to the public , omb shall provide a report to congress that indicates whether agencies subject to the inventory requirement have complied and includes a summary of each agency's inventory .

omb shall make this report available to the public on its website .

section 743 ( a ) ( 3 ) lists the information to be provided for each entry in an agency inventory .

within 180 days of the deadline for submitting the inventory to omb , an agency head , or his or her designee , in addition to reviewing the inventory , shall ensure the following: that ( a ) each contract in the inventory that is a personal services contract has been entered into , and is being performed , in accordance with applicable laws and regulations ; ( b ) the agency is giving special management attention to functions that are closely associated with inherently governmental functions ; ( c ) the agency is not using contractor employees to perform inherently governmental functions ; ( d ) the agency has specific safeguards and monitoring systems in place to ensure that work being performed by contractors has not changed or expanded during performance to become an inherently governmental function ; ( e ) the agency is not using contractor employees to perform critical functions in such a way that could affect the ability of the agency to maintain control of its mission and operations ; and ( f ) there are sufficient internal agency resources to manage and oversee contracts effectively ; ( 3 ) identify contracts that have been poorly performed , as determined by a contracting officer , because of excessive costs or inferior quality ; and ( 4 ) identify contracts that should be considered for conversion to — ( a ) performance by federal employees of the executive agency in accordance with agency insourcing guidelines required under section 736 of the financial services and general government appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-111 – 8 , division d ) ; or ( b ) an alternative acquisition approach that would better enable the agency to efficiently utilize its assets and achieve its public mission .

each agency is required to submit a report to omb that summarizes the actions taken pursuant to section 743 ( e ) ( see the excerpt above ) .

the report is to be submitted with the next annual inventory of services contracts and made available to the public .

apparently , this particular provision was fashioned to ensure , among other things , that inherently governmental functions are performed by federal government employees .

it is the policy of the federal government that "[c]ontracts shall not be used for the performance of inherently governmental functions. .

under office of management and budget ( omb ) circular a - 76 , only agency functions designated as commercial functions may be subjected to private - public competition .

some observers have suggested , however , that despite far subpart 7.5 and circular a - 76 , some contractor employees perform inherently governmental functions .

the above excerpt from the statute also includes a requirement that agency heads identify contracts that should be considered for conversion to performance by federal government employees .

since the inception of circular a - 76 , which was issued initially in 1966 , most public - private competitions have involved functions where federal government employees are the incumbent workforce .

in july 2009 , omb issued insourcing guidance , which was developed to facilitate the application of insourcing requirements found in section 736 , division d , of p.l .

111-8 , fy2009 omnibus appropriations act .

section 743 ( f ) requires the comptroller general to issue several reports regarding omb's actions and agencies' inventories of services contracts .

since the early 1960s , u.s. policy toward communist cuba has consisted largely of efforts to isolate the island nation through comprehensive economic sanctions , including prohibitions on u.s. financial transactions — the cuban assets control regulations ( cacr ) — that are administered by the treasury department's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) .

under u.s. sanctions , some u.s. commercial agricultural exports to cuba have been allowed since 2001 pursuant to the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 , or tsra ( title ix of p.l .

106-387 ) .

however , there are numerous restrictions and licensing requirements for these exports .

for instance , exporters are denied access to u.s. private commercial financing or credit , and all transactions must be paid for in cash in advance or with financing from third countries .

the bush administration tightened sanctions on cuba in february 2005 by further restricting how u.s. agricultural exporters may be paid for their product .

ofac amended the cacr to clarify that the term "payment of cash in advance" for u.s. agricultural sales to cuba means that the payment is to be received prior to the shipment of the goods .

this differs from the practice of being paid before the actual delivery of the goods , a practice that had been utilized by many u.s. agricultural exporters to cuba since such sales were legalized in late 2001 .

u.s. agricultural exporters and some members of congress strongly objected to this "clarification" on the grounds that the action constituted a new sanction that violated the intent of tsra , and could jeopardize millions of dollars in u.s. agricultural sales to cuba .

then ofac director robert werner maintained that the clarification "conforms to the common understanding of the term in international trade. .

since 2002 , the united states has been cuba's largest supplier of food and agricultural products , and cuba has purchased almost $2.7 billion in agricultural products from the united states .

overall u.s exports to cuba rose from about $7 million in 2001 to $404 million in 2004 .

u.s. exports to cuba declined in 2005 and 2006 to $369 million and $340 million , respectively , but increased to $447 million in 2007 .

in 2008 , u.s. exports to cuba rose to $712 million , far higher than in previous years , in part because of the rise in food prices and because of cuba's increased food needs in the aftermath of several hurricanes and tropical storms that severely damaged cuba's agricultural sector .

in the first 10 months of 2009 , u.s. exports to cuba were valued at $449 million , 25% lower than the same time period in 2008 .

from 2000-2007 , either one or both houses of congress included provisions in the annual treasury department appropriations bill that would have eased u.s. economic sanctions on cuba ( especially on travel and on u.s. agricultural exports ) , but none of these provisions were enacted .

the bush administration regularly threatened to veto legislation if it included any provision weakening sanctions on cuba .

in 2008 , both house and senate appropriations committee versions of the financial services and general government appropriations bill for fy2009 , h.r .

7323 and s. 3260 , contained various provisions easing restrictions on travel and on payment terms related to the payment of cash in advance for u.s. agricultural exports to cuba .

final action on the fy2009 appropriations measure was delayed until the 111 th congress when it was included in the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( h.r .

1105 / p.l .

111-8 ) signed into law in march 2009 .

unlike the bush administration , the obama administration did not threaten to veto the measure if it included provisions easing cuba sanctions .

the omnibus appropriations measure ultimately included three cuba provisions that eased restrictions on family travel and travel for the marketing and sale of u.s. agricultural and medical exports to cuba , and were intended to ease payment provisions for u.s. agricultural exports to cuba .

the treasury department's interpretation of the latter provision , however , mitigated its practical effect .

as set forth in the omnibus measure , section 622 of division d prohibits funds in the act from being used to administer , implement , or enforce an amendment to the cuban embargo regulations issued on february 25 , 2005 , requiring that u.s. agricultural exporters using the "cash in advance" payment mechanism for selling their goods to cuba must be paid in cash for their goods before the goods leave u.s. ports .

as noted above , tsra requires either the "payment of cash in advance" for such exports ( or financing by third country financial institutions ) , but does not provide a definition of cash in advance .

prior to the february 2005 amendment to the cuban embargo regulations , u.s. exporters could be paid for the goods before they were unloaded in cuba .

ofac guidance on the implementation of this provision states that tsra's statutory provisions remain in place that agricultural exports to cuba be either paid for by "cash in advance" or financed using a third - country bank .

during senate consideration of the omnibus measure , secretary of the treasury timothy geithner provided additional guidance on the implementation of this provision in a letter published in the congressional record that states that "exporters will still be required to receive payment in advance of shipment. .

this appeared to continue the bush administration policy imposed in february 2005 .

given the secretary's interpretation , the omnibus provision had little , if any , practical effect .

while the secretary's response ameliorated the concerns that several senators had regarding the provision , it also triggered concerns by other senators who maintained that the secretary's action ignored the legislative intent of the cuba provision to ease restrictions on agricultural sales to cuba .

as a result of the treasury department's action , both the house - passed and senate appropriations committee - reported versions of the fy2010 financial services and general government appropriations act , h.r .

3170 and s. 1432 , had an identical provision ( section 618 in the house bill and section 617 in the senate bill ) stating that during fy2010 , the term "payment of cash in advance" as used in tsra "shall be interpreted as payment before the transfer of title to , and control of , the exported items to the cuban purchaser. .

in its report to the bill ( s.rept .

111-43 ) , the senate appropriations committee maintained that it was aware that the treasury department was continuing to require the sellers of agricultural goods to cuba to receive cash payments in advance of shipping rather than in advance of delivering the goods , and asserted that the policy impedes u.s. sales since it increases the cost of doing business .

in the report , the committee urged the treasury department to use its rulemaking authority to permanently amend the cuban assets control regulations and remove impediments to u.s. agricultural sales to cuba .

the provision defining the term "payment of cash in advance" for fy2010 was ultimately included as section 619 in the enacted version of the fy2010 financial services and general government appropriations act , which congress incorporated as division c of the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( h.r .

3288 / p.l .

111-117 ) .

supporters of the provision maintain that it restores congressional intent on the matter , and will make it easier for u.s. agricultural producers to export to cuba , while opponents maintain the provision constitutes a foreign policy change included in a must - pass spending bill without appropriate congressional consideration .

