over the past century , particularly in recent decades , scientists have documented increases in global temperature and sea levels , decreases of sea ice in the arctic , and melting of continental ice sheets and mountain glaciers .

there is increasing evidence that human activities are at least partially responsible for some of these effects .

this is based upon the combination of two conclusions .

first , global temperature increases are linked in some manner to the measurable increases of greenhouse gas ( ghg ) concentrations in the atmosphere .

second , human activities ( eg , fossil fuel combustion , industrial processes , and deforestation ) have contributed to the increased concentration of ghg emissions in the earth's atmosphere .

a variety of efforts that seek to reduce ghg emissions are currently underway or being developed on the international , national , and sub - national level ( eg , individual state actions or regional partnerships ) .

one way in which ghg emissions may be reduced is through market - based approaches , such as a cap - and - trade or emission fees ( "carbon tax" ) system .

recent legislative proposals have generally focused on using these market - based approaches to reduce ghg emissions , with cap - and - trade approaches generating far more congressional activity in terms of introduced bills and committee action than carbon taxes .

as a result , this report uses both the general term "ghg control program" and the more specific "cap - and - trade program" to describe proposals to reduce ghg emissions .

this report discusses the potential impacts that a cap - and - trade program would have on u.s. households and options for how congress might mitigate those effects .

the first section of the report explains in greater detail why these impacts are expected and discusses the arguments for providing financial assistance to households under a cap - and - trade program , particularly lower - income households , to help them cope with expected cost increases .

the second section examines various issues and considerations involved in providing assistance to households .

the third section examines and compares different ways in which policymakers could alleviate some of the costs imposed on household consumers by a ghg emission control program .

the fourth section outlines how active ghg emission reduction legislation in the 111 th congress would address these concerns .

a cap - and - trade approach to reducing ghg emissions would have economic consequences .

by limiting the number of ghg emissions that can be generated in a given year , a cap - and - trade system would attach a new cost to activities that generate emissions , primarily fossil fuel combustion .

in general , entities subject to the emissions cap may either ( 1 ) make their own emission reductions ( eg , install more efficient equipment or use energy sources that emit fewer ghgs ) and embed the additional costs into their products ( eg , electricity , gasoline , cement , paper , steel ) or ( 2 ) increase the price of their products with the expectation that the higher prices would decrease demand from their customers , thus lowering the emissions associated with the product's creation or use .

in either case , households are expected to ultimately bear the brunt of the costs of the cap - and - trade program .

this section outlines the process by which these costs would filter down to households , and in particular , why lower - income households may face disproportionately high costs as a result of cap - and - trade legislation .

if congress enacts a cap - and - trade program and determines to use some portion of emission allowance value to directly assist households , policymakers would face several questions when seeking to implement this objective .

a primary consideration is which households or persons should receive allowance value: should value be distributed evenly to all households , or should particular household groups receive a higher proportion ? .

moreover , should policymakers seek to account for different costs that households in different regions may experience ? .

in addition to these issues , this section examines potential concerns and unintended consequences that may occur by providing direct assistance to households .

policymakers have a variety of options available for distributing allowance value to households .

proposed delivery mechanisms in both the 110 th and 111 th congress have included: distributing equal dividends to all households , or to all individuals ; providing energy tax credits for low - and / or middle - income households with earned income or qualifying retirement income , or expanding the earned income tax credit ; reducing social security payroll taxes ; distributing allowances to electricity and natural gas local distribution companies ( ldcs ) to be used to "mitigate economic impacts on low - and middle - income consumers," or to assist all consumers ; allocating auction proceeds to the low income home energy assistance program and the weatherization assistance program ; and creating rebates for low - income households .

in addition , president obama's fy2010 budget proposed to implement a cap - and - trade program and devote a majority of the proceeds to the "making work pay" tax credit , a reduction in payroll taxes for those workers below a certain income threshold .

 ( the tax credit was created as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ) . ) .

this section of the report describes some of the delivery options that have been proposed for returning allowance value to households .

in evaluating these options , there are a number of considerations that might be relevant to policymakers in choosing and implementing a distribution system .

among considerations are the ability of a system to reach large numbers of households , the existence of an administrative infrastructure and the costs of distributing funds , and the ease of tailoring benefits to different consumer incomes and regions of the country .

for each of the potential delivery options , this section of the report discusses some of the considerations that could make the options more or less appealing .

this is not an exhaustive discussion and is meant only to raise potential considerations .

a table summarizing these options is available in the appendix .

the considerations discussed in this section are: a bility to r each households — a distribution system would have to reach millions of potential beneficiaries ( this would be true even in a system targeted only to low - income households ) .

for already - existing delivery mechanisms such as the income tax system , we have some knowledge about their ability to deliver funds .

for untried mechanisms , such as universal rebates through an electronic transfer or check , their effectiveness may be more speculative .

a dministrati on — implementing a delivery system would have administrative costs .

some proposed delivery systems may have an administrative infrastructure already in place , others may need to have an existing administrative system adapted to distribute funds , while still others may need to create a new system .

the way in which funds are targeted would also have an effect on the administrative costs .

in general , the more targeted benefits are , the higher the administrative costs of the system .

for example , a program with complicated income eligibility rules and verification processes or a program that delivers multi - tiered benefits is likely to be more expensive to administer than one with simple eligibility rules and standard benefits for all recipients .

consumer f lexibility — a system could deliver cash or in - kind benefits to consumers .

for example , funds that are targeted for energy assistance such as liheap and the weatherization assistance program ( wap ) can only be used for specific purposes .

however , if revenues were to be distributed as cash , consumers would decide how best to use the benefit .

according to economic theory , beneficiaries may be better off with a cash transfer than with an in - kind benefit of the same amount because they are not constrained in the way they use the benefit .

however , there is a tension in public policy between consumer flexibility and limiting flexibility to ensure that policy priorities are achieved .

as discussed earlier , a flexible cash benefit may mean that consumers would not reduce energy consumption as much as they might otherwise , potentially reducing the effectiveness of a cap - and - trade program .

tailoring benefits for household size and income — allowance value may be distributed to all households or to those that meet certain income eligibility requirements .

they may be the same for everyone or may vary based on household size .

some existing federal benefit systems tailor their benefits by income and number of family members , with benefits phased out at certain income levels .

an example is the earned income tax credit .

in the case of other delivery systems , a formula or eligibility determination process might need to be created to take account of factors such as income and household size .

accoun t ing for regional differences — congress may want to account for regional differences when distributing allowance value .

some existing programs such as liheap and wap take account of energy sources in determining how funds are distributed .

in the case of other delivery systems , a formula may need to be created to incorporate energy price data .

this approach may require new data collection .

although it would be possible to tailor rebates based on expected regional differences , doing so may decrease the transparency of particular mechanisms .

as discussed above , applying a regional calculation to individual households would be imprecise and would likely ( 1 ) overcompensate regions at the expense of others and ( 2 ) create winners and losers within a particular region .

promoting e nergy e fficiency — it may be desirable to use proceeds in a way that promotes energy efficiency .

some options , such as funding for weatherization , may increase energy efficiency , while lump sum payments may not necessarily encourage increased efficiency beyond any conservation that might take place due to increased prices .

as a result , consumers might not reduce consumption to the same degree they would if there were no reimbursement to households .

policymakers could complement the rebate mechanism with an educational / outreach program .

the program could offer suggestions of ways households could spend the rebates in terms of energy efficiency activities and explain the long - term ( financial ) benefits of improving a home's energy efficiency .

on their own , individual options such as those described in this section may have limitations that do not allow them to reach all the households that congress may wish to target .

however , the options could be used in combination to assist everyone from those living in poverty to those considered middle - class , to all consumers , whether working , unable to work , or retired .

this section of the report discusses legislation in the 111 th congress that proposes to use one or more of the options to assist households that were discussed in the previous section .

this section is not meant to track all ghg emissions bills that have been introduced in the current congress .

the american clean energy and security act ( h.r .

2454 , introduced by representatives waxman and markey ) , which the house passed on june 26 , 2009 , has several provisions that would attempt to reimburse households for increased costs associated with a cap - and - trade program established by the bill .

the bill would accomplish this by ( 1 ) distributing allowances at no cost to various entities , including local distribution companies ( ldcs ) and states , which would then use the value of the allowances to assist households , and ( 2 ) distributing emission allowance auction proceeds directly to households .

h.r .

2454 would allocate allowances to electricity local distribution companies ( electricity ldcs ) and natural gas local distribution companies ( natural gas ldcs ) to be used for the benefit of residential and commercial consumers .

the bill would also allocate allowances to states to be used for the benefit of heating oil , propane , and kerosene consumers .

a substantial portion of the emission allowances would be used to support energy consumers in the early years of the program .

between 2012 and 2029 , electricity ldcs would receive a gradually diminishing portion of allowances , starting with approximately 38% in 2012 and decreasing to 6% by 2029 ; natural gas ldcs would receive 9% of emission allowances in 2016 , decreasing to 2% in 2029 ; and states would receive 1.9% of allowances in 2012 , decreasing to 0.3% by 2029 .

in 2030 , the allocations to support energy consumers would cease .

in the case of electricity ldcs , allowances would be allocated through a two - part formula: 50% based on each ldc's carbon content of electricity and 50% based on the amount of electricity delivered .

benefits from the allowances would be distributed ratably to each ratepayer class ( residential versus commercial ) , and then "equitably" to each ratepayer within the class .

h.r .

2454 would require certain processes to ensure that electricity ldcs comply with the bill's requirements regarding consumers .

state regulatory authorities would be required to either publish regulations or conduct proceedings regarding how electricity ldcs will fulfill the requirements of h.r .

2454 .

electricity ldcs would be required to submit periodic plans ( approved by state regulators ) to the epa administrator describing how they will use the value of the allowances to benefit consumers and to report annually on their use of allowances .

the epa administrator would audit a sample of electricity suppliers every year to ensure that emission allowances are used "exclusively for the benefit of retail ratepayers. .

in the case of natural gas ldcs , beginning in 2016 , allowances would initially be distributed based on each company's average annual retail natural gas deliveries .

in later years , the distribution formula would also take into account the number of customers for each company .

as with electricity ldcs , h.r .

2454 would require natural gas ldcs to deliver benefits to ratepayers based on the amount of natural gas used by each class and then equitably to each consumer within the ratepayer class with the same limitation that any rebate not be based on the amount of natural gas delivered to each ratepayer .

unlike electricity ldcs , natural gas ldcs would be required to use one - third of allowances for energy efficiency programs that benefit natural gas consumers .

similar requirements regarding submission of plans and reports would apply to natural gas ldcs , and the epa administrator would audit a sample of companies every year .

in order to reach heating oil , propane , and kerosene consumers , h.r .

2454 would distribute allowances to states based on their share of the carbon content of heating oil , propane , and kerosene sold to consumers within the state .

states would be required to use at least half of the allowances for energy efficiency programs targeted to heating oil , propane , and kerosene consumers ; the remainder would be used to provide rebates or other direct financial assistance to consumers ( to the extent practicable , through existing energy efficiency and consumer energy assistance programs ) .

states would be required to submit reports to the epa administrator about the use of allowances and cost effectiveness of energy efficiency measures ; the reports would also include independent third - party evaluations of the energy efficiency and consumer assistance programs .

small electricity ldcs — defined as those that deliver less than four million megawatt hours of electricity to retail consumers — would receive a declining percentage ( 0.5% in 2012 ) of emission allowances ( in addition to the allotment to ldcs generally ) at no cost .

h.r .

2454 would require small ldcs to use the allowance value , in part , for assistance programs for their low - income customers ( those with incomes at or below 200% of poverty ) .

the epa administrator would be required to establish eligibility criteria and guidelines for this consumer assistance program and small ldcs would be required to report on the assistance provided .

h.r .

2454 would also establish a climate change consumer refund account in the united states treasury .

the account would be funded through the sale of allowances beginning in 2021 , with additional allowances auctioned beginning in 2026 .

proceeds from the account would be distributed as tax refunds "on a per capita basis to each household in the united states. .

citizens and lawful permanent residents would be eligible for the tax refunds .

h.r .

2454 would establish a new low - income benefit program , the energy refund program , that would reimburse eligible households for the estimated loss in purchasing power to families caused by increases in energy prices resulting from the bill .

the proposed new program ( the proposed title xxii of the social security act ) would be administered at the federal level by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and at the state level by agencies that administer other assistance programs , such as cash welfare and snap .

the energy refund program would make households with gross incomes at or below 150% of poverty eligible for the maximum benefit ( see below for a description of the benefit ) .

the benefit would be phased out for households with incomes over 150% of poverty .

the cbo estimates that program would serve 34.4 million households in 2012 , rising to 35.5 million in 2019 .

this is about double the number of households cbo estimates would be served in the snap program ( 16.5 million estimated snap households in fy2012 ) .

households that already receive certain need - tested benefits would be automatically eligible for the benefit .

these households include those that already receive: nutrition assistance through snap , the food distribution program on indian reservations , or the programs of nutrition assistance that operate in lieu of snap in puerto rico and american samoa ; a benefit or service from tanf that also receive a snap benefit ; a subsidy based on income for prescription drugs under the medicare part d program ; or supplemental security income ( ssi ) .

additionally , the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) would be charged to promulgate regulations to determine whether information used for determining eligibility under state medicaid or children's health insurance program ( chip ) can be used to automatically determine eligibility for the energy refund program .

the bill would make eligible for benefits all those in the united states lawfully , whether citizens or noncitizens .

 ( many need - tested programs restrict benefits for noncitizens .

see crs report rl31114 , noncitizen eligibility for major federal public assistance programs: policies and legislation , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

the maximum benefit for the energy refund program would be the estimated loss in purchasing power caused by the american clean energy and security act of 2009 for families with gross incomes of 150% of the poverty threshold .

the benefit would vary by household size .

separate benefit amounts would be computed for households of sizes one through four , with households of five or more receiving a benefit based on the average loss of purchasing power for all households of five or more persons .

the loss in purchasing power for the next fiscal year would be estimated by the energy information administration and published annually ( by august 31 ) in the federal register and the benefit adjusted annually .

the benefit would be paid monthly , with the monthly benefit being 1 / 12 th of the estimated annual loss in purchasing power .

however , the bill provides that if the monthly benefit would be too small to pay efficiently on a monthly basis , the benefit would be paid quarterly .

table 4 shows the cbo's estimate of the maximum benefit amount for the energy refund program for selected years , 2012 to 2019 .

the annual benefit amount is relatively small .

for example , in 2012 a household of four would receive a little less than $400 per year from the program .

this contrasts with snap , where the benefit for a family of four is expected to exceed $400 per month .

however , the years in the budget window 2012-2019 would be very early in the implementation of the cap - and - trade system .

in these years , most allowances would be given away rather than auctioned and the reduction requirements are relatively less stringent compared to other years: thus , the costs of the system are relatively low .

costs — and the compensating benefits — may be higher in real terms later in the program .

figure 3 shows the estimated structure of the benefit , using the 2012 estimate of the benefit for a family of four .

it shows that eligibility for the benefit ends relatively quickly above 150% of poverty — reaching $0 at about 159% of poverty .

the very rapid reduction in the benefit is , in part , because of its small size in the early years .

a larger benefit would produce a more graduated phase - out .

if , for example , the real value of the benefit would triple to $1,182 per year , eligibility for the benefit would end at 176% of the poverty threshold .

h.r .

2454 would require that all federal and federal - state income - based assistance programs disregard energy refund benefits for the purpose of determining either eligibility or benefit amounts .

that is , the energy refund benefit would not result in loss of eligibility or reduced benefits in programs such as medicaid , the children's health insurance program ( chip ) , snap , school lunch , or benefits and services funded under the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant .

the bill would require the secretary of hhs to promulgate regulations to allow states to co - administer the energy refund program with the snap program .

snap benefits are provided through electronic benefit transfers ( ebt ) cards .

ebt is an electronic system used to make purchases , much like a bank automated teller machine ( atm ) card .

the ebt card authorizes the transfer of funds representing a recipient's benefit from a federal account to a retailer account to pay for purchases .

in the snap program , ebt is used in all 50 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , and the virgin islands .

the bill also would allow for alternative delivery of the benefit through direct deposit to an eligible household's bank account or other mechanisms approved by the secretary of hhs .

though energy refund program benefits would be determined by federal law and funded by the federal government , the program would be administered by the states .

theoretically , states would have the ability to opt - in or opt - out of the program .

this is largely patterned after the snap program .

unlike snap , however , the program as passed by the house does not provide funding for state administrative costs .

states would have to meet certain requirements in their administration of the energy refund program .

they would be required to use public employees for all tentative and final eligibility determinations and use bilingual personnel in those portions of the state where a substantial number of people in low - income households speak a language other than english .

states would also be required to screen energy refund program applicants to determine whether they are eligible for three other low - income assistance programs: snap , the children's health insurance program ( chip ) , and tanf .

the eitc is a refundable tax credit that supplements the earnings of low - income workers .

the credit is considered refundable because it benefits even those filers who have no federal income tax liability ; these filers receive a check from the federal treasury .

the eitc began as a temporary program in 1975 , and was made permanent in 1978 and expanded several times since then .

in 2006 , the total value of the eitc was $44.4 billion , making it the largest low - income program providing cash , greater than ssi ( fy2006 outlays of $36.2 billion ) and far greater than tanf cash welfare ( fy2006 expenditures of $9.9 billion ) .

the eitc was first restricted only to tax filers with children .

it was not until 1993 when congress amended the tax code to provide an eitc to childless tax filers .

the eitc for tax filers without qualifying children is far smaller than the credit for those with children .

it is also available only to those age 25 to 64 .

under current law for 2012 , the credit for childless filers is 7.65% of earnings up to the maximum amount .

in contrast , the credit rate for filers with one child is 36% and the rate for filers with two or more children is 40% .

the estimated maximum credit under current law for childless filers in 2012 is $466 .

all estimates of the credit amount are based on inflation assumptions from the congressional budget office ( cbo ) as published in march of 2009 .

h.r .

2454 would expand the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) for certain tax filers without qualifying children whom the secretary of the treasury determines have "experienced a reduction in purchasing power" as a result of the american clean energy and security act ( benefits for tax filers with children would not change ) .

loss of purchasing power would be calculated in the same way as under the energy refund program .

the expansion of the eitc proposed in h.r .

2454 would be effective in 2012 .

h.r .

2454 would increase the maximum amount of the credit that filers without qualifying children would receive .

it would raise the eitc credit rate for childless filers to 15.3% , increasing the estimated maximum credit to $932 for 2012 .

the eitc is phased out for income over a certain threshold .

under current law , the eitc for childless filers begins to phase out at an estimated income level of $7,620 .

h.r .

2454 would raise the income threshold at which the eitc is estimated to begin to phase out to $11,640 .

after 2012 , this phase - out threshold would be indexed to inflation .

figure 4 graphically shows the impact of the proposed eitc changes for childless tax filers who would lose purchasing power due to h.r .

2454 .

the bill would increase the maximum credit rate and the income at which the credit begins to phase out .

the effect of these two changes would result in expanded eligibility , so that such filers with income below an estimated $17,700 would qualify .

the eitc for tax filers without qualifying children is available only as an end - of - year refund .

h.r .

2454 would not alter this provision .

 ( the eitc for tax filers with qualifying children is available on an advance - payable basis , added to paychecks .

however , advance payment of the eitc is rarely used. ) .

the refundable portion of the eitc is considered an outlay from the federal government .

 ( for filers where the eitc reduces , but does not eliminate , federal tax liability , that portion of the eitc is considered a revenue loss. ) .

the cbo estimates that the eitc expansion in h.r .

2454 would increase outlays by $4.4 billion over the five - year period fy2010-fy2014 and by $15.7 billion over the ten - year period fy2010-fy2019 .

the clean energy jobs and american power act ( s. 1733 ) , sponsored by senators kerry and boxer , was introduced on september 30 , 2009 .

the bill is similar to h.r .

2454 in that it would distribute allowances to electricity ldcs and natural gas ldcs to assist consumers .

however , unlike h.r .

2454 , the bill as introduced in the senate does not yet specify the amount of allowances that would be available to ldcs .

also like h.r .

2454 , the clean energy jobs and american power act would allocate allowances to states to be used to assist consumers who use heating oil and propane ( unlike the house - passed bill , s. 1733 does not mention kerosene users ) .

the percentage of allowances that would be allocated to the states to assist heating oil and propane consumers is not specified in the bill .

s. 1733 would also create a consumer rebate fund in the treasury to be funded through the auction of allowances , though the bill does not specify the amount of auction proceeds that would be used to fund the account .

beginning in 2026 , the bill provides that the president use the funds in the consumer rebate account "in accordance with federal statutory authority to provide relief to consumers and others affected by" the bill's enactment .

similarly , s. 1733 would establish an energy refund program , funded through the auction of allowances , with the proceeds used to "offset energy cost impacts on low - and moderate - income households. .

