the federal government has long played a role in helping vulnerable young people secure employment and achieve academic success through job training and employment programs , including summer youth employment opportunities .

these programs have sought to increase youth employment , educational attainment , and other positive outcomes .

in some years , hundreds of thousands of youth have participated in the programs .

the enactment of the workforce investment act ( wia , p.l .

105-220 ) in 1998 marked the first time since 1964 that states and localities did not receive funding explicitly for summer employment programs for vulnerable youth .

however , the law requires that local areas funded under its youth activities ( youth ) program provide summer employment opportunities as one of 10 elements available to low - income youth with barriers to employment .

the economic downturn that began in december 2007 increased focus on the summer employment component , especially given recent evidence that employment for youth during the summer is at record lows .

in february 2009 , president obama signed into law the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 , arra , recovery act ) .

one of the stated purposes of arra was to preserve existing jobs and create new jobs .

to this end , the law appropriated $1.2 billion for the youth program .

the law emphasized that funds should be spent on summer youth employment opportunities , as well as year - round employment activities for older youth .

this report provides an overview of efforts to employ youth during the summer months , particularly under the recovery act , and the issues surrounding these efforts .

appendix a provides descriptions of terms applicable to the wia youth program and appendix b discusses evaluations of past stand - alone summer youth programs that were federally funded .

the youth activities program is authorized by wia and is the primary source of federal funding for youth employment and job training activities , including summer employment opportunities , targeted to vulnerable youth .

a youth is eligible for youth activities if he or she is age 14 through 21 , is a low - income individual , and has one or more of the following barriers: he or she is deficient in basic literacy skills ; a school dropout ; homeless , a runaway , or a foster child ; pregnant or parenting ; or an offender ; or in need of additional assistance to complete an educational program or to secure and hold employment .

at least 30% of all youth activities funds must be used for activities for out - of - school youth , or youth who have dropped out or have received a high school diploma or its equivalent but are basic - skills deficient , unemployed , or underemployed .

the purpose of the youth activities program is to facilitate job training , employment , and educational attainment for select youth .

the youth activities formula grant is distributed by the department of labor ( dol ) to state workforce investment boards ( wibs ) , based on the unemployment and poverty status of youth in each state .

state wibs coordinate workforce services for a state .

as part of their oversight of these services , the state wib creates a five - year state plan that addresses several items related to employment and training needs and activities , as well as performance and accountability .

state wibs distribute youth activities funds to local wibs , which oversee workforce services in a particular area of a state .

among other activities , each local board must establish what is known as a "youth council," comprised of representatives that assist the wib in awarding grants or contracts to providers that carry out youth workforce activities .

wia is silent on the types of entities that may be contracted to provide services for youth .

however , local wibs tend to award grants or contracts to a number of entities , including secondary schools , colleges or universities , and community organizations to carry out a local youth program for each local area overseen by a wib .

workforce programs carried out by local wibs must provide 10 activities or "elements" to youth .

the elements pertain to summer employment , educational achievement , employment services , leadership development activities , additional support for youth services , and follow - up services for 12 months .

the 10 program elements are summarized in table a - 2 of appendix a .

local wibs have the option of also providing "other elements and strategies as appropriate to the needs and goals of the participants. .

separately , a one - stop system is established by a local wib to coordinate employment and training services for adult job seekers , dislocated workers , and youth .

approximately 20 federal programs must provide services through the one - stop system , either by co - location , electronic linkages , or referrals .

the local youth program is a required partner , and must use a portion of its funds to create and maintain the one - stop delivery system .

the local program enters into a memorandum of understanding with the local wib relating to the operation of the one - stop , among other requirements .

congress encouraged that funds appropriated under arra be made available specifically for summer youth employment opportunities , as well as year - round activities for older youth .

the law's accompanying conference report ( h.rept .

111-16 ) stated the conferees are particularly interested in [wia youth] funds being used to create summer employment opportunities for youth and language applying the work readiness performance indicator to such summer jobs is included as an appropriate measure for those activities .

year - round youth activities are also envisioned and the age of eligibility for youth services provided with the additional funds is extended through age 24 to allow local programs to reach young adults who have become disconnected from both education and the labor market .

the conference report referenced an existing wia youth activities' measure — the work readiness indicator , which is part of the basic skills performance indicator — for purposes of evaluating performance of the summer youth component .

the work readiness indicator measures the number of work readiness skills goals attained by youth divided by the number of work readiness skills goals set overall .

this next section of the report discusses dol guidance for implementing the summer youth employment component , as funded by arra .

this discussion is followed by an overview of efforts to monitor the implementation and performance of the program by both dol and the government accountability office ( gao ) .

the increased focus on summer jobs for youth under arra raised several issues related to its implementation , in addition to those highlighted by both dol and gao , such as implementation of the work readiness indicator .

first , dol issued formal guidance to provide direction to states about carrying out summer youth employment , and this guidance was different from previous guidance provided under wia .

second , while arra and guidance by dol focused on the summer youth provisions , they also emphasized that older out - of - school youth should also have opportunities to participate in activities funded under arra .

whether states and localities adequately served these youth may be of interest to congress .

third , policymakers may consider , as part of any efforts to reauthorize wia , whether the law should place greater emphasis on summer employment .

