electronic waste ( e - waste ) is a term that is used loosely to refer to obsolete , broken , or irreparable electronic devices like televisions , computer central processing units ( cpus ) , computer monitors ( flat screen and cathode ray tubes ) , laptops , printers , scanners , and associated wiring .

rapid technology changes have led to increasingly large e - waste surpluses .

electronic devices , particularly older units in use today or in storage , contain a host of hazardous constituents such as lead , mercury , or chromium , as well as plastics treated with brominated flame retardants .

the presence of these constituents has led to end - of - life ( eol ) management concerns from state and federal environmental agencies , environmental organizations , and some members of congress .

e - waste is essentially unregulated at the federal level — meaning it can be disposed of with common household garbage in municipal solid waste landfills ( the primary disposal method ) or incinerators .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has stated that landfill disposal of e - waste is safe .

however , epa's preferred method of eol management is reuse or recycling .

further , state and local waste management agencies have expressed concerns regarding the potential cumulative impact to human health and the environment of landfilling millions of pounds of e - waste .

as a result , individual states have begun to enact their own e - waste management requirements .

to date , 23 states and new york city have enacted some form of e - waste management law .

those laws include provisions such as restrictions on landfill disposal of certain e - wastes and the establishment of mandatory recycling programs , generally paid for by electronics manufacturers .

in the coming years , it is likely that more states will enact similar laws .

new state requirements , mixed with increased consumer awareness regarding potential problems with landfilling e - waste , have led to an increase in recycling .

with that increase have come new questions about e - waste eol management .

instead of questions only about the potential impacts associated with e - waste disposal , questions have arisen regarding the potential danger associated with e - waste recycling .

because e - waste recycling is largely unregulated , virtually no data are available to track its fate .

accurate data regarding how much is generated , how it is managed , and where it is processed ( either domestically or abroad ) are largely unavailable .

what is known is that e - waste recycling may involve costly , complex processes and that there is an insufficient , though growing , national recycling infrastructure to enable the united states to fully manage its own e - waste .

it also is known that markets for e - waste ( either for reuse or recycling for scrap ) are largely overseas .

as a result , the majority of e - waste collected for recycling appears to be exported for processing .

although it is difficult to know exactly how much e - waste collected for recycling is exported , it appears that india or developing countries in asia or africa are most likely to receive it .

those countries are more likely to have electronics manufacturing plants that can cheaply repair or refurbish e - waste for reuse .

also , developing countries are more likely to value e - waste more highly than developed countries for its potential to recycle for scrap .

while some exports may be sent to facilities that manage e - waste in a way that protects workers and the environment , a significant amount is likely sent to countries that have few if any protections for workers or the environment , or that have regulations that are not enforced .

the result is that recycling operations in those countries may pose a significant risk to human health and the environment .

increasingly , environmental organizations , university researchers , and the media have documented contamination to air , soil , and water , and health impacts to the people working and living near these operations — particularly to children ( these issues are discussed in more detail in the section " impacts of e - waste exports " ) .

concerns regarding the potential impact of exporting e - waste for processing in developing countries have led to increased scrutiny from members of the public and environmental organizations , as well as some members of congress .

on may 21 , 2009 , representative gene green introduced h.r .

2595 , a bill that would amend the solid waste disposal act ( 42 u.s.c .

6921 ) to establish certain e - waste export restrictions .

there have also been several congressional hearings on issues associated with e - waste management , one of which specifically addressed issues associated with e - waste exports .

there are various issues of concern with regard to e - waste disposal and recycling .

this report looks at issues specifically related to its export for recycling .

particularly , it discusses documented impacts to human health and the environment that have been tied to unsafe recycling practices in developing countries .

it provides an overview of various factors necessary to understand why e - waste disposal has become a concern in the united states .

specifically , the report discusses issues that have motivated certain stakeholders to divert e - waste from landfill disposal and , hence , increase recycling .

it also discusses waste management requirements in the united states , to illustrate how e - waste disposal and recycling are essentially unregulated ; and why processing e - waste in undeveloped countries has , and will likely continue to have , a predominant role in the recycling process .

it is difficult to determine how much e - waste is exported from the united states to developing countries .

it is further difficult to determine how much of the waste that is exported is sent to facilities that will manage it safely as opposed to those that use disassembly and disposal methods that will expose workers to toxic chemicals with little , if any , protection .

it is also difficult to determine how much e - waste may be sent to countries that have a limited regulatory framework to protect the local environment — potentially exposing the surrounding communities to resulting contamination .

what is becoming easier to document is the impact that e - waste exports are having on less developed nations .

with increased exports have come increased media attention on the improper handling of e - waste in those areas and its resulting impacts .

various reports have graphically documented health and safety threats to workers and environmental contamination from e - waste recovery practices in developing countries .

it is difficult to document all e - waste recycling hubs , but popular destinations for e - waste exported from the united states ( and other developed countries ) are waste processing operations in guiyu in the shantou region of china , delhi and bangalore in india , and the agbogbloshie site near accra , ghana .

multiple studies have documented environmental and health effects of uncontrolled waste processing activities .

environmental impacts include contamination of all local environmental media — soil , air , surface water , and ground water .

for example , a june 2009 study found that the primary hazardous recycling operations in guiyu involve metal recovery that involves open burning of wires to obtain steel and copper , cathode ray tube ( crt ) cracking to obtain copper - laden yokes , desoldering and burning of circuit boards to remove solder and chips , and acid stripping chips for gold ; plastic recycling through chipping and melting ; and dumping of materials that cannot be further processed ( such as leaded crt glass and burned circuit boards ) and residues from recycling operations ( such as ashes from open burn operations , spent acid baths , and sludges ) .

it was observed that burning circuit board plastics treated with brominated flame retardants emitted harmful heavy metals , dioxins , and aromatic hydrocarbons .

further , heavy metal contamination in surface water and sediments was found that could be attributed to the direct effects of e - waste recycling operations in guiyu .

copper from surface water was found to be 2.4 to 131 times the reference background concentrations , and sediment samples were 3.2 to 429 times the reference levels .

the study also found severe levels of contamination for lead , cadmium , mercury , and arsenic in sediment and surface water as a result of recycling operations .

in addition to environmental contamination , impacts on humans have been observed .

in a 2007 study , children from one to six years old in guiyu were compared to those living in a neighboring town where no e - waste processing was done .

children in guiyu were found to have blood lead levels ( bll ) that were significantly higher than those in the neighboring village .

the study concluded that elevated blls in guiyu children were common as a result of exposure to lead contamination caused by primitive e - waste recycling activities .

to understand why e - waste is exported , it is helpful to understand why landfill disposal has become a concern to certain stakeholders in the united states .

those concerns center largely around the waste's increasing volume and the hazardous constituents , such as lead and mercury , it likely contains ( particularly in older electronic devices ) .

increased awareness has encouraged state waste management and water resources agencies to consider the potential impacts to human health and the environment associated with e - waste and has led to increased efforts to divert e - waste from landfill disposal .

broadly speaking , discarded e - waste has two potential fates — it may be disposed of ( most likely in a landfill ) or it may be recycled .

once the device is in the hands of the recycler , it may be resold and reused "as is" or it may undergo some degree of refurbishing .

products that cannot be reused or refurbished are either dismantled or shredded , with the resulting material separated into secondary material streams and at least partially recovered .

the resale of electronic devices for reuse or material recovery may occur domestically or abroad .

regardless of whether an electronic device is disposed of or recycled , there are virtually no federal environmental regulatory requirements applicable to its management .

factors specific to e - waste that affect the lack of regulation are useful in understanding the challenges associated with addressing e - waste management issues .

since e - waste recycling is largely unregulated , accurate data regarding the end markets , both domestic and abroad , are not publicly available .

therefore , it is difficult to know how much e - waste that is collected for recycling is actually exported for processing .

however , in a 2008 report , epa consulted an industry expert to develop a "best estimate" of the end markets for crt - containing devices ( televisions and computer monitors ) .

according to that estimate , between 77% and 89% of those end markets were outside the united states .

epa acknowledged that such data are fluid — market conditions change rapidly .

also , since this estimate only applies only to crts , it is not possible to apply those estimates to all e - waste .

still , it can be estimated that the majority of e - waste collected for recycling is processed , at least to some extent , abroad .

there are various reasons why recyclers export e - waste instead of recycling it domestically .

most reasons relate to the high costs of processing the waste domestically and the lower costs and higher demand for the material abroad .

an unintended consequence of avoiding potential negative impacts of domestic e - waste disposal has been a contribution to actual environmental contamination and human health impacts to some communities in developing countries .

if environmentally preferable management of e - waste is the goal , is recycling it preferable to landfill disposal if recycling means exporting the waste to developing countries ? .

determining how to address this issue — that is , take into consideration concerns regarding domestic e - waste disposal and the negative impacts of recycling abroad — involves many factors .

one significant factor is the lack of timely , accurate data needed to help fully understand the scope of the potential problem .

it is almost impossible to know exactly how much e - waste is generated , to what extent it is processed domestically ( eg , to what degree it is sorted or disassembled by domestic recyclers ) , how much is exported , and , of the waste that is exported , how much is actually reusable or sent to a facility that will manage it properly .

that is not to say that all or even the majority of e - waste that is exported is managed improperly .

it is simply impossible to know using existing data .

electronics manufacturers are currently driven by various forces to make their products more easily recyclable and with fewer hazardous constituents .

any future changes to electronic devices have no impact , however , on the hundreds of millions of devices currently in use or obsolete devices currently in storage .

eventually those devices will make their way to the disposal or recycling markets .

the high cost of domestic recycling , high demand for exports , and a lack of barriers to export will continue to drive reuse and recycling markets abroad .

as stated previously , the current regulatory structure involves no or very limited prohibition on exports and limited options for reuse or recycling ( although , those options will likely increase as e - waste collection increases ) .

as long as there are legitimate reuse markets and recycling operations in developing countries , an outright prohibition on exports would be problematic , particularly when limited opportunities for recycling exist in the united states .

this presents policy - makers with multiple challenges: principal among them are how to address the obstacles that limit domestic recycling , and how one might establish export controls that facilitate reuse and recycling but prohibit delivery of e - waste to operations that do not protect workers or their environment .

