the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 , ppaca ) was signed into law on march 23 , 2010 .

on march 30 , 2010 , ppaca was amended by p.l .

111-152 , the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 .

in terms of the noncitizen eligibility and verification provisions , the ppaca mirrors the senate - passed legislation ( h.r .

3590 ) discussed below .

this report was completed on january 8 , 2010 .

health care reform legislation raises a significant set of complex issues , and among the thornier for policy makers are the noncitizen eligibility and verification issues .

that the treatment of foreign nationals complicates health care reform legislation is not surprising given that reform of immigration policy poses its own constellation of controversial policy options .

this report focuses on this nexus of immigration law and health care reform in the major health care reform bills that have received committee or floor action .

these are the america's affordable health choices act of 2009 ( h.r .

3200 ) , as reported by the house committees on energy and commerce , ways and means , and education and labor on october 14 , 2009 , and folded into the affordable health care for america act ( h.r .

3962 ) , which passed on november 7 , 2009 ; the affordable health choices act ( s. 1679 ) , as reported by the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) on september 17 , 2009 ; the america's healthy future act ( s. 1796 ) , as reported by the senate committee on finance on october 19 , 2009 ; and the patient protection and affordable care act ( h.r .

3590 as amended ) , which passed the senate on december 24 , 2009 .

a noncitizen is anyone who is not a citizen or national of the united states and is synonymous with the terms alien and foreign national .

noncitizens include those in the united states permanently ( eg , legal permanent residents , refugees ) , those in the country temporarily ( eg , students , temporary workers ) , and those who are in the country without authorization .

the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) defines and proscribes who among the noncitizens are legally present in the united states .

according to the march 2009 current population survey ( cps ) , an estimated 21.3 million noncitizens were 7.1% of the u.s. population .

of those , an estimated 23.4% of noncitizens were below the 100% threshold of the federal poverty level in 2008 .

an earlier congressional research service ( crs ) study found that 43.8% of noncitizens lacked any type of health insurance in 2007 .

researchers at the pew hispanic center estimated that 24% of legal immigrants who were adults had no health insurance coverage and that 59% of unauthorized aliens who were adults had no health insurance in 2007 .

the report opens with a legislative analysis that summarizes the key elements of the major health care reform legislation in which noncitizen eligibility issues are especially germane .

it follows with a comparative analysis of how the bills treat the main classes of noncitizens on the three key elements .

the report then addresses four questions selected for their policy implications: what type of health coverage do noncitizens currently have ? .

what is current law on noncitizen eligibility for federal means - tested health care coverage ? .

what are the current employment rules for and tax obligations of noncitizens ? .

how is immigration and citizenship status verified ? .

this report builds on a set of crs reports that analyze the tax obligations of noncitizens , noncitizen eligibility for federal benefits , trends in noncitizen poverty levels , and noncitizen health insurance coverage and use of select safety net providers .

among other features , the major health care reform bills have elements based upon employer - provided health insurance , federal means - tested health care , individually obtained health coverage , and premium subsidies or cost sharing credits for low - and moderate - income people .

when these elements are seen through the prism of immigration and citizenship status , the policy implications prompt at least four questions .

what types of health coverage do noncitizens currently have ? .

what is current law on noncitizen eligibility for federal means - tested health care coverage ? .

what are the current employment rules for and tax obligations of noncitizens ? .

how is immigration and citizenship status verified ? .

this section of the report addresses these questions in light of the policy implications of the proposals and summarizes the germane legislative provisions .

addressing the policy questions of coverage , eligibility , and verification that arise directly from the nexus of immigration policy and health care reform is both complicated and controversial .

in addition to these first - order policy questions , second - order questions come to mind .

for example , if unauthorized aliens are exempted from the mandate to purchase health insurance , will they be potentially able to underbid their u.s. counterparts in the labor market , particularly among private contractors and the self - employed ? .

will health care providers be less likely to provide medical treatment to uninsured people whom they presume are likely to be unauthorized aliens ? .

will citizen children in mixed - status families be negatively affected in the premium subsidy calculations if their unauthorized parent is ineligible ? .

should the "five - year bar" on federal means - tested benefits include the premium subsidies for low - and moderate - income lprs who would be otherwise eligible during their first five years in the united states ? .

should u.s. residents who sponsor immigrants to the united states be required to assume some financial responsibility for the health insurance coverage of newly arriving lprs ? .

these are among the vexing questions that might arise in subsequent debates .

appendix a .

classes of noncitizens and their eligibility to obtain social security numbers , to qualify as a resident alien , and to receive medicaid appendix b. deeming and sponsorship for lprs ( but not refugees and asylees ) , the law links the income of the person who sponsored the alien to immigrate to the united states with the immigrant's income calculations when determining eligibility for most federal benefits .

the basis of this policy is that the immigration and nationality act excludes immigrants who appear "likely at any time to become a public charge. .

this exclusion is implemented by provisions on deeming sponsors' income and binding affidavits of support .

not all prospective lprs are required to have affidavits of support to demonstrate that they will not become a public charge , and most exceptions are statutory ( eg , refugees or employment - based lprs ) .

the affidavit of support is a legally binding contract that requires the sponsor to ensure that the new immigrant will not become a public charge and to make the sponsor financially responsible for the new immigrant , as codified in ยง213a of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

sponsors must demonstrate the ability to maintain an annual income of at least 125% of the federal poverty line ( 100% for sponsors who are on active duty in u.s. armed forces ) , or share liability with one or more joint sponsors , each of whom must independently meet the income requirement .

current law also directed the federal government to include "appropriate information" regarding affidavits of support in the save system .

congress has required the establishment of an automated record of the sponsors' social security numbers ( ssn ) in order to implement this policy .

according to administrative guidance issued in 1999 , the receipt of medicaid or chip does not trigger the deportation or removal of a noncitizen beneficiary .

it also does not categorically prevent a noncitizen beneficiary from sponsoring a potential lpr .

the cash benefit , however , cannot be included in the calculation of the beneficiary's income if he or she signs an affidavit of support for a potential lpr .

under the deeming rules , all of the income and resources of a sponsor ( and a sponsor's spouse ) may be deemed available to the sponsored applicant for assistance until the noncitizen becomes naturalized or meets a work test .

the ina requires states to seek reimbursement of the costs of federal means - tested benefits from the sponsors .

the sponsor's liability ends when the sponsored alien is no longer subject to deeming , either through naturalization or meeting a work test .

chip was enacted after the list of programs meeting the prwora designation of federal means - tested programs was proposed .

chipra 2009 provided an exception to this rule in the cases of children and pregnant women who are lprs , and battered individuals lawfully residing in the united states , during the first five years .

more precisely , ยง214 of chipra 2009 states that "no debt shall accrue under an affidavit of support against any sponsor of such an alien on the basis of provision of assistance to such category and the cost of such assistance shall not be considered as an unreimbursed cost. .

appendix c. selected categories of non - lpr aliens who are permitted to work there are categories of aliens who are not lprs but who may be working and residing in the united states for periods of time sufficient to qualify under the internal revenue code's "substantial presence" test ( and thus are classified for tax purposes as resident alien s , unless there are specific treaty agreements between the united states and their country of citizenship ) .

the classes of nonimmigrants who are expressly permitted to work in the united states include the following: e treaty traders and investors .

h temporary workers .

nafta temporary workers .

certain f foreign students who have obtained permission .

j and q cultural exchange visitors .

l intracompany transfers .

k fiancees of u.s. citizens .

o and p extraordinary athletes , entertainers , and performers .

r religious workers .

u crime victims .

v family members waiting for more than three years .

in addition to the nonimmigrants specified above , the following classes of unauthorized aliens have acquired a "quasi - legal" status that often enables them to work: aliens who have been granted temporary protected status ( tps ) , extended voluntary departure ( evd ) status , or deferred enforced departure ( ded ) status by the attorney general or secretary of homeland security .

aliens with petitions pending to adjust to lpr status who have been given employment authorization by the u.s .

citizenship and immigration services .

aliens with asylum cases or relief from removal cases pending before the courts who have been given employment authorization by the executive office for immigration review .

appendix d. major immigration documents that foreign - born persons in the united states may use to establish identity and / or legal immigration status permanent resident card i - 551 ( identity and status ) .

foreign passport with temporary i - 551 stamp or temporary i - 551 noted on a machine - readable visa ( identity and status ) .

employment authorization with photograph i - 766 ( identity and status ) .

temporary resident employment authorization card i - 688b .

passports from the federated states of micronesia and the republic of the marshall islands ( identity and status ) .

refugee travel document i - 571 .

arrival - departure record i - 94 containing an expiration date that has not passed and a notation indicating refugee or asylum status granted pursuant to ยง207 or ยง208 of immigration and nationality act .

advance parole document i - 512l .

permit to reenter the united states i - 327 .

certification of birth abroad issued by the state department fs - 540 or fs - 545 .

certification of report of birth abroad issued by the state department ds - 1350 .

certificate of citizenship n - 560 or n - 561 .

naturalization certificate n - 550 or n - 570 .

