recent media revelations that the president authorized the national security agency ( nsa ) to collect signals intelligence from communications involving u.s. persons within the united states , without obtaining a warrant or court order , raise numerous questions regarding the president's authority to order warrantless electronic surveillance .

little information is currently known about the full extent of the nsa domestic surveillance , which was revealed by the new york times in december , 2005 , but allegedly began after the president issued a secret order in 2002 .

attorney general alberto gonzales laid out some of its parameters , telling reporters that it involves "intercepts of contents of communications where one ... party to the communication is outside the united states" and the government has "a reasonable basis to conclude that one party to the communication is a member of al qaeda , affiliated with al qaeda , or a member of an organization affiliated with al qaeda , or working in support of al qaeda. .

the aim of the program , according to principal deputy director for national intelligence general michael hayden , is not "to collect reams of intelligence , but to detect and warn and prevent [terrorist] attacks. .

the president has stated that he believes his order to be fully supported by the constitution and the laws of the united states , and the attorney general clarified that the administration bases its authority both on inherent presidential powers and the joint resolution authorizing the use of "all necessary and appropriate force" to engage militarily those responsible for the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( "aumf" ) .

although the resolution does not expressly specify what it authorizes as "necessary and appropriate force," the administration discerns the intent of congress to provide the statutory authority necessary take virtually any action reasonably calculated to prevent a terrorist attack , including by overriding at least some statutory prohibitions that contain exceptions for conduct that is "otherwise authorized by statute. .

specifically , the administration asserts that a part of the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) that punishes those who conduct "electronic surveillance under color of law except as authorized by statute " does not bar the nsa surveillance at issue because the aumf is just such a statute .

on december 22 , 2005 , the department of justice office of legislative affairs released a letter to certain members of the house and senate intelligence committees setting forth in somewhat greater detail the administration's position with regard to the legal authority supporting the nsa activities described by the president .

the administration's views have been the subject of debate .

critics challenge the notion that federal statutes regarding government eavesdropping may be bypassed by executive order , or that such laws were implicitly superceded by congress's authorization to use military force .

others , however , have expressed the view that established wiretap procedures are too cumbersome and slow to be effective in the war against terrorism , and that the threat of terrorism justifies extraordinary measures the president deems appropriate , and some agree that congress authorized the measures when it authorized the use of military force .

this memorandum lays out a general framework for analyzing the constitutional and statutory issues raised by the nsa electronic surveillance activity .

it then outlines the legal framework regulating electronic surveillance by the government , explores ambiguities in those statutes that could provide exceptions for the nsa intelligence - gathering operation at issue , and addresses the arguments that the president possesses inherent authority to order the operations or that congress has provided such authority .

foreign intelligence collection is not among congress's powers enumerated in article i of the constitution , nor is it expressly mentioned in article ii as a responsibility of the president .

yet it is difficult to imagine that the framers intended to reserve foreign intelligence collection to the states or to deny the authority to the federal government altogether .

it is more likely that the power to collect intelligence resides somewhere within the domain of foreign affairs and war powers , both of which areas are inhabited to some degree by the president together with the congress .

the steel seizure case is frequently cited as providing a framework for the courts to decide the extent of the president's authority , particularly in matters involving national security .

in that korean war - era case , the supreme court declared unconstitutional a presidential order seizing control of steel mills that had ceased production due to a labor dispute , an action justified by president truman on the basis of wartime exigencies and his role as commander - in - chief , despite the fact that congress had considered but rejected earlier legislation that would have authorized the measure , and that other statutory means were available to address the steel shortage .

the court remarked that it is clear that if the president had authority to issue the order he did , it must be found in some provision of the constitution .

and it is not claimed that express constitutional language grants this power to the president .

the contention is that presidential power should be implied from the aggregate of his powers under the constitution .

particular reliance is placed on provisions in article ii which say that 'the executive power shall be vested in a president ... ' ; that 'he shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed' ; and that he 'shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the united states. .

the order cannot properly be sustained as an exercise of the president's military power as commander in chief of the armed forces .

the government attempts to do so by citing a number of cases upholding broad powers in military commanders engaged in day - to - day fighting in a theater of war .

such cases need not concern us here .

even though 'theater of war' be an expanding concept , we cannot with faithfulness to our constitutional system hold that the commander in chief of the armed forces has the ultimate power as such to take possession of private property in order to keep labor disputes from stopping production .

this is a job for the nation's lawmakers , not for its military authorities .

the court also rejected the argument that past similar assertions of authority by presidents bolstered the executive claims of constitutional power: it is said that other presidents without congressional authority have taken possession of private business enterprises in order to settle labor disputes .

but even if this be true , congress has not thereby lost its exclusive constitutional authority to make laws necessary and proper to carry out the powers vested by the constitution 'in the government of the united states , or any department or officer thereof. .

the steel seizure case is not remembered as much for the majority opinion as it is for the concurring opinion of justice robert jackson , who took a more nuanced view and laid out what is commonly regarded as the seminal explication of separation - of - powers matters between congress and the president .

justice jackson set forth the following oft - cited formula: 1 .

when the president acts pursuant to an express or implied authorization of congress , his authority is at its maximum , for it includes all that he possesses in his own right plus all that congress can delegate.... a seizure executed by the president pursuant to an act of congress would be supported by the strongest of presumptions and the widest latitude of judicial interpretation , and the burden of persuasion would rest heavily upon any who might attack it .

2 .

when the president acts in absence of either a congressional grant or denial of authority , he can only rely upon his own independent powers , but there is a zone of twilight in which he and congress may have concurrent authority , or in which its distribution is uncertain .

therefore , congressional inertia , indifference or quiescence may sometimes , at least as a practical matter , enable , if not invite , measures on independent presidential responsibility .

in this area , any actual test of power is likely to depend on the imperatives of events and contemporary imponderables rather than on abstract theories of law .

3 .

when the president takes measures incompatible with the expressed or implied will of congress , his power is at its lowest ebb , for then he can rely only upon his own constitutional powers minus any constitutional powers of congress over the matter .

courts can sustain exclusive presidential control in such a case only by disabling the congress from acting upon the subject .

presidential claim to a power at once so conclusive and preclusive must be scrutinized with caution , for what is at stake is the equilibrium established by our constitutional system .

to ascertain where in this framework the president's claimed authority might fall appears to require a determination of the congress's will and an assessment of how the constitution allocates the asserted power between the president and congress , if at all .

if the constitution forbids the conduct , then the court has a duty to find the conduct invalid , even if the president and congress have acted in concert .

in the absence of a constitutional bar , congress's support matters , except in the rare case where the president alone is entrusted with the specific power in question .

in other words , under this view , the president may sometimes have the effective power to take unilateral action in the absence of any action on the part of congress to indicate its will , but this should not be taken to mean that the president possesses the inherent authority to exercise full authority in a particular field without congress's ability to encroach .

william rehnquist , at the time an associate justice of the supreme court , took the opportunity in dames & moore v. regan to refine justice jackson's formula with respect to the cases falling within the second classification , the "zone of twilight in which he and congress may have concurrent authority , or in which its distribution is uncertain. .

in such a case the analysis becomes more complicated , and the validity of the president's action , at least so far as separation - of - powers principles are concerned , hinges on a consideration of all the circumstances which might shed light on the views of the legislative branch toward such action , including "congressional inertia , indifference or quiescence. .

[i]t is doubtless the case that executive action in any particular instance falls , not neatly in one of three pigeonholes , but rather at some point along a spectrum running from explicit congressional authorization to explicit congressional prohibition .

this is particularly true as respects cases such as the one before us , involving responses to international crises the nature of which congress can hardly have been expected to anticipate in any detail .

in dames & moore , petitioners had challenged president carter's executive order establishing regulations to further compliance with the terms of an executive agreement he had entered into for the purpose of ending the hostage crisis with iran .

the orders , among other things , directed that legal recourse for breaches of contract with iran and other causes of action must be pursued before a special tribunal established by the algiers accords .

president carter relied largely on the international economic emergency powers act ( ieepa ) , which provided explicit support for most of the measures taken , but could not be read to authorize actions affecting the suspension of claims in u.s. courts .

the carter administration also cited the broad language of the hostage act , which states that "the president shall use such means , not amounting to acts of war , as he may think necessary and proper to obtain or effectuate the release" of the hostages .

justice rehnquist wrote for the majority although we have declined to conclude that the ieepa or the hostage act directly authorizes the president's suspension of claims for the reasons noted , we cannot ignore the general tenor of congress' legislation in this area in trying to determine whether the president is acting alone or at least with the acceptance of congress .

as we have noted , congress cannot anticipate and legislate with regard to every possible action the president may find it necessary to take or every possible situation in which he might act .

such failure of congress specifically to delegate authority does not , "especially ... in the areas of foreign policy and national security," imply "congressional disapproval" of action taken by the executive .

on the contrary , the enactment of legislation closely related to the question of the president's authority in a particular case which evinces legislative intent to accord the president broad discretion may be considered to "invite" "measures on independent presidential responsibility. .

at least this is so where there is no contrary indication of legislative intent and when , as here , there is a history of congressional acquiescence in conduct of the sort engaged in by the president .

the court remarked that congress's implicit approval of the longstanding presidential practice of settling international claims by executive agreement was critical to its holding that the challenged actions were not in conflict with acts of congress .

the court cited justice frankfurter's concurrence in youngstown stating that "a systematic , unbroken , executive practice , long pursued to the knowledge of the congress and never before questioned ... may be treated as a gloss on 'executive power' vested in the president by § 1 of art .

ii. .

finally , the court stressed that its holding was narrow: we do not decide that the president possesses plenary power to settle claims , even as against foreign governmental entities... .

but where , as here , the settlement of claims has been determined to be a necessary incident to the resolution of a major foreign policy dispute between our country and another , and where , as here , we can conclude that congress acquiesced in the president's action , we are not prepared to say that the president lacks the power to settle such claims .

a review of the history of intelligence collection and its regulation by congress suggests that the two political branches have never quite achieved a meeting of the minds regarding their respective powers .

presidents have long contended that the ability to conduct surveillance for intelligence purposes is a purely executive function , and have tended to make broad assertions of authority while resisting efforts on the part of congress or the courts to impose restrictions .

congress has asserted itself with respect to domestic surveillance , but has largely left matters involving overseas surveillance to executive self - regulation , subject to congressional oversight and willingness to provide funds .

investigations for the purpose of gathering foreign intelligence give rise to a tension between the government's legitimate national security interests and the protection of privacy interests and first amendment rights .

the interception of wire , oral , or electronic communications is regulated by title iii of the omnibus crime control and safe streets act of 1968 ( "title iii" ) , as amended .

government surveillance for criminal law enforcement is permitted under certain circumstances and in accordance with the procedures set forth in title iii .

government surveillance for the gathering of foreign intelligence information is covered by fisa .

these statutes are relevant to the analysis of the legality of the reported nsa surveillance to the extent that their provisions are meant to cover such surveillance , prohibit it , or explicitly exempt it from requirements therein .

if congress meant for fisa to occupy the entire field of electronic surveillance of the type that is being conducted pursuant to the president's executive order , then the operation may fall under the third tier of justice jackson's formula , in which the president's "power is at its lowest ebb" and a court could sustain it only by "disabling the congress from acting upon the subject. .

in other words , if fisa , together with title iii , were found to occupy the field , then for a court to sustain the president's authorization of electronic surveillance to acquire foreign intelligence information outside the fisa framework , fisa would have to be considered an unconstitutional encroachment on inherent presidential authority .

if , on the other hand , fisa leaves room for the nsa surveillance outside its strictures , then the claimed power might fall into the first or second categories , as either condoned by congress ( expressly or implicitly ) , or simply left untouched .

the administration's position , as set forth in the office of legislative affairs letter to the leaders of the house and senate intelligence committees , is that the president has the constitutional authority to direct the nsa to conduct the activities he described , and that this inherent authority is supplemented by statutory authority under the aumf .

the administration interprets the aumf , based on its reading of the supreme court opinion in hamdi , as authorizing the president to conduct anywhere in the world , including within the united states , any activity that can be characterized as a fundamental incident of waging war .

it includes communications intelligence among the fundamental incidents of waging war .

the following sections analyze the extent to which the president's authority to conduct warrantless electronic surveillance is inherent , whether the aumf authorizes the operations , and whether the nsa operations are consistent with fisa and title iii .

whether an nsa activity is permissible under the fourth amendment and the statutory scheme outlined above is impossible to determine without an understanding of the specific facts involved and the nature of the president's authorization , which are for the most part classified .

if the nsa operations at issue are encompassed in the definition of "electronic surveillance" set forth under fisa , it would seem consistent with congress's intent that such surveillance must be carried out in accordance with fisa procedures .

although section 109 ( a ) of fisa does not explicitly limit the language "as authorized by statute" to refer only to title iii and to fisa , the legislative history suggests that such a result was intended .

the exceptions to the criminal prohibition under title iii , however , are specifically limited to those mentioned within title iii .

even if the aumf is read to provide the statutory authorization necessary to avoid criminal culpability under fisa , it does not necessarily follow that the aumf provides a substitute authority under fisa to satisfy the more specific language in title iii .

to the extent that any of the electronic surveillance at issue may be outside the sweep of fisa or title iii , congress does not appear to have legislated specifically on the subject , nor , by the absence of legislation , to have authorized or acquiesced in such surveillance .

whether such electronic surveillances are contemplated by the term "all necessary and appropriate force" as authorized by the aumf turns on whether they are , under the hamdi analysis , an essential element of waging war .

even assuming that the president's role as commander in chief of the armed forces is implicated in the field of electronic surveillance for the collection of foreign intelligence information within the united states , it should not be accepted as a foregone conclusion that congress has no role to play .

by including the emergency authorization for electronic surveillance without a court order for fifteen days following a declaration of war , congress seems clearly to have contemplated that fisa would continue to operate during war , although such conditions might necessitate amendments .

amendments to fisa in the usa patriot act and subsequent legislation further demonstrate congress's willingness to make adjustments .

the history of congress's active involvement in regulating electronic surveillance within the united states leaves little room for arguing that congress has accepted by acquiescence the nsa operations here at issue .

to the extent that the administration seems to base its interpretation of the aumf and fisa on the assumption that a reading contrary to the one they rely upon would be an unconstitutional violation of separation - of - powers principles , it appears to regard the matter as deserving the highest level of deference under youngstown's first category simply by virtue of the assumption that it would survive scrutiny under the third category .

to conclude that congress's enactments are unconstitutional and therefore could not reflect congress's intent seems to beg the question .

court cases evaluating the legality of warrantless wiretaps for foreign intelligence purposes provide some support for the assertion that the president possesses inherent authority to conduct such surveillance .

the court of review , the only appellate court to have addressed the issue since the passage of fisa , "took for granted" that the president has inherent authority to conduct foreign intelligence electronic surveillance under his article ii powers , stating that , "assuming that was so , fisa could not encroach on that authority. .

however , much of the other lower courts' discussions of inherent presidential authority occurred prior to the enactment of fisa , and no court has ruled on the question of congress's authority to regulate the collection of foreign intelligence information .

from the foregoing analysis , it appears unlikely that a court would hold that congress has expressly or impliedly authorized the nsa electronic surveillance operations here under discussion , and it would likewise appear that , to the extent that those surveillances fall within the definition of "electronic surveillance" within the meaning of fisa or any activity regulated under title iii , congress intended to cover the entire field with these statutes .

to the extent that the nsa activity is not permitted by some reading of title iii or fisa , it may represent an exercise of presidential power at its lowest ebb , in which case exclusive presidential control is sustainable only by "disabling congress from acting upon the subject. .

while courts have generally accepted that the president has the power to conduct domestic electronic surveillance within the united states inside the constraints of the fourth amendment , no court has held squarely that the constitution disables the congress from endeavoring to set limits on that power .

to the contrary , the supreme court has stated that congress does indeed have power to regulate domestic surveillance , and has not ruled on the extent to which congress can act with respect to electronic surveillance to collect foreign intelligence information .

given such uncertainty , the administration's legal justification , as presented in the summary analysis from the office of legislative affairs , does not seem to be as well - grounded as the tenor of that letter suggests .

