this report provides an overview of supreme court and federal circuit cases concerning patentable subject matter , including the court's recent june 2010 decision , bilski v. kappos .

the u.s. patent and trademark office ( pto ) issues a patent to an inventor after pto examiners approve the submitted patent application for an allegedly new invention .

an application for a patent consists of two primary parts: ( 1 ) a "specification," which is a written description of the invention enabling those skilled in the art to practice the invention , and ( 2 ) one or more claims that define the scope of the subject matter which the applicant regards as his invention .

therefore , these claims define the scope of the patentee's rights under the patent .

before a patent may be granted , the pto examiners must find that the new invention satisfies several substantive requirements that are set forth in the patent act .

for example , one of the statutory requirements for patentability of an invention is "novelty. .

for an invention to be considered "novel," the subject matter must be different than , and not be wholly "anticipated" by , the so - called "prior art," or public domain materials such as publications and other patents .

another statutory requirement is that the subject matter of an alleged invention must be "nonobvious" at the time of its creation .

a patent claim is invalid if "the differences between the subject matter sought to be patented and the prior art are such that the subject matter as a whole would have been obvious at the time the invention was made to a person having ordinary skill in the art to which said subject matter pertains. .

finally , the invention must also be "useful," which means that the invention provides a "significant and presently available," "well - defined and particular benefit to the public. .

according to section 101 of the patent act , one who "invents or discovers any new and useful process , machine , manufacture , or any composition of matter , or any new and useful improvement thereof , may obtain a patent therefore , subject to the conditions and requirements of this title. .

even if an invention satisfies the novelty , nonobviousness , and utility requirements described above , it may not qualify for patent protection if it does not fall within one of the four statutory categories of patent - eligible subject matter: processes , machines , manufactures , and compositions of matter .

indeed , whether the discovery is patentable subject matter is a threshold inquiry that "must precede the determination of whether that discovery is , in fact , new or obvious. .

the statutory scope of patentable subject matter under § 101 of the patent act is quite expansive — the u.s. supreme court once observed that the legislative history describing the intent of § 101 was to make patent protection available to "anything under the sun that is made by man. .

notwithstanding the breadth of patentable subject matter , the supreme court has articulated certain limits to § 101 , stating that "laws of nature , natural phenomena , and abstract ideas" may not be patented .

the court has elaborated on this restriction in several cases , including the following explanation: [a] new mineral discovered in the earth or a new plant found in the wild is not patentable subject matter .

likewise , einstein could not patent his celebrated law that e=mc 2 ; nor could newton have patented the law of gravity .

such discoveries are "manifestations of ... nature , free to all men and reserved exclusively to none. .

in the 1972 case gottschalk v. benson , the supreme court held that the discovery of a mathematical formula , though it is novel and useful , may not be patented .

the court rejected patent claims for an algorithm used to convert binary code decimal numbers to equivalent pure binary numbers ( in order to program a computer ) , because such claims "were not limited to any particular art or technology , to any particular apparatus or machinery , or to any particular end use. .

a patent on such claims , according to the court , "would wholly pre - empt the mathematical formula and in practical effect would be a patent on the algorithm itself. .

the benson court then pronounced that "[p]henomena of nature , though just discovered , mental processes , and abstract intellectual concepts are not patentable , as they are the basic tools of scientific and technological work. .

six years after benson , the supreme court in parker v. flook recognized that "[t]he line between a patentable 'process' and an unpatentable 'principle' is not always clear. .

the flook court rejected patent claims that described a method for computing an "alarm limit," which is a number that may signal the presence of an abnormal condition in temperature , pressure , and flow rates during catalytic conversion processes .

the court criticized the patent claims , as follows: the patent application does not purport to explain how to select the appropriate margin of safety , the weighting factor , or any of the other variables .

nor does it purport to contain any disclosure relating to the chemical processes at work , the monitoring of process variables , or the means of setting off an alarm or adjusting an alarm system .

all that it provides is a formula for computing an updated alarm limit .

the flook court then concluded that "a claim for an improved method of calculation , even when tied to a specific end use , is unpatentable subject matter under § 101. .

in 1980 , the supreme court in diamond v. chakrabarty held that § 101 of the patent act allowed the patenting of genetically altered micro - organisms .

the case involved a human - made , genetically engineered bacterium that is capable of breaking down multiple components of crude oil , an invention that would help in the control and treatment of oil spills .

the chakrabarty court observed that congress , in drafting § 101 , used "expansive terms as 'manufacture' and 'composition of matter,' modified by the comprehensive 'any'," thus reflecting congress's intent to permit a broad range of patentable subject matter .

the court found that the bacterium sought to be patented was a nonnaturally occurring manufacture or composition of matter ; thus , because the discovery was not the result of "nature's handiwork," it could be patented .

a year after chakrabarty , the supreme court once again had an opportunity to examine statutory subject matter under § 101 in diamond v. diehr .

the case involved a patent application that sought to claim a process for producing cured synthetic rubber products .

the diehr court upheld the process patent , stating: [a] physical and chemical process for molding precision synthetic rubber products falls within the § 101 categories of possibly patentable subject matter .

that respondents' claims involve the transformation of an article , in this case raw , uncured synthetic rubber , into a different state or thing cannot be disputed .

the respondents' claims describe in detail a step - by - step method for accomplishing such , beginning with the loading of a mold with raw , uncured rubber and ending with the eventual opening of the press at the conclusion of the cure .

industrial processes such as this are the types which have historically been eligible to receive the protection of our patent laws .

the fact that several of the process's steps involved the use of a mathematical formula and a programmed digital computer did not pose a barrier to patent eligibility .

the diehr court explained: [t]he respondents here do not seek to patent a mathematical formula .

instead , they seek patent protection for a process of curing synthetic rubber .

their process admittedly employs a well - known mathematical equation , but they do not seek to pre - empt the use of that equation .

rather , they seek only to foreclose from others the use of that equation in conjunction with all of the other steps in their claimed process .

diehr was decided in 1981 and was the last case in which the supreme court issued an opinion concerning § 101 of the patent act .

since diehr , the federal circuit court of appeals has decided several cases concerning patent - eligible subject matter .

in a 1994 en banc decision , in re alappat , the federal circuit considered a means for creating a smooth waveform display in a digital oscilloscope .

in upholding the patentability of computer programs , the federal circuit stated: although many , or arguably even all , of the means elements recited in claim 15 represent circuitry elements that perform mathematical calculations , which is essentially true of all digital electrical circuits , the claimed invention as a whole is directed to a combination of interrelated elements which combine to form a machine for converting discrete waveform data samples into anti - aliased pixel illumination intensity data to be displayed on a display means .

this is not a disembodied mathematical concept which may be characterized as an "abstract idea," but rather a specific machine to produce a useful , concrete , and tangible result .

in 1998 , the federal circuit issued another decision regarding patent - eligibility of process claims , state street bank & trust co. v. signature financial group .

this decision is widely credited with opening the doors to the allowance of patents on methods of doing or conducting business in a variety of fields , including management , finance , legal , and e - commerce .

state street bank involved a data processing system consisting of software for managing a stock mutual fund .

the system allowed individual mutual funds ( "spokes" ) to pool their assets in an investment portfolio ( "hub" ) organized as a partnership .

the federal circuit found the system patentable: today , we hold that the transformation of data , representing discrete dollar amounts , by a machine through a series of mathematical calculations into a final share price , constitutes a practical application of a mathematical algorithm , formula , or calculation , because it produces "a useful , concrete and tangible result" — a final share price momentarily fixed for recording and reporting purposes and even accepted and relied upon by regulatory authorities and in subsequent trades .

in response to the state street bank decision , congress passed the american inventors protection act of 1999 , which , among other things , allowed an earlier inventor of a "method of doing or conducting business" that was maintained as a trade secret , to assert a defense to patent infringement in the event that the business method was later patented by another .

the legislative concern was that because state street bank would allow business methods to be patented , companies and individuals who had maintained business methods as trade secrets may be potentially subject to liability for patent infringement .

this defense to patent infringement is known as "prior user rights. .

the supreme court had an opportunity to revisit § 101 subject matter patentability in the 2006 case , laboratory corporation v. metabolite labs .

the patent at issue in the case involves a way of detecting a deficiency in two b vitamins , cobalamin and folate , in the human body .

low levels of these vitamins can cause serious illnesses in humans .

the patented method requires two separate steps: first , measuring a body fluid for elevated levels of a particular amino acid ( homocysteine ) , and second , noticing that an elevated level of this amino acid correlates with a deficiency in the two b vitamins .

the question presented on which the supreme court granted certiorari in the case was: "whether a method patent setting forth an indefinite , undescribed , and non - enabling step directing a party simply to 'correlat[e]' test results can validly claim a monopoly over a basic scientific relationship used in medical treatment such that any doctor necessarily infringes the patent merely by thinking about the relationship after looking at a test result. .

however , after hearing oral argument in the case , the court dismissed laboratory corporation , stating only that the writ of certiorari was improvidently granted .

three justices dissented to the dismissal of the writ .

justice stephen breyer , writing for himself , justice john paul stevens , and justice david souter , opined that "those who engage in medical research , who practice medicine , and who as patients depend upon proper health care , might well benefit from this court's authoritative answer. .

justice breyer explained that he would have held the patent invalid because "[t]here can be little doubt that the correlation between homocysteine and vitamin deficiency ... is a 'natural phenomenon'" that is not patentable .

furthermore , justice breyer offered insight into his views regarding the legal correctness of the federal circuit's state street bank decision .

justice breyer expressly criticized the state street bank ruling that relied on the "useful , concrete and tangible result" test first articulated by in re alappat : neither does the federal circuit's decision in state street bank help respondents .

that case does say that a process is patentable if it produces a "'useful , concrete and tangible result. .

.. .

but this court has never made such a statement and , if taken literally , the statement would cover instances where this court has held the contrary .

in a 2006 opinion involving a business method patent , ebay , inc. v. mercexchange , justice kennedy wrote a concurrence , joined by justices stevens , souter , and breyer , in which he criticized the "potential vagueness and suspect validity" of "the burgeoning number of patents over business methods. .

the patent application at issue in bilski v. kappos contained claims that relate to a method of hedging risk in the commodities trading field .

specifically , the patent application claimed the following method: a method for managing the consumption risk costs of a commodity sold by a commodity provider at a fixed price comprising the steps of: ( a ) initiating a series of transactions between said commodity provider and consumers of said commodity wherein said consumers purchase said commodity at a fixed rate based upon historical averages , said fixed rate corresponding to a risk position of said consumer ; ( b ) identifying market participants for said commodity having a counter - risk position to said consumers ; and ( c ) initiating a series of transactions between said commodity provider and said market participants at a second fixed rate such that said series of market participant transactions balances the risk position of said series of consumer transactions .

the pto examiner rejected the application on the basis that the claims were not directed to patent - eligible subject matter under § 101 of the patent act , a determination that was upheld by the board of patent appeals and interferences ( "board" ) .

the board held that the transformation of "non - physical financial risks and legal liabilities of the commodity provider , the consumer , and the market participants" is not patentable subject matter .

in addition , the board found that the claimed process did not produce a "useful , concrete and tangible result. .

the applicants , bernard l. bilski and rand a. warsaw , appealed the final decision of the board to the federal circuit .

before a panel of the federal circuit was able to rule on the appeal , the federal circuit sua sponte ordered en banc review of the case .

the business community , patent practitioners , legal scholars , and policymakers were eagerly awaiting the issuance of the court's bilski decision , desiring to receive clear guidelines regarding what types of business methods could or could not qualify for patent protection .

some parties ( existing business method patent holders ) had feared and other parties ( internet companies that are often the target of business method patent infringement lawsuits ) had hoped that the bilski decision would pronounce an outright ban on business method patents — which very nearly happened , as four justices supported that view .

although the bilski opinion did not strike down business methods , nor did it reject the "machine - or - transformation" test , the lack of additional guidance from the court may have disappointed many observers .

indeed , justice stevens was critical of the court opinion's lack of substance: the court , in sum , never provides a satisfying account of what constitutes an unpatentable abstract idea .

indeed , the court does not even explain if it is using the machine - or - transformation criteria .

the court essentially asserts its conclusion that petitioners' application claims an abstract idea .

this mode of analysis ( or lack thereof ) may have led to the correct outcome in this case , but it also means that the court's musings on this issue stand for very little .

one observer argued that the bilski decision "does little to quiet a fierce debate on the value and harm of [business method] patents raging in both the business and academic worlds. .

a prominent patent law scholar lamented that " bilski is a remarkably inconclusive contribution to the law on patent eligible subject matter. .

he continued: the court's characterization of the claims as "abstract ideas" is palpably unsatisfying .

the claims were to a series of specified steps a human can take ( eg , "identifying market participants" and "initiating a series of transactions" ) .

the claimed subject matter may have been very obvious in view of the state of the art or possibly unduly vague , but to characterize it as an "abstract idea" stretches the meaning of "abstract" and "idea" beyond recognition .

others expressed relief at the ruling , noting that "there was a big possibility that the patent system was going to get gutted , that the court would go too far and put up too many hurdles to getting anything patented. .

former chief judge of the federal circuit paul r. michel ( the author of that court's en banc in re bilski decision ) observed that the supreme court did not "impose any radical change" in patent eligibility jurisprudence ; however , he expressed his concern that bilski , which emphasized the use of the judicially recognized "abstract idea" exception to patentability but provided no additional definition of "abstractness," "will make litigation more difficult and outcomes less predictable. .

the legal impact of bilski is that a process may be eligible for patenting under § 101 if the patent applicant can show that it is more than a law of nature , natural phenomena , or abstract idea ; by satisfying the "machine - or - transformation" test , the applicant can likely demonstrate patent eligibility .

however , because the bilski court had determined that the "machine - or - transformation" test is not the sole test for process patent eligibility , it is possible that a process could still be eligible for patenting if it fails to meet the "machine - or - transformation" test ( and is neither a law of nature , natural phenomena , nor an abstract idea ) .

nevertheless , it remains to be seen how many processes would fall into this category ; as justice breyer in his concurring opinion suggested , not many patentable processes lie beyond the reach of the "machine - or - transformation" test .

the opinion of the court did not directly address the degree to which patent protection is available for software , medical diagnostics , and e - commerce techniques ( although justice kennedy's plurality opinion suggests that such "inventions in the information age" may qualify for patent protection ) .

nevertheless , by finding that the patent act's definition of "method" does not categorically exclude business methods , the court did not outright invalidate the patents that have already been issued in the financial services , biotechnology , and internet fields ; furthermore , by rejecting the use of the "machine - or - transformation" test as the exclusive test , bilski requires courts and pto examiners to follow a more flexible approach in determining patent eligibility of processes .

in addition , a majority of the court specifically rejected the state street bank "useful , concrete , and tangible result" standard that had been the basis for finding patent eligibility of many business methods in the years prior to the federal circuit's in re bilski decision .

thus , patents that had been obtained on business methods under that standard may be more easily subject to challenge by defendants accused of infringing them .

in response to bilski , the u.s. patent and trademark office issued guidelines to its examiners for patent application examination under § 101: if a claimed method does not meet the machine - or - transformation test , the examiner should reject the claim under § 101 unless there is a clear indication that the method is not directed to an abstract idea .

if a claim is rejected under § 101 on the basis that it is drawn to an abstract idea , the applicant then has the opportunity to explain why the claimed method is not drawn to an abstract idea .

the bilski decision leaves unanswered several important questions ( in particular , the definition of "abstract idea" and "business method" ) , and the court's opinion arguably "negated over twenty - five years of the federal circuit's attempts at doctrine" regarding patent - eligibility of process claims .

therefore , going forward , the district courts , pto examiners , and the federal circuit will likely have to determine , on a case - by - case basis , what constitutes an "abstract idea" and whether particular business methods , diagnostic methods , or other inventions are too abstract to be patentable .

