since 1995 , congress has on three occasions approved legislation to regulate lobbyists' contacts with executive branch officials .

prior to 1995 , lobbying laws only required that lobbyists contacting members of congress register with the clerk of the house of representatives and the secretary of the senate .

under current lobbying laws , individuals are required to register with the clerk and the secretary when lobbying either legislative or executive branch officials .

federally registered lobbyists who wish to lobby executive branch departments and agencies regarding funds provided by the emergency economic stabilization act and the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 are subject to additional restrictions pursuant to a series of memoranda and guidelines issued between january and july 2009 .

this report outlines the development of registration requirements for lobbyists engaging executive branch officials since 1995 .

it also summarizes steps taken by the obama administration to limit and monitor lobbying of the executive branch ; discusses the development and implementation of restrictions placed on lobbying for recovery act and eesa funds ; examines the obama administration's decision to stop appointing lobbyists to federal advisory bodies and committees ; considers third - party criticism of current executive branch lobbying policies ; and evaluates options for possible modifications in current lobbying laws and practices .

in 1995 , the lobbying disclosure act ( lda ) repealed the lobbying act portion of the legislative reorganization act of 1946 and created a system of detailed registration and reporting requirements for lobbyists .

it included a provision requiring lobbyists to register with congress and the disclosure of lobbying contacts with certain "covered" executive branch employees .

the lda was amended in 1998 to make technical corrections , including altering the definition of executive branch officials covered by the act .

in 2007 , the honest leadership and open government act further amended lda definitions on covered officials .

since its inception , the obama administration has focused on ethics and the potential influence of lobbyists on executive branch personnel .

one of president barack obama's first actions was to issue ethics and lobbying guidelines for executive branch employees .

these guidelines laid the foundation for formal lobbying restrictions issued in july 2009 .

critiques of the obama administration's policy toward federally registered lobbyists have focused on recovery act restrictions and lobbyists serving as members of federal advisory committees .

in each instance , the american league of lobbyists has written to the white house critiquing the programs and suggesting policy modifications .

creation of restrictions on federally registered lobbyists' access to executive branch departments and agencies has already changed the relationship between lobbyists and covered executive branch officials .

if desired , there are additional options which might further clarify lobbyists' relationships with executive branch officials .

these options each have advantages and disadvantages for the future relationships between lobbyists and governmental decision - makers .

crs takes no position on any of the options identified in this report .

if current disclosure requirements are not determined to be sufficient to capture program level lobbying activity , or if current executive branch restrictions were made permanent , the lobbying disclosure act could be amended to institute provisions similar to current executive branch lobbying restrictions .

currently , lobbyists must file quarterly disclosure reports with information on their activities and covered officials contacted .

in addition , the lda , as amended by the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 , requires federally registered lobbyists to file semi - annual reports on certain campaign and presidential library contributions .

the disclosure requirements might be further amended to cover program specific disbursement information .

changes to the lda would require the introduction and passage of a bill by congress , as well as the president's signature .

the white house or the recovery accountability and transparency board could create a central database to collect all recovery act projects and contacts by federally registered lobbyists in a single , searchable location .

creating a central , searchable portal might allow for department and agencies to see which lobbyists , if any , are involved in a given project and allow individuals and groups to better understand which departments and agencies are responsible for projects of interest .

a similar website has been established for stimulus fund recipients to register and disclose how funds are being spent .

congress or the president might determine that the current lobbying registration and disclosure provisions , executive orders , and executive branch memoranda on recovery act lobbying restrictions are effective .

instead of amending the lda , issuing additional executive orders , or issuing additional memoranda , congress or the president could continue to utilize existing law to provide lobbyists access to covered governmental officials .

changes to the lda or executive branch policy could be made on an as - needed basis through changes to lda guidance documents issued by the clerk of the house and secretary of the senate , through executive order , or through the issuance of new memoranda by the president .

