as congress debates the justification for comprehensive health reform and considers various proposals , some states have taken the initiative by enacting reforms to address concerns about health insurance coverage and health care costs , among other issues .

massachusetts is one such state .

while massachusetts has a legislative history full of reforms to its health care system , its most ambitious effort to date was enactment and implementation of a comprehensive health reform law that sought to provide universal health insurance coverage and reduce health care costs at the same time .

this report provides background information on the main components of the state's reform law and the law's initial impact on coverage , costs , access to care , employers , and uncompensated care .

in 2006 , massachusetts enacted a comprehensive health reform law that included provisions to expand eligibility for medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , provide premium subsidies for certain individuals with income below 300% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) , require the purchase of insurance by adult residents who can afford it ( "individual mandate" ) , and require employers to make contributions towards health coverage ( "employer mandate" ) .

to comply with the individual mandate , individuals must enroll in insurance that meets "minimum creditable coverage" ( mcc ) standards .

firms with at least 11 full - time equivalent employees must ( 1 ) establish section 125 plans which allow workers to buy health insurance on a pre - tax basis , and ( 2 ) pay an assessment ( "fair share contribution" of up to $295 annually per employee ) if they do not make "fair and reasonable" contributions to employee health benefits ( "pay or play" provision ) .

employers may be subject to a "free rider surcharge" if they do not establish section 125 plans but are required to , or if any one of their employees receives free care three or more times in a year or if a firm has five or more instances of employees receiving free care in a year .

to make private health insurance plans more accessible , the state modified its insurance laws ( eg , merging the state's non - group and small group markets ) and created a quasi - public entity called the health insurance connector authority ( "connector" ) whose duties include facilitating the purchase of insurance primarily by individuals who are not offered subsidized insurance by a large employer and are not eligible for public coverage ( eg , medicaid ) .

the connector , governed by a board of directors , serves as an intermediary to assist individuals and small groups in acquiring health insurance through private insurance carriers .

in this role , the connector manages two programs: commonwealth care ( "commcare" ) , which offers public subsidies to individuals up to 300% fpl who are not otherwise eligible for traditional medicaid or other coverage ( eg , medicare , job - based coverage ) for the purchase of connector - approved plans ( plan types 1 , 2 , and 3 based on income ) offered by several health insurers ; and commonwealth choice ( "commchoice" ) , which offers an unsubsidized selection of four benefit tiers ( gold , silver , bronze , and young adult ) , from a handful of insurers , to individuals and small groups .

before reform , massachusetts administered the uncompensated care pool ( ucp ) .

ucp paid for medical services provided by community health centers ( chcs ) and acute care hospitals to eligible individuals with income up to 400% fpl .

under the reform law , ucp was renamed the health safety net ( hsn ) and redesigned to finance services obtained by individuals with income up to 400% fpl who are not eligible for comprehensive coverage under masshealth ( the state's combined medicaid program and state children's health insurance program ) , or commonwealth care .

to partially pay for the reforms the state relied on a federally approved waiver of statutory medicaid restrictions .

the state redirected some existing medicaid funding that was used to reimburse health care providers ( primarily hospitals ) for treating uninsured and other patients who generated uncompensated care costs .

it obtained additional federal medicaid and chip dollars , collected assessments from insurers and hospitals , used state general funds , and collected fair share contributions from employers .

statements on the success or failure of massachusetts health reform are far from final .

the impact of the state's ambitious health reform plan may not be fully quantified and analyzed until the plan has been implemented and in operation for some time .

however , the initial impact on coverage and costs simultaneously deserves attention and raises concerns .

the drop in uninsurance is impressive by any measure , but long - term sustainability is seen as an open question especially with respect to costs .

massachusetts's experience also raises other relevant health system issues .

in particular , what changes to the health delivery system may be necessary to fully support coverage expansions ? .

for example , about 20% of nonelderly adults in the state reported problems obtaining care because the physician's office or clinic either were not accepting new patients or did not accept their type of insurance .

this problem was much more common for lower - income adults and adults with public coverage , compared to adults with higher - income or private coverage .

consistent with these reported problems finding a health care provider or the previously mentioned difficulties regarding unmet need , there was "no change from pre - reform levels in emergency department ( ed ) use for nonemergency conditions .

however , some of the reasons behind these findings may pre - date health reform .

for instance , according to the massachusetts medical society , there were severe to critical shortages in primary care providers ( family medicine and internal medicine ) in 2006 .

nonetheless , these findings point to the limitations of comprehensive coverage reforms without equivalent changes to the health care delivery system .

