the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant provides grants to states , indian tribes , and territories for a wide range of benefits , services , and activities that address economic disadvantage .

tanf is best known for funding state cash assistance programs for low - income families with children .

however , in fy2013 , cash assistance represented only 28% of tanf funds .

tanf funds a wide range of activities that seek to both ameliorate the effects of and address the root causes of child poverty .

in addition to state block grants , tanf includes competitive grants to fund healthy marriage and responsible fatherhood initiatives .

this report provides a nontechnical introduction to the tanf block grant .

it briefly describes the history of cash assistance and how the "welfare reform" debates led to the creation of tanf ; tanf financing , amount of federal and state funds , how tanf funds may be used , and how tanf funds are being used ; the tanf cash welfare programs ; and other tanf benefits , services , and activities .

for a more technical discussion of federal financing and program rules in tanf , see crs report rl32748 , the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant: a primer on tanf financing and federal requirements , by [author name scrubbed] .

for current issues and data and statistics on activities funded by tanf , see crs report rl32760 , the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant: responses to frequently asked questions , by [author name scrubbed] .

the tanf block grant was created in the 1996 welfare reform law ( the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 , p.l .

104-193 ) , ending a decades - long debate to modify or replace the system of cash assistance for needy families with children .

it replaced the aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) cash assistance program and several related programs .

the modern form of cash assistance for needy families with children dates back to the progressive era of the early 1900s and state - or locally funded mothers' pensions for "fatherless" families .

the purpose of these programs was to permit these mothers to stay at home and care for their children .

the social security act of 1935 ( p.l .

74-271 ) provided federal funding for these types of programs by creating the aid to dependent children ( adc ) program .

in the early years , benefits were paid only on behalf of the children ( not the caretaker , usually the mother ) .

families receiving benefits were usually headed by a widow or had a disabled father .

however , over time , the nature of both the program and the families it aided changed .

social security survivors benefits were created in the social security amendments of 1939 , and those receiving adc increasingly were families where the father was alive but absent .

the caseload also increasingly became nonwhite .

amendments to the program made in 1950 authorized benefits for caretakers .

in 1956 , the goals of creating "self sufficiency" and strengthening family life were added to adc , along with funding for services that would seek to achieve these goals .

in 1962 , the program was renamed aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) .

policymakers became concerned that cash assistance was a contributing cause of economic disadvantage .

providing cash to a nonworking parent was seen as a work disincentive , during a time when an increasing number of women , and mothers , were going to work .

economic studies generally confirmed that providing cash assistance was a disincentive to work .

further , there was concern that restricting benefits to only single - parent families ( usually headed by the mother ) contributed to the trend of an increasing number of children living in single - parent families .

the social science research on the impact of assistance , as embodied in afdc , on family structure is inconclusive .

cash assistance benefits for families headed by two able - bodied parents became available in 1961 at state option .

it was not until the family support act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-485 ) that states were mandated to provide benefits for such families , and even then it was on more restrictive terms than those for single - parent families .

two - parent families never became a large portion of the cash assistance caseload .

the 1980s also saw increasing attention to the notion of "welfare dependency. .

research showed that many single mothers received cash assistance for only a short period of time , but others were likely to spend a long time on the rolls .

additional research conducted in the 1980s showed that mandatory welfare - to - work programs could move families off the rolls and into employment .

the family support act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-485 ) established in afdc the notion of mutual responsibility between the cash assistance recipient and the state .

it created the job opportunity and basic skills ( jobs ) training program , which provided employment services , education , and training for cash assistance recipients .

following the family support act , states also experimented with "waivers" of federal law , and began designing their own cash assistance programs and requirements for cash assistance recipients .

the 1996 welfare law abolished afdc , and consolidated the funding of afdc , a program that provided emergency assistance , and jobs into the tanf block grant .

tanf financing involves both federal and state monies .

most tanf funding is set at a fixed amount that does not change with state circumstances .

in addition to federal grants to states , there are also tanf competitive grants to community - based organizations for healthy marriage and responsible fatherhood initiatives .

to many , tanf is synonymous with cash assistance ( sometimes called "welfare" ) for needy families .

as discussed above , this is not true: tanf is far broader than cash assistance .

however , the policy concerns around cash assistance are what led to the creation of tanf .

this section provides a discussion of cash benefit amounts , the requirements on cash assistance recipients , and an overview of the number and type of families on the cash assistance caseload .

the fixed funding of tanf combined with the sharp decline in the cash welfare caseload made available to states new funds to address the broad purposes of tanf .

in fy2013 , more than half of federal tanf and state moe funds were used for activities that are generally not associated with a traditional cash assistance program .

tanf funds have been and continue to be used for a wide range of benefits , services , and activities that both address the effects of child poverty and attempt to deal with its root causes .

among other things , tanf funds are used to support work for low - income families through funding subsidized child care and refundable tax credits such as state earned income tax credits ( eitcs ) ; operate subsidized employment programs for low - income parents ( both on and off the cash assistance rolls ) and for youth ; fund post - secondary educational programs for low - income parents ; provide economic aid to families with children on an emergency and short - term basis ; fund programs that address child abuse and neglect ; and fund early child development programs , such as pre - kindergarten programs and head start programs .

these funds can be used to provide additional help to families who receive cash assistance , but also to provide benefits and services to the wider population of disadvantaged families with children in general .

tanf state plans and reports indicate that many tanf "services" are provided to families with incomes well above the cutoff for cash assistance — they still go to low - income families , but in many states the cash assistance cutoff is just a fraction of the poverty line , while services typically are provided to families with incomes of up to 200% of poverty , and in some instances even higher .

table 1 shows expenditures in tanf benefit and service categories other than categories typically associated with traditional cash assistance programs ( cash , administration , and work ) .

it shows the range of benefits and services funded at least partially from tanf .

in fy2013 , these categories represented close to 6 out of 10 federal tanf and state moe dollars .

there is limited information available on the populations served and specific activities funded by tanf outside of the traditional cash assistance programs .

tanf's statutory reporting requirements focus on obtaining information about the cash assistance population .

however , hhs has recently revised the financial reporting system for tanf to obtain more detail on tanf expenditures in the categories shown in table 1 .

this new detail will be available with the publication of expenditure data for fy2015 .

tanf is not a program , but rather a flexible funding stream that states can use to provide a wide range of benefits , services , and activities .

tanf is not simply another term to describe state cash assistance programs .

more than half of tanf money goes to activities outside what one would describe as being part of a traditional cash assistance program: for example , child care and refundable tax credits for low - income families with workers , early childhood education programs , and services related to child abuse and neglect .

even within the cash assistance caseload , less than half of all families represent families with an unemployed adult recipient , which have been the focus of the traditional policy interest of moving families from welfare to work .

thus , the issues related to tanf broadly span those that reflect the effects and address the root causes of disadvantage among families with children .

