legislative interest in the interaction between intellectual property and public health has been evidenced by considerable discussion of a number of bills in the 111 th congress .

some of this legislation would establish marketing exclusivities for biologic medicines alongside an expedited marketing approval pathway for follow - on products .

the 111 th congress has also sustained consideration of proposals that would introduce a broad range of reforms to the patent system and further discussed settlements of patent disputes that potentially delay the market entry of generic drugs .

another persistent issue at the intersection of patents and public health is the practice of "evergreening. .

also known as "stockpiling," "layering," "life - cycle management," or "line extension," evergreening generally consists of obtaining multiple patents that cover different aspects of the same product .

this approach is said to be most common in the pharmaceutical industry , where patents cover such aspects of drugs as their active ingredient , formulations , methods of medical treatment , method of manufacturing , and chemical intermediates .

critics of evergreening assert that the ability to obtain multiple patents on a product , over a period of many years , effectively extends the term of exclusivity that the patent holder obtains .

they further assert that this practice is abusive , impedes the introduction of generic medications , and has a negative effect upon public health in the united states .

other observers believe that the term "evergreening" is perjorative and misdescribes long - standing intellectual property policy that allows innovators to obtain patents on improvement inventions .

in their view , improvements upon previously patented inventions may be of great medical significance .

as well , all patents have been reviewed by the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) and are presumptively valid , whether some observers choose to characterize them as the result of "evergreening" practices or not .

in addition , competitors of the patent owner may be able to market inventions covered by expired patents without regard to subsequent patents .

as a result , improvement patents may not have a significant negative impact upon generic competition .

this report reviews the current debate regarding patent evergreening .

it begins by introducing the patent system and the role of patents in innovation .

it then introduces the concept of evergreening and identifies competing views concerning this practice .

this report closes with congressional issues and options .

the u.s. constitution confers upon congress the power "to promote the progress of ... useful arts , by securing for limited times to .. .

inventors the exclusive right to their ... discoveries. .

in accordance with the patent act of 1952 , an inventor may seek the grant of a patent by preparing and submitting an application to the uspto .

uspto officials known as examiners then determine whether the invention disclosed in the application merits the award of a patent .

uspto procedures require examiners to determine whether the invention fulfills certain substantive standards set by the patent statute .

an invention that constitutes a "process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter" may be patented .

it must also be novel , or different , from subject matter disclosed by an earlier patent , publication , or other state - of - the - art knowledge .

in addition , an invention is not patentable if "the subject matter as a whole would have been obvious at the time the invention was made to a person having ordinary skill in the art to which said subject matter pertains. .

this requirement of "nonobviousness" prevents the issuance of patents claiming subject matter that a skilled artisan would have been able to implement in view of the knowledge of the state of the art .

the invention must also be useful , a requirement that is satisfied if the invention is operable and provides a tangible benefit .

in addition to these substantive requirements , the uspto examiner will consider whether the submitted application fully discloses and distinctly claims the invention .

in particular , the application must enable persons skilled in the art to make and use the invention without undue experimentation .

in addition , the application must disclose the "best mode," or preferred way , that the applicant knows to practice the invention .

if the uspto allows the patent to issue , its owner obtains the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , offering to sell or importing into the united states the patented invention .

those who engage in those acts without the permission of the patentee during the term of the patent can be held liable for infringement .

adjudicated infringers may be enjoined from further infringing acts .

the patent statute also provides for an award of damages "adequate to compensate for the infringement , but in no event less than a reasonable royalty for the use made of the invention by the infringer. .

the maximum term of patent protection is ordinarily set at 20 years from the date the application is filed .

at the end of that period , others may employ that invention without regard to the expired patent .

patent rights do not enforce themselves .

patent owners who wish to compel others to respect their rights must commence enforcement proceedings , which most commonly consist of litigation in the federal courts .

although issued patents enjoy a presumption of validity , accused infringers may assert that a patent is invalid or unenforceable on a number of grounds .

the court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) possesses nationwide jurisdiction over most patent appeals from the district courts .

the supreme court enjoys discretionary authority to review cases decided by the federal circuit .

if congress decides that patent evergreening does not present a significant issue , then no action need be taken .

should congress choose to address the issue of evergreening , however , a number of options exist .

first , some observers believe that the broad ability to file continuation applications encourages evergreening practices .

the uspto recently promulgated controversial rules that would have limited the availability of continuation applications .

a ruling of the court of appeals held that those rules were invalid because they exceeded the uspto's authority to regulate , however .

although litigation concerning the uspto continuation rules remains ongoing at the time this report issued , congress may wish to consider whether current statutory provisions concerning continuation practice are appropriate .

second , no provision of the u.s. patent act is specifically directed towards evergreening issues .

in this respect , legislative developments in other nations might also be of interest .

recent amendments to the patent law of india were introduced arguably in order to address concerns over evergreening .

section 3 ( d ) of that statute provides: the following are not inventions within the meaning of this act: [t]he mere discovery of a new form of a known substance which does not result in the enhancement of the known efficacy of that substance or the mere discovery of any new property or new use for a known substance or of the mere use of a known process , machine or apparatus unless such known process results in a new product or employs at least one new reactant .

explanation — for the purposes of this clause , salts , esters , ethers , polymorphs , metabolites , pure form , particle size , isomers , mixtures of isomers , complexes , combinations and other derivatives of known substance shall be considered to be same substance , unless they differ significantly in properties with regard to efficacy .

as explained by janice m. mueller , a member of the law faculty of the university of pittsburgh , "[t]his express and detailed statutory presumption against patentability of derivatives , unique among the world's patent regimes , reflects a strong resentment towards ever - greening of pharmaceutical patents. .

however , some commentators have expressed concern that the indian patent statute may violate obligations established by the world trade organization ( wto ) — in particular , its requirement that "patents shall be available and patent rights enjoyable without discrimination as ... the field of technology. .

more generalized reform of the patent system presents a third possibility for dealing with concerns over evergreening .

persistent concerns have been voiced that certain patents upon improvement technologies are of poor quality and doubtful validity .

effective rules that would allow the uspto to issue high - quality patents , as well as procedural and substantive rules that would efficiently resolve disputes with respect to granted patents , may allay some of these concerns .

current bills before the 111 th congress would potentially introduce a broad range of reforms in an effort to improve the patent system , and would perhaps respond to criticisms of evergreening practices .

janice mueller , a member of the faculty of the university of pittsburgh school of law , and donald chisum , a retired member of the santa clara university law school faculty , assert that "[d]rawing the line between improper attempts at evergreening and legitimate incremental innovation is a broad and difficult problem in patent law. .

the difficulty of this discussion is suggested by the fact that numerous knowledgeable observers have reached strongly contrasting views concerning the propriety of improvement patenting , the extent of any possible negative social impact of this practice , and even the term "evergreening" itself .

further consideration of possible evergreening practices may nonetheless assist in the identification of policy concerns , aiding in the current legislative debate of reforms to the patent system .

