the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 , ppaca ) was signed into law on march 23 , 2010 .

on march 30 , 2010 , ppaca was amended by p.l .

111-152 , the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 .

this report summarizes the key provisions in ppaca ( hereafter referring to ppaca as amended by p.l .

111-152 ) that affect private health insurance .

with respect to the private health insurance market , mostly by full implementation in 2014 , ppaca focuses on restructuring the market ( particularly the small - group and nongroup markets ) , setting minimum standards for health coverage , and providing financial assistance to certain individuals and , in some cases , small employers .

overall , the law includes the following provisions: beginning in 2014 , individuals will be required to maintain health insurance , and certain employers with more than 50 full - time equivalent employees ( ftes ) will be required to pay a penalty , with some exceptions .

several market reforms will be made , such as prohibition against lifetime benefit limits and coverage for preexisting health conditions .

by 2014 , either a state will establish separate exchanges to offer individual and small - group coverage , or the secretary of health and human services ( hereafter referred to as the "secretary" or "hhs secretary" unless noted otherwise ) will contract with a nongovernment entity to establish and operate exchanges in states that do not establish them .

exchanges will not be insurers but will provide eligible individuals and small businesses with access to private plans in a comparable way .

the exchange will consist of a selection of private plans as well as "multi - state qualified health plans," administered by the office of personnel management ( opm ) .

beginning in 2014 , certain individuals with incomes below 400% of the federal poverty level may qualify for credits toward their premium costs and for subsidies towards their cost - sharing .

this financial assistance will be available only through exchanges .

states will be provided the flexibility to establish basic plans for low - income individuals not eligible for medicaid .

existing plans offered by employers as well as plans offered in the nongroup market will be grandfathered .

new plans may also be sold in both the individual and group market outside of an exchange .

individual and small group coverage will be allowed to be offered through nonprofit , member - run health insurance companies .

this report summarizes key provisions affecting private health insurance in ppaca .

most of the provisions will be effective beginning in 2014 .

provisions effective prior to 2014 are described in the next section and are listed in appendix a on immediate reforms .

the private health insurance provisions in this report are presented under the following topics: individual mandate and employer requirements: the mandate for individuals to maintain health insurance and any requirements for employers .

private health insurance market reforms .

exchange , through which the following two items can only be offered: multi - state qualified health plans .

premium subsidies .

immediate individual and group market reforms and consumer operated and oriented plan — health care cooperatives .

ppaca requires implementation of a number of reforms in both the individual and group markets prior to the full implementation date for many other insurance reforms ( january 1 , 2014 ) .

these reforms include the following , in the order in which they would become effective ( see appendix a for additional details and appendix b for a chronology of implementation deadlines ) : authorizing the secretary to award grants to states to provide information and assistance to health insurance consumers ; establishing a process for the annual review of unreasonable premium increases ; providing coverage assistance for those who are uninsured because of a preexisting condition ; creating a temporary re - insurance program to support coverage for early retirees ; establishing an internet portal to assist consumers in identifying coverage options ; prohibiting lifetime limits and restricted annual limits on essential benefits ; prohibiting rescissions of health insurance policies ; requiring coverage of preventive services and immunizations ; extending dependent coverage up to age 26 ; prohibiting discrimination based on salary with respect to eligibility for benefits ; capping insurance company non - medical , administrative expenditures ; ensuring that consumers have access to an effective appeals process ; providing coverage for preexisting health conditions for enrollees under age 19 ; ensuring patient protections regarding the choice of a primary care provider , access to emergency services and obstetrical and gynecological care , and access to medical reimbursement data ; requiring the secretary to develop uniform summary of benefits documents so consumers can make easier comparisons when shopping for health insurance ; facilitating administrative simplification to lower health system costs ; and tasking the secretary with developing requirements for quality of care .

in addition to the immediate reforms in ppaca , there are other private insurance reforms that were not identified as immediate but nonetheless become effective prior to 2014 ; those reforms include the following , in the order in which they would become effective ( see appendix a for additional details concerning implementation deadlines ) : grandfathering of existing group and individual health plans ; availability of small business tax credits ; awarding of grants to employers to establish workplace wellness programs ; availability of medical malpractice demonstration grants ; determination made by the secretary whether states have met requirements to establish their own exchange ; and awarding of loans and grants to applicants to the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) program .

ppaca will establish new health insurance plans and define existing health insurance terms .

new health plans include the following: a "qualified health plan" ( qhp ) will be a health plan that is certified as meeting a specified list of requirements related to marketing , choice of providers , plan networks , and other features , or is recognized by each exchange through which such plan is offered ; and provides the essential health benefits package ( defined below ; see " essential health benefits package " ) .

a qhp issuer must be licensed and in good standing with each state in which it offers coverage ; must offer at least one qhp each providing silver and gold levels of coverage ( levels described below ; see " levels of coverage " ) ; must charge the same premium for a plan regardless if it is offered in or out of the exchange ( including through an insurance agent ) ; and must comply with regulations applicable to exchanges .

qhps will include qualified health plans offered through the co - op program ( described below ; see " consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) " ) .

a "standard health plan" will be a plan established and maintained by the state under which eligible individuals are residents of the state who are not eligible to enroll in medicaid ; whose household income exceeds 133% but does not exceed 200% of the poverty line for the size of the family involved ; who are not eligible for minimum essential coverage ( as defined in section 5000a ( f ) of 23 the internal revenue code of 1986 ) ; or are eligible for an employer - sponsored plan ; and have not attained the age of 65 as of the beginning of the plan year .

such a plan will provide coverage equal to at least the essential health benefits ( described below ) , and have a medical loss ratio of at least 85% .

ppaca defines several terms applicable to private health insurance including the following: "health plan" refers to health insurance coverage offered to individuals and groups , not including self - insured plans and multiple employer welfare arrangements ( mewas ) not subject to state law .

"group health plan" refers to a plan that provides medical care to employees or their dependents , including self - insured plans .

mewas could be considered group health plans for the purpose of private health insurance requirements under ppaca .

"grandfathered plan" refers to a health plan or health insurance coverage in which an individual is enrolled in on the date of enactment ( march 23 , 2010 ) .

grandfathered plans ( 1 ) include plans that are renewed after this date ; ( 2 ) allow for enrollment of family members , if such enrollment is permitted under the terms of the plan in effect on the date of enactment ; and ( 3 ) allow for enrollment of new employees ( and their families ) .

"minimum essential coverage" ( i.e. , coverage required to fulfill the individual mandate ) is defined as coverage under medicare part a , medicaid , the children's health insurance program ( chip ) , tricare , the tricare for life program , the veteran's health care program , the peace corps program , a government plan ( local , state , federal ) including the federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) and any plan established by an indian tribal government , any plan offered in the individual , small group or large group market , a grandfathered health plan , and any other health benefits coverage , such as a state health benefits risk pool , as recognized by the hhs secretary in coordination with the treasury secretary .

"essential health benefits package" refers to health insurance coverage that will provide "essential health benefits," will not exceed out - of - pocket and deductible limits specified in the law , and will not impose a deductible on preventive services .

"essential health benefits" refers to categories of benefits specified in the law ( described below ) which will be provided in an "essential health benefits package. .

besides the immediate reforms previously mentioned , ppaca also will establish new federal standards applicable to private health insurance coverage primarily after full implementation in 2014 .

these standards will affect private health insurance in the individual , small group , and large group markets , depending on the standard .

these standards will impose new requirements on states related to the allocation of insurance risk , modify the current state - based regulatory system applicable to private plans , and require coverage for specified categories of benefits .

before 2016 , states will have the option to define "small employers" either as those with ( 1 ) 100 or fewer employees , or ( 2 ) 50 or fewer employees .

beginning in 2016 , small employers will be defined as those with 100 or fewer employees .

a "large employer" will be an employer that had an average of at least 101 employees the preceding calendar year and at least one employee on the first day of the plan year .

states will be required to uniformly apply any standard or requirement it adopts under the private health insurance provisions of ppaca .

ppaca will establish "qualified health plans" ( qhps ) , a type of new health plan subject to a specified list of requirements related to marketing , choice of providers , plan networks , essential benefits , and other features .

a qhp issuer will be licensed and in good standing with each state in which it will offer coverage ; will offer at least one qhp each providing silver and gold levels of coverage ( described below ) ; will charge the same premium for a plan regardless if it was offered in or out of the exchange ( including through an insurance agent ) ; and will comply with regulations applicable to exchanges .

existing plans may continue to offer coverage as grandfathered plans in the individual and group markets .

enrollment in such plans will be limited to those who were currently enrolled , their families , or new employees and their families in the case of grandfathered employer - sponsored coverage .

enrollees could continue and renew enrollment in a grandfathered plan indefinitely .

grandfathered plans will still be subject to a number of insurance reforms .

existing group plans subject to one or more collective bargaining agreements will be grandfathered until the date on which the agreement terminates , at which time the immediate reforms and private market reforms will apply .

in addressing the coverage of abortion services by qualified health plans offered through an exchange , ppaca refers to the so - called "hyde amendment" to distinguish between two types of abortions: abortions for which federal funds appropriated for hhs may be used , and abortions for which such funds may not be used .

under the hyde amendment , funds appropriated for hhs may be used to pay for an abortion if a pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or incest , or if a woman's life would be endangered if an abortion were not performed .

such funds may not be used , however , for elective abortions .

under ppaca , individuals who receive premium credits or cost - sharing reductions ( available beginning in 2014 ) will be permitted to purchase an exchange plan that includes coverage for elective abortions .

however , to ensure that funds attributable to a premium subsidy are not used to pay for elective abortion services , ppaca prescribes payment and accounting requirements for plan enrollees and issuers , as described in greater detail below .

additionally , after the enactment of ppaca , on march 24 , 2010 , president obama issued an executive order that reaffirmed the abortion funding restrictions included in ppaca .

the order was reportedly the result of negotiations with some house members who expressed concerns over the abortion provisions of ppaca .

under ppaca , the issuer of a qualified health plan will determine whether to provide coverage for either elective abortions or abortions for which federal funds appropriated for hhs are permitted .

a plan issuer would also appear able to not cover either type of abortion .

in addition , ppaca will permit a state to prohibit abortion coverage in exchange plans by enacting a law to with such a prohibition .

the issuer of a qualified health plan that provides coverage for elective abortions will be required to collect two separate payments from each enrollee in the plan: one payment that reflects an amount equal to the portion of the premium for coverage of health services other than elective abortions ; and another payment that reflects an amount equal to the actuarial value of the coverage for elective abortions .

the plan issuer must deposit the separate payments into separate allocation accounts that consist solely of each type of payment and that are used exclusively to pay for the specified services .

state health insurance commissioners must ensure compliance with the segregation requirements in accordance with applicable provisions of generally accepted accounting requirements , office of management and budget circulars on funds management , and government accountability office guidance on accounting .

to determine the actuarial value of the coverage for elective abortions , the plan issuer will estimate the basic per enrollee , per month cost , determined on an average actuarial basis , for including such coverage .

the estimate may take into account the impact on overall costs of including coverage for elective abortions , but may not take into account any cost reduction estimated to result from such services , such as prenatal care , delivery , or postnatal care .

the per month cost will have to be estimated as if coverage were included for the entire population covered , but may not be less than $1 per enrollee , per month .

under ppaca , a qualified health plan that provides coverage for elective abortions will also be required to provide notice of such coverage to enrollees as part of a summary of benefits and coverage explanation at the time of enrollment .

the notice , any plan advertising used by the issuer , any information provided by the exchange , and any other information specified by the secretary will provide information only with respect to the total amount of the combined payments for elective abortion services and other services covered by the plan .

ppaca also provides for conscience protection and the preservation of certain state and federal abortion - related laws .

the measure prohibits exchange plans from discriminating against any individual health care provider or health care facility because of its unwillingness to provide , pay for , provide coverage of , or refer for abortions .

state laws concerning the prohibition or requirement of coverage or funding for abortions , and state laws involving abortion - related procedural requirements will not be preempted .

federal conscience protection and abortion - related antidiscrimination laws , as well as title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , are not affected by ppaca .

ppaca prohibits the federal government , and any state or local government or health care provider that receives federal financial assistance under ppaca or any health plan created under ppaca , from subjecting an individual or institutional health care entity to discrimination on the basis that the entity does not provide any health care item or service furnished for the purpose of causing , or assisting in causing , the death of any individual , such as by assisted suicide , euthanasia , or mercy killing .

nothing in the above can be construed to apply or to affect any limitation relating to ( 1 ) the withholding or withdrawing of medical treatment or medical care , ( 2 ) the withholding or withdrawing of nutrition or hydration , ( 3 ) abortion , or ( 4 ) the use of an item , good , benefit , or service furnished for the purpose of alleviating pain or discomfort , even if such use may increase the risk of death , so long as it is not also furnished for the purpose of causing , or assisting in causing , death .

the hhs office for civil rights is designated to receive complaints of discrimination based on this issue .

ppaca expresses the sense of the senate that ( 1 ) health care reform presents an opportunity to address issues related to medical malpractice and medical liability insurance ; ( 2 ) states are encouraged to develop and test litigation alternatives while preserving an individual's right to seek redress in court ; and ( 3 ) congress should consider establishing a state demonstration program to evaluate alternatives to the existing civil litigation system with respect to medical malpractice claims .

ppaca appropriates $50 million for a five - year period , beginning in fy2011 , for the hhs secretary to award demonstration grants to states for the development , implementation , and evaluation of alternatives to current tort litigation .

these grants will exist for no more than five years .

under the provision , a state desiring a grant is required to develop an alternative that ( 1 ) allows for the resolution of disputes caused by health care providers or organizations , and ( 2 ) promotes a reduction of health care errors by encouraging the collection and analysis of patient safety data .

each state will have to identify the sources from and methods by which compensation will be paid , and demonstrate that its proposed alternative to tort litigation meets certain goals and criteria .

the secretary will provide to the states that are applying for the grants technical assistance , including guidance on common definitions , non - economic damages , avoidable injuries , and disclosure to patients of health care errors and adverse events .

the secretary will consult with a review panel composed of relevant experts appointed by the comptroller general when reviewing states' applications .

furthermore , each state that receives a grant is required to submit a report to the secretary covering the impact of the activities funded on patient safety and on the availability and price of medical liability insurance .

similarly , the secretary must submit a report to congress that examines any differences that may result in the area of quality of care , number and nature of medical errors , medical resources used , length of time for dispute resolution , and the availability and price of liability insurance .

additionally , the secretary , in consultation with the review panel , must conduct an overall evaluation of the effectiveness of grants awarded and to submit the findings of the evaluation to congress .

the medicare payment advisory commission ( medpac ) and the medicaid and chip payment and access commission ( macpac ) must each conduct an independent review on the impact of state alternatives implemented on their programs and beneficiaries .

the law will not limit any prior , current , or future efforts of any state to establish any alternative to tort litigation .

ppaca contains certain provisions intended to combat fraud and abuse relating to multiple employer welfare arrangements ( mewas ) .

for example , ppaca prohibits persons ( in connection with mewas ) from knowingly making false statements or representations in connection with the marketing or sale of the plan that concerns , among other things , the financial solvency and the benefits provided by the mewa .

pursuant to regulations to be promulgated by the secretary of labor , mewas will be required to register with the secretary before operating in a state .

in addition , the labor secretary is authorized to adopt regulatory standards or to issue orders that a person engaged in the business of providing insurance through a mewa is subject to the laws of the state in which such person operates .

ppaca also allows the labor secretary to issue cease and desist orders against certain mewas if it appears to the secretary that the alleged conduct of the mewa is fraudulent , creates an immediate danger to the public safety or welfare , or is causing or can be reasonably expected to cause significant , imminent , and irreparable public injury .

while the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) prohibits group health plans and group health insurance issuers from imposing higher premiums or contributions among "similarly situated" participants based on certain health - related factors , it does allow the provision of premium discounts , rebates , or reduced cost - sharing for enrollee participation in wellness programs .

among other provisions related to wellness programs , ppaca codifies an amended version of the hipaa wellness program regulations .

consistent with current regulation , the law indicates that wellness programs that do not require an individual to satisfy a standard related to a health factor as a condition for obtaining a reward ( or do not offer a reward ) would not violate hipaa , so long as participation in the programs is made available to all similarly situated individuals .

however , if any of the conditions for obtaining a reward under a wellness program are based on an individual meeting a certain standard relating to a health factor , the program must meet additional requirements .

among these requirements , the reward must be capped at 30% of the cost of the employee - only coverage under the plan , but the secretaries of hhs , labor , and the treasury would have the discretion to increase the reward up to 50% of the cost of coverage if the increase is determined to be appropriate .

further , this type of wellness program must be reasonably designed to promote health or prevent disease .

a program complies with this requirement if it has a reasonable chance of improving the health of , or preventing disease in , participating individuals and it is not overly burdensome ; is not a subterfuge for discriminating based on a health status factor ; and is not highly suspect in the method chosen to promote health or prevent disease .

ppaca also requires the secretary of hhs , in consultation with the secretaries of the treasury and labor , to establish a 10-state pilot program no later than july 1 , 2014 , in which participating states must apply the wellness program provisions to health insurers in the individual market .

ppaca requires that not later than one year after enactment , and annually thereafter , the secretary of labor prepare an annual report , using data collected from the form 5500 on self - insured group health plans , including plan type , number of participants , benefits offered , funding arrangements , benefit arrangements , assets , liabilities , contributions , investments , and expenses .

the law also requires that the secretary of hhs , not later than one year after enactment , conduct a study of the fully insured and self - insured group health plan markets , to compare the characteristics of employers , health plan benefits , financial solvency , capital reserve levels , and the risks of becoming insolvent — and to determine the extent to which new insurance market reforms are likely to cause adverse selection in the large group market or to encourage small and midsize employers to become self - insured .

appendix a .

immediate individual and group market reforms under title i this appendix provides more details on the immediate private health insurance reform provisions in title i , subtitles a and b of ppaca .

the ppaca term "immediate" refers to the legal effective date of the provision .

the actual implementation date , however , may not be immediate due to the number of steps required to make the provision operational .

for example , the administrative simplification provision is effective on enactment , but this sets in motion a series of implementation steps culminating in health plans certifying their use of the newly developed standards by december 31 , 2015 .

appendix b provides detail on the required implementation steps for all of the title i private health insurance reforms .

high - risk pools for individuals with a preexisting condition not later than 90 days after enactment , the secretary must establish a temporary high - risk pool program to provide health insurance coverage for eligible individuals during the period beginning on the date the program is established and ending on january 1 , 2014 .

the high - risk pool is required to not impose any preexisting condition exclusions , and the out - of - pocket limit will not be greater than the maximum amount for hsa - qualified hdhps , except that the secretary is permitted to modify the limit if necessary to ensure the pool meets the actuarial limit for the program .

the premium rate charged for the high - risk pool coverage may vary on the basis of age by a factor of not greater than 4 to 1 and be established at a standard rate for a standard population .

the secretary is granted the authority to issue additional requirements determined to be appropriate for the calculation of premium rates .

an individual will be eligible if he / she is a citizen or national of the united states or is lawfully present in the united states ; has not been covered under creditable coverage during the six - month period prior to the date on which such individual is applying for coverage through the high - risk pool ; and has a preexisting condition , as determined in a manner consistent with guidance to be issued by the secretary .

bringing down the cost of health care coverage effective for plan years beginning on or after six months after enactment , issuers in the group and individual markets ( including grandfathered health plans ) are required to submit to the secretary a report concerning the ratio of incurred loss ( or incurred claims ) plus the loss adjustment expense ( or change in contract reserves ) to earned premiums .

the report must also include the percentage of total premium revenue , after accounting for risk adjustment , risk corridors , and payments for reinsurance , that the coverage expends on reimbursement for clinical services ; for activities that improve health care quality ; and on all other non - claims costs including an explanation of the nature of such costs and excluding federal and state taxes , licensing , or regulatory fees .

beginning not later than january 1 , 2011 , a health insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage ( including grandfathered health plans ) will provide an annual rebate to each enrollee on a pro rata basis if the ratio of the amount of premium revenue expended by the issuer on clinical claims and health quality costs , after accounting for taxes , regulatory fees , risk adjustment , risk corridors , and reinsurance , is less than 85% in the large group market and 80% for the small group and individual markets .

states are permitted to increase the percentages , but the secretary may adjust the state percentage for the individual market if it is determined that the application of 80% would destabilize the market .

the rebate amount will be equal to the product of the amount by which the percentage exceeds the ratio ( both described above ) and the total amount of premium revenue ( excluding federal and state taxes and licensing or regulatory fees ) and after accounting for risk adjustment , risk corridors and reinsurance .

no lifetime or annual limits for plan years beginning on or after six months after enactment , group health plans , grandfathered plans , and health insurance issuers offering group or individual plans are prohibited from establishing lifetime limits on the dollar value of essential health benefits for any participant or beneficiary , or annual limits except those defined as "restricted" as determined by the secretary .

the secretary will ensure that there is access to needed services available with minimal impact on premiums .

the provision for restricted annual limits sunsets with the plan year beginning january 1 , 2014 .

in other words , from january 1 , 2014 , going forward annual limits will be prohibited in manner similar to lifetime limits .

health plans and health insurance issuers will be permitted to place annual or lifetime limits on specific covered benefits that are not essential health benefits , to the extent that such limits are otherwise permitted by federal and state law .

prohibition on rescissions the practice of "rescission" refers to canceling medical coverage after a policyholder has become sick or injured .

effective for plan years beginning on or after six months after enactment , the law generally prohibits rescissions for a group health plan , a grandfathered plan , and a health insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage .

rescissions will still be permitted in cases where the covered individual committed fraud or made an intentional misrepresentation of material fact as prohibited by the terms of the plan or coverage .

a cancellation of coverage in this case requires prior notice to the enrollee .

sunshine on health insurance premium rates the secretary must , in conjunction with the states , establish a process for the annual review of unreasonable increases in premiums for health insurance coverage beginning in the 2010 plan year .

health insurance issuers will be required to submit to the secretary , and the relevant state , a justification for an unreasonable premium increase prior to implementation of the premium .

the secretary must carry out a program of grants to states during the five - year period beginning with fy2010 for carrying out the premium review .

there is appropriated to the secretary $250 million available for these grants .

as a condition of these grants , states are required to provide the secretary with information about trends in premium increases and make recommendations about if a particular issuer should be excluded from participation in the exchange due to a pattern or practice of excessive or unjustified premium increases .

coverage of preventive health services effective for plan years beginning on or after six months after enactment , group health plans and health insurance issuers in the group and individual markets are required to provide coverage for preventive health services .

these preventive services include the following: evidence - based items or services that have in effect a rating of "a" or "b" from the united states preventive services task force ( uspstf ) ; immunizations that have in effect a recommendation from the advisory committee on immunization practices of the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) ; with respect to infants , children , and adolescents , evidence - informed preventive care and screenings provided for in the comprehensive guidelines supported by the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) ; and with respect to women , such additional preventive care and screenings not described by the uspstf as provided in comprehensive guidelines supported by hrsa .

a plan or issuer is permitted to cover or deny additional services not recommended by the uspstf .

for the purposes of this provision the current recommendations of the uspstf regarding breast cancer screening , mammography , and prevention is considered the most current other than those issued in or around november 2009 .

the law permits the secretary to develop guidelines for group health plans and health insurance issuers in the group and individual markets to utilize value - based insurance designs .

value - based insurance designs , as defined in prior testimony before the senate committee on budget , refers to coverage that encourages the use of services that have clinical benefits exceeding the costs , while discouraging the use of services when the expected clinical benefits do not justify the costs .

extension of dependent coverage effective for plan years beginning on or after six months after enactment , a group health plan , a grandfathered plan , and a health insurance issuer offering coverage in the group or individual markets that provided dependent coverage must extend that coverage to adult children until the individual is 26 years of age .

this will not apply to a child of the child receiving dependent coverage .

for group plans that are grandfathered , the coverage is limited to those adult children that do not have an offer of coverage from an employer .

development and utilization of uniform explanation of coverage documents no later than 12 months after enactment , the secretary will develop standards for group health plans , grandfathered plans , and health insurance offers in the group and individual markets with respect to providing their enrollees with a summary of benefits ( sb ) and coverage .

the secretary will periodically review and update the standards developed .

the secretary will consult with the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) , and representatives of health - insurance related consumer advocacy organizations , health insurance issuers , health care professionals , patient advocates including those representing individuals with limited english proficiency , and other qualified individuals as deemed appropriate .

these federal standards preempt any standards developed under state law .

table a - 1 summarizes the standards for the sb .

not later than 24 months after the date of enactment , each plan will provide a sb to an applicant at the time of application , to an enrollee prior to the time of enrollment or re - enrollment , and to a policyholder or certificate holder at the time of issuance of the policy or delivery of the certificate .

the sb can be in paper or electronic form .

enrollees will have to be given notice of any materials changes in benefits no later than 60 days prior to the date that the modifications would become effective .

any entity that willfully fails to provide the information required is subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each such failure , as defined to be each enrollee that did not receive the required information .

prohibition of discrimination based on salary effective for plan years beginning on or after six months after enactment , the sponsor of a group health plan ( other than a self - insured plan ) is prohibited from establishing rules relating to health insurance eligibility of any full - time employee that are based on the total hourly or annual salary of the employee .

in no way will eligibility rules be permitted to discriminate in favor of higher wage employees .

ensuring the quality of care beginning upon enactment and concluding not later that two years after enactment , the secretary must develop reporting requirements for use by group health plans or health insurance issuers in the group and individual markets including regulations governing acceptable provider reimbursement structures .

the secretary must develop these requirements in consultation with experts in health care quality and other stakeholders .

once implemented , plans and health insurance issuers will annually submit to the secretary and to enrollees a report on the use of the reimbursement structures and quality programs that do the following: improve health outcomes through use of quality reporting , case management , care coordination and chronic disease management ; implement activities to prevent hospitalization readmissions ; implement activities to improve patient safety and reduce medical errors through the use of best clinical practices , evidence based medicine , and health information technology ; and implement wellness and health promotion activities .

with respect to gun rights , a wellness or promotion activity cannot require disclosure or collection of any information relating to ( 1 ) the presence or storage of a lawfully possessed firearm or ammunition in the residence or on the property of an individual , or ( 2 ) the lawful use , possession , or storage of a firearm or ammunition by an individual .

a health plan issued in accordance with the law is prohibited from increasing premium rates , denying health insurance coverage , and reducing or withholding a discount , rebate , or reward offered for participation in a wellness program on the basis of or on reliance on the lawful ownership , possession , use or storage of a firearm or ammunition .

appeals process effective for plan years beginning on or after six months after enactment , the law requires that a group health plan and a health insurance issuer in the group or individual markets implement an effective appeals process for coverage determinations and claims .

the process at a minimum must have in effect an internal claims appeals process ; provide notice to enrollees of available internal and external appeals processes , and the availability of any applicable assistance ; and allow an enrollee to review their file , present evidence and testimony and to receive continued coverage pending the outcome .

to comply with the requirements , group plans are expected to initially incorporate the claims and appeals procedures set forth at 29 cfr §2560.530-1 and will update their processes in accordance with any standards established by the secretary of labor .

to comply with the requirements , health insurance issuers offering individual health coverage will provide internal claims and appeals procedures set forth under applicable law and updated by the secretary of hhs .

a group health plan and health insurance issuer offering group or individual coverage must comply with the applicable state external review process that at a minimum includes the consumer protections set forth in the uniform external review model act promulgated by the naic .

the plan or issuer is required to implement an effective external review process that meets the minimum standards established by the secretary if the applicable state has not established standards that meet the naic model requirements , or if the plan is self - insured and therefore is not subject to state insurance regulation .

health insurance consumer information effective on enactment , the secretary will award grants to states to enable them , or the exchanges operating in the states , to establish , expand , or provide support for an office of health insurance consumer assistance or health insurance ombudsman .

there is $30 million appropriated for the first fiscal year of the program and authorization for such sums as necessary in subsequent fiscal years .

to be eligible to receive a grant , a state will designate an independent office of health insurance consumer assistance or health insurance ombudsman , that will directly or in coordination with state health insurance regulators and consumer assistance organizations , receive , and respond to inquires and complaints concern health insurance coverage .

the secretary will establish criteria for the grant , and the office of health insurance consumer assistance or health insurance ombudsman will assist with the filing of complaints and appeals ; collect , track , and quantify problems and inquires ; assist consumers with enrollment in a group health plan or health insurance coverage ; and resolve problems with obtaining premium tax credits .

reinsurance for early retirees the secretary is required to create , within 90 days after enactment , a temporary reinsurance program to assist participating employment - based plans with the cost of providing health benefits to eligible retirees who are 55 and older , and are not eligible for medicare ( and their dependents ) .

the law defines eligible employment - based plans as those plans provided to retirees and maintained by one or more employers ( including any state or political subdivision ) , former employers or employee organizations or associations , or a voluntary employees' beneficiary association or a multiemployer plan .

health benefits are defined as medical , surgical , hospital , prescription drug , and other benefits as determined by the secretary .

a retiree is defined as an individual who is 55 years of age or older , is not eligible for medicare , and is not an active employee .

participating plans will submit claims for reimbursement to the secretary that contain documentation of the actual costs of the items and services .

in determining the amount of the claim the plan will take into account any negotiated price concessions obtained by the plan and any costs paid by the retiree or beneficiary in deductibles , copayments , and coinsurance will be included along with the amounts paid by the plan .

the secretary will determine if a claim is valid and in such cases will pay 80% of the portion of costs that exceeds $15,000 , but is less than $90,000 .

these amounts will be adjusted annually by the medical care component of the consumer price index ( cpi ) for all urban consumers rounded to the nearest multiple of $1,000 .

amounts paid to plans will be required to be used to reduce premium costs , deductibles , copayments , coinsurance , or other out - of - pocket costs for plan participants and beneficiaries .

immediate information to identify affordable coverage the law requires the secretary , in consultation with the states , to establish an internet portal for beneficiaries to easily access affordable and comprehensive coverage options not later than july 1 , 2010 .

the law also requires that , not later than 60 days after enactment , the secretary must develop a standardized format to be used for the presentation of information used on the internet portal .

the information on the portal will include eligibility , availability , premium rates , cost sharing , and the percentage of total premium revenues spent on health care compared to administrative costs .

standards for electronic billing and other administrative transactions the law establishes a timeline , extending through mid - 2014 , for the development and adoption of a single set of operating rules for each of the administrative and financial electronic transactions for which there is an existing hipaa standard .

those transactions , between health care providers and health plans , include patient eligibility inquiry / response , reimbursement claims , and payment and remittance advice .

the standards and associated operating rules will permit the determination of a patient's eligibility and financial responsibility ( i.e. , cost - sharing requirements ) for specific services prior to or at the point of care , among other capabilities .

the law also mandates the adoption of an electronic funds transfer ( eft ) standard for the payment of health claims .

by december 31 , 2015 , health plans will have to certify that their health information technology systems comply with the most current standards and operating rules .

health plans that fail to meet the certification requirements will be fined .

patient protections effective for plan years beginning on or after six months after enactment , if a group health plan or health insurance issuer in the group or individual markets requires or provides for designation by a participant , beneficiary or enrollee of a participating primary care provider , then the plan or issuer is required to permit the designation of any participating primary care provider who is available to accept the individual .

this same provision applies for pediatric care for any child who is a participant , beneficiary , or enrollee of a group health plan or health insurance issuer in the group or individual markets .

if the group health plan or health insurance issuer in the group or individual markets covers services in an emergency department of a hospital they are required to cover those services without the need for any prior authorization and without the imposition of coverage limitations irrespective of the provider's contractual status with the plan .

if the emergency services are provided out - of - network , the cost - sharing requirement will be the same as the cost - sharing for an in - network provider .

patients will also have protected access to obstetrical and gynecological care .

preexisting condition exclusion prohibition for children under 19 years of age group health plans , grandfathered health plans , and health insurance issuers offering group or individual health insurance coverage may not impose any preexisting condition exclusion enrollees who are under 19 years of age for plan years beginning on or after 6 months from enactment , september 23 , 2010 .

health insurance reform implementation fund the law establishes a health insurance reform implementation fund within hhs for federal administrative expenses for carrying out the legislation and appropriates $1 billion to the fund .

appendix b .

implementation timeline for private health insurance reforms table b - 1 lists the implementation deadlines for the private health insurance reforms established by ppaca ( p.l .

111-148 , as amended by p.l .

111-152 ) .

this list only includes implementation deadlines as required by law .

several implementation requirements do not have a specific date and are indicated as "not specified" in the table .

this table does not present effective dates for authorities or rules that do not include implementation requirements .

for example , there are no implementation requirements , such as promulgating regulations , for the prohibition on rescissions that has an effective date of plan years beginning on or after six months after enactment .

