a dramatic collapse in farm milk prices late in 2008 , which resulted in severe financial stress for many dairy farmers , led to efforts in 2009 by both congress and the administration to provide assistance for milk producers .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) reactivated dairy export subsidies in may and temporarily raised dairy product price supports in july , among other actions .

in october , congress provided $350 million in the fy2010 agriculture appropriations act ( p.l .

111-80 ) to supplement the assistance provided under existing dairy programs .

market dynamics in 2009 have also generated concerns about "dairy pricing" and the adverse effects of milk price volatility on farmers .

dairy pricing is shorthand for the process of establishing the farm value of milk .

the federal government plays a prominent role in that process .

this report describes dairy pricing and examines several related issues .

among the related issues are ( 1 ) how milk producers receive price signals under existing policy and how that affects production decisions , ( 2 ) farm milk price variability and managing price risks , and ( 3 ) the farm share of retail prices for dairy products and whether retail prices track changes in the farm milk price .

the report concludes with a discussion of alternative approaches that the dairy industry is proposing as a way to deal with dairy pricing .

price movements for milk and other commodities have several components .

first , "trend" is the long - term movement in prices .

for agricultural commodities , prices adjusted for inflation typically trend downward , primarily because improvements in agricultural productivity reduce costs and increase supplies .

second , a seasonal component is one that results in higher or lower prices during different periods of the year .

for example , the supply of milk increases and prices tend to decline in the spring , when cows are highly productive .

third , cyclical price movement refers to highs and lows established over any particular period with regularity .

this is the type of price movement at the crux of today's concern for dairy farmers .

dairy economists generally agree that the current cyclical price movement for dairy farmers was created by a mismatch in demand and supply .

simply put , milk output in late 2008 and 2009 was greater than milk demand , and prices adjusted downward in order for dairy products to sell or "clear the market" ( figure 1 ) .

the lower prices also provided a signal to producers that market needs had declined and they should cut milk production , either by culling cows or by reducing feed inputs .

according to dairy forecasters , supply adjustments and a modest improvement in demand helped lift farm milk prices in fall 2009 , and further ( modest ) gains are expected in 2010 .

the 2009 experience has been particularly painful for milk producers because prices had been at a record high in 2007-2008 and then fell sharply , with monthly average prices dropping nearly 25% below the long - term average .

in the past , prior to reductions in the price support levels in the 1980s , farm milk prices were very stable , resting atop support prices and leaving little price uncertainty for producers .

it was not until the late 1980s and into the 1990s that year - to - year prices began to fluctuate significantly .

over the last 10 years , as the dairy industry has become more dependent on export markets and world dairy prices have remained generally above u.s. support price levels , the volatility in farm milk prices has likely been enhanced by supply and demand changes in the world market .

a separate pricing issue concerns the relationship between farm and retail prices .

as farm prices of milk and other agricultural commodities fell in late 2008 , retail food price declines were slow to follow .

this decreased the farm value share — the portion of the retail dollar that flows to the farmer — and caused some in congress to question whether processors and retailers were contributing to economic stress in the agricultural sector , particularly for dairy farmers .

in recent decades , across the agricultural sector , several factors have led to a declining farm share of the retail food dollar , including gains in agricultural productivity , growth in demand for value - added products , and changes in food marketing .

the farm share of the retail food dollar for all farm products ( not just dairy ) was 41% in 1950 , a time when many food products were sold with much less value - added processing or packaging than today .

in 2006 , usda estimated that the average farm - value share of all food products of u.s. farm origin consumed was 18.5% .

the remaining 81.5% was accounted for by a host of marketing factors , including labor ( processing and retail sectors ) , packaging , profit , transportation , energy , and other business expenses .

for dairy products , the farm share is approximately one - third of the retail dollar , which is greater than the all - food average , largely because other food categories such as cereals and bakery products have a higher overall degree of processing .

examining changes in monthly farm and retail prices during 2008 and early 2009 indicates a decline in the farm - value share of retail product values and a widening of the marketing margin .

between july 2008 and december 2008 , the farm price of milk reported by usda fell by $0.33 per gallon ( figure 2 ) .

meanwhile , the average retail milk price fell only $0.28 , with the difference between the retail and farm price ( i.e. , the marketing margin ) increasing to $2.35 per gallon .

in january 2009 , the difference between the average retail price of milk and the farm price of milk reached a record - high $2.43 per gallon ( figure 3 ) .

however , as retailers cut prices amid lower costs for farm milk and other inputs ( eg , energy and transportation ) , the difference between farm and retail prices declined in september 2009 to $1.89 per gallon , which is below the recent five - year average margin .

the decline in late summer / early fall means that producers are receiving a greater share of the retail dollar as retail prices retreat , although the farm share remains below year - ago levels .

retail milk and dairy product prices have retreated significantly from dramatic highs in 2007 and 2008 .

in addition , they have declined more sharply than overall food prices , as measured by the consumer price index ( figure 4 ) .

dairy pricing in the united states is a unique combination of both market - based and administered ( through public dairy policies or programs ) prices .

each influences the other to determine the overall level of farm milk prices as well as price movements to some extent .

two characteristics — perishability and production on a daily basis — create challenges for pricing and marketing milk ( and the products made from it ) .

as a result , in the short run , production in excess of demand in the fluid market must be either dumped ( much like unharvested fresh fruit left in orchards ) or manufactured into storable dairy products and sold later .

when prices of agricultural ( or other ) commodities rise , producers tend to increase their output to increase profit .

alternatively , when prices are falling , they focus on trimming costs to save money , thereby reducing production .

at some point , the price cycle ( with prices either rising or falling ) reverses course as supply becomes more aligned with demand .

the points at which farmers see these price incentives and when they take action affects overall production levels and price movements going forward .

for most milk producers in the united states , the "mailbox price" is what farmers receive for their milk in a monthly check from the handler or their cooperative .

it is the net price received after adjustments for quality , marketing costs ( eg , hauling charges , cooperative dues , producer assessments ) , and over - order premiums that arise when market prices rise above the marketing order minimums .

dairy farmers make production decisions — to buy or raise more cows or send some to the slaughterhouse — based in large part on their monthly revenue or expected revenue in the future .

feed and other input costs , including debt service , also play a large part in whether to expand or contract .

the biggest factors driving the changes in prices producers receive month - to - month are the minimum fmmo prices handlers must pay for milk .

usda calculates the fmmo prices using wholesale product prices as input into formulas that have been established through the regulatory process .

for a more detailed description of the fmmo system , see crs report r40205 , dairy market and policy issues .

three pricing issues with respect to market signals for dairy farmers are timing , clarity , and the "make allowance," or margin afforded to dairy manufacturers in the federal order minimum prices .

while dairy markets appear to be rebounding from low farm milk prices of summer 2009 , the dairy industry and policymakers continue to consider how the dairy pricing system might be improved .

the house and senate have held hearings on dairy policy and pricing in 2009 .

the administration is also collecting information through usda's establishment of a dairy advisory committee , which is to review issues of farm milk price volatility and suggest to the secretary of agriculture how usda can best address these issues .

the committee is to "develop changes to the dairy pricing system to avoid the boom and bust cycle facing dairy famers this year. .

as congress , the administration , and the dairy industry consider how possibly to revise the dairy pricing system , two schools of thought appear to be emerging .

one is to reduce price volatility through some means of supply control while raising farm prices .

the other is to allow the market to fluctuate and help farmers manage the resulting price risk through hedging strategies used by farmers in other parts of the agriculture sector .

a number of organizations are also examining potential changes to various aspects of the federal dairy programs .

supply control is a way for government to influence the supply of farm products on the market with the intention of increasing or stabilizing farm prices .

one dairy producer group , holstein association usa , has proposed a plan to stabilize farm milk prices with assessments on farmers who increase milk production over specified levels , as determined by usda forecasts of demand for fluid milk and manufactured dairy products .

some of the program's objectives are to reduce the volatility of dairy product prices and producer milk prices while preventing severely depressed producer milk prices .

the national farmers union ( nfu ) is among the supporters .

supply control is also affected by imports .

legislation has been introduced in both the house and the senate in 2009 to apply import controls on specific dairy products .

the milk import tariff equity act ( s. 1542 and h.r .

3674 ) would impose tariff - rate quotas on imports of casein ( the main protein found in milk ) and milk protein concentrates .

some believe a change in federal milk marketing orders also could be used to stabilize the milk market and boost dairy farm returns .

one bill in the 111 th congress , the federal milk marketing improvement act of 2009 ( s. 1645 , first introduced as s. 889 ) , is designed to "help farmers get a fair price for their milk" and provide relief and assistance to dairy farmers by using the cost of milk production as the basis for pricing milk .

the bill contains provisions for usda to administratively reduce prices received by farmers , in an effort to limit milk production , if the secretary of agriculture determines that an excess amount is being produced for the national domestic market .

supporters of price stabilization and supply control say that incentives within the dairy industry to overproduce need to be offset by a program to control supplies in a more measured way .

critics contend that supply control could reduce the competitiveness of the u.s. dairy industry , limit its incentive to innovate , and raise consumer prices because , they argue , a pricing system based on supply control and / or cost of production potentially rewards inefficiency .

critics also argue that administratively matching supply and demand can be difficult because the process would require accurate forecasts of demand and supply factors that are notoriously fickle .

other industry groups , including the national milk producers federation ( nmpf ) , the largest trade association representing milk producer cooperatives , prefer a more market - based approach for addressing milk pricing issues , along with changes to existing dairy programs as part of an overall adjustment to federal dairy policy .

the nmpf proposes a new dairy producer income insurance program that would make indemnity payments when operation losses occur ( similar to a revenue insurance program ) and reform of the federal milk marketing order system , specifically the provisions for calculating minimum farm milk prices and the existing price discovery mechanism .

the organization also advocates discontinuing the dairy product price support program in order to speed up market adjustments .

promoters of a market - based approach , including dairy food manufacturers , say that price volatility will be a part of the dairy industry , as it is for other commodities .

as such , they claim the best approach is to find ways for producers to manage price risks without limiting the industry's ability to capitalize on domestic and international demand opportunities .

detractors expect that incentives to overproduce will aggravate the financial woes of the dairy industry indefinitely , so controlling potential price variability with supply management is necessary for long - term financial health for producers .

this concern for overproduction could and has been applied to commodities such as corn and wheat .

but dairy generally is more susceptible to overproduction , some dairy producers say , because current policy encourages producers to maximize production and they tend to add cows even when prices are low to improve cash flow .

current policy is set for the dairy product price support program until 2012 under the 2008 farm bill , and federal milk marketing orders are permanently authorized .

however , given the difficult economic situation dairy farmers experienced in 2009 , congress may continue to monitor the dairy pricing situation through hearings and oversight .

efforts to address dairy pricing issues could be affected by the future direction of market prices .

the current farm milk price cycle appears to have bottomed out in summer / early fall 2009 , based on forecasts by usda and others .

if the forecasts hold , it may be difficult for policymakers and producers to support major policy changes while milk prices are climbing .

in the view of some , any further intervention could disrupt an otherwise favorable price situation .

in any event , discussions and policy proposals on dairy pricing may continue to be a topic of discussion in the 111 th congress or in the next farm bill debate , which may begin as early as 2011 .

