h.r .

3962 , affordable health care for america act , was introduced in the house of representatives on october 29 , 2009 .

h.r .

3962 is based on h.r .

3200 , america's affordable health choices act of 2009 , originally introduced on july 14 , 2009 , and reported separately on october 14 , 2009 , by three house committees — education and labor , energy and commerce , and ways and means .

h.r .

3962 was further modified by the manager's amendment posted on november 3 , 2009 .

on november 7 , 2009 , h.r .

3962 , as amended , was passed by the house .

a republican alternative amendment in the nature of a substitute , dated november 3 , 2009 , is addressed in a separate crs report .

on november 6 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) released an updated estimate of the direct spending and revenue effects of h.r .

3962 , incorporating the manager's amendment proposed on november 3 , and enactment of h.r .

3548 ( the worker , homeownership , and business assistance act of 2009 , signed into law on november 6 .

this estimate projects the bill would reduce federal deficits by $109 billion over the 10-year period of 2010-2019 and , by 2019 , would insure 96% of the non - elderly , legally present u.s. population .

the gross 10-year cost of the exchange subsidies ( $610 billion ) , increased federal medicaid expenditures ( $425 billion ) , and tax credits for small employers ( $25 billion ) would total $1.052 trillion .

taking into account employer and individual tax penalties and other issues pertaining to coverage , the net cost of the coverage provisions , according to the cbo analysis , would be $891 billion over 10 years .

"over the 2010-2019 period , the net cost of the coverage expansions would be more than offset by the combination of other spending changes , which cbo estimates would save $427 billion , and receipts resulting from the income tax surcharge on high - income individuals and other provisions , which jct [the joint committee on taxation] and cbo estimate would increase federal revenues by $574 billion over that period. .

the office of the actuary , within the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) , has issued an alternative estimate of the financial effects of h.r .

3962 as passed by the house on november 7 , 2009 .

on november 13 , 2009 , cms's office of the actuary approximated potential monetary and coverage impacts of the non - tax provisions in h.r .

3962 .

according to the cms report , the cost of h.r .

3962 , ignoring the tax offsets , is $935 billion .

this is only slightly higher than cbo's estimate of $891 billion , which includes the tax provisions .

in addition , the cms memorandum projected that h.r .

3962 would insure an additional 34 million legal residents , or 93 % of the u.s. population .

the office of the actuary also estimated possible impacts on the health care system as a whole .

h.r .

3962 proposes sweeping reforms of the u.s. health insurance and health care system .

the three major components of the bill are designated divisions a , b , and c. division a , "affordable health care choices," focuses on reducing the number of uninsured , restructuring the private health insurance market , setting minimum standards for health benefits , and providing financial assistance to certain individuals and , in some cases , small employers .

division b , "medicare and medicaid improvements," proposes modifications to the largest two public health insurance programs to make them consistent with the changes proposed in division a and to amend other provisions in existing federal statute .

division b also introduces a number of technical changes intended to improve quality of care , reduce federal and state expenditures , and address coverage gaps for both medicare and medicaid .

for medicaid , among other major proposals , division b would expand medicaid eligibility for traditional and non - traditional beneficiary categories up to 150% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) .

division c , "public health and workforce development," would amend and expand existing health professions and nursing workforce programs .

this report provides a discussion of the medicaid and chip provisions contained in h.r .

3962 , and is divided into seven major categories: eligibility .

benefits .

financing .

waste , fraud , and abuse .

payments to territories .

demonstrations and pilot programs .

miscellaneous .

each topic contains a brief summary of existing medicaid law and related background to provide context for the description of changes proposed by h.r .

3962 .

medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program operated by states within broad federal guidelines .

to qualify , an individual must meet both categorical ( i.e. , must be a member of a covered group such as children , pregnant women , families with dependent children , the elderly , or the disabled ) and financial eligibility requirements .

medicaid's financial requirements place limits on the maximum amount of assets and income individuals may possess to participate in medicaid .

additional guidelines specify how states should calculate these amounts .

the specific asset and income limitations that apply to each eligibility group are set through a combination of federal parameters and state definitions .

consequently , these standards vary across states , and different standards apply to different population groups within states .

of the approximately 50 different eligibility "pathways" into medicaid , some are mandatory while others may be covered at state option .

examples of groups that states must provide medicaid to include pregnant women and children under age six with family income below 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) , and poor individuals with disabilities or poor individuals over age 64 who qualify for cash assistance under the ssi program .

examples of groups that states may choose to cover under medicaid include pregnant women and infants with family income exceeding 133% fpl up to 185% fpl , and "medically needy" individuals who meet categorical requirements with income up to 133% of the maximum payment amount applicable under states' former aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) programs based on family size .

"childless adults" ( nonelderly adults who are not disabled , not pregnant and not parents of dependent children ) , for example , are generally not eligible for medicaid , regardless of their income .

h.r .

3962 makes several changes to medicaid eligibility .

among the provisions that would impact eligibility , the bill would add four new mandatory eligibility groups , and add two new optional eligibility groups .

in addition , it would make several modifications to existing eligibility groups , and add provisions to facilitate outreach and enrollment in medicaid , chip , and the health insurance exchange .

medicaid benefits are identified in federal statute and regulations and include a wide range of medical care and services .

some benefits are specific items , such as eyeglasses and prosthetic devices .

other benefits are defined in terms of specific types of providers ( eg , physicians , hospitals ) .

still other benefits define specific types of services ( eg , family planning services and supplies , pregnancy - related services ) that may be delivered by any qualified medical provider that participates in medicaid .

finally , additional benefits include premium payments for coverage provided through managed care arrangements and medicare premium and cost - sharing support for persons dually eligible for both medicare and medicaid .

medicaid's basic benefit rules require all states to provide certain "mandatory" services ( eg , inpatient hospital care , physician services , lab / x - ray services ) .

the statute lists additional services that are considered optional ( eg , other licensed practitioners , rehabilitative services , nursing facility services for individuals under age 21 ) - that is , federal matching payments are available for optional services if states choose to include them in their medicaid plans .

states define the specific features of each mandatory and optional service to be provided under that plan within broad federal guidelines .

h.r .

3962 would make a number of changes to benefits under the medicaid program .

for example , this bill would add a new mandatory benefit for coverage of certain preventive services .

the bill would also add some optional medicaid benefits ( eg , nurse home visitation services ) and clarify the availability of certain existing optional services under current law ( eg , therapeutic foster care services , adult day health care ) .

h.r .

3962 would also makes coverage of services provided by podiatrists and optometrists mandatory , rather than optional as under current law .

these and other proposed benefit changes are described below .

medicaid financing is shared by the federal government and the states .

the federal share for most medicaid expenses for benefits is determined by the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) .

fmap is based on a formula that provides higher reimbursement to states with lower per capita income relative to the national average ( and vice versa ) .

fmaps have a statutory minimum of 50% and maximum of 83% , although some medicaid services receive a higher federal match rate .

fy2009 fmaps ranged from a high of 75.8% in mississippi to a low of 50.0% in 13 other states .

in february of this year , with passage of arra , states received temporary enhanced fmap rates for nine quarters beginning with the first quarter of fy2009 and running through the first quarter of fy2011 .

state expenditures to administer their medicaid programs are matched by federal funding at the 50% matching funding rate .

federal matching rates for administrative expenditures are the same for all states , although some activities are matched at higher rates .

within broad federal guidelines , states generally control medicaid spending levels by tailoring eligibility , covered services , cost - sharing and premiums paid by beneficiaries , provider reimbursement rates , and other program components to achieve their budget and policy goals .

to receive payment for the federal share of medicaid expenditures , states submit quarterly expenditure reports to the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) .

the medicaid financing provisions in h.r .

3962 generally can be considered technical changes or refinements that would reduce federal and state health care expenditures .

the proposed changes would affect medicaid purchases of prescription drugs , disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) payments , and graduate medical education ( gme ) payments .

some of the medicaid financing provisions in h.r .

3962 , discussed in this section , appear in two subtitles .

division b , title vii — medicaid and chip , subtitle a — medicaid and health reform contains a dsh financing provision , and subtitle e — financing , contains provisions on prescription drugs and gme .

states are required to create a state plan for their medicaid programs that is subject to approval by cms .

this comprehensive document describes nearly all aspects of each state's medicaid program including administrative activities , eligibility , enrollment , covered benefits , provider credentialing , provider reimbursement , quality assurance , beneficiary cost sharing , and many more program elements .

in creating their medicaid plans , states must conform to federal rules and guidance .

whenever states make changes to their medicaid program , they must update their state plans by submitting a state plan amendment , which is also subject to review and approval by cms .

as part of the medicaid plan , states establish participation requirements and reimbursement rules for different providers and suppliers that deliver services to medicaid beneficiaries , subject to federal rules .

these requirements include reporting and monitoring waste , fraud , and abuse .

in general , initiatives designed to combat fraud , waste , and abuse are considered program integrity activities .

this includes processes directed at reducing improper payments , as well as activities to prevent , detect , investigate , and ultimately prosecute health care fraud and abuse .

more specifically , program integrity ensures that correct payments are paid to legitimate providers for appropriate and reasonable services for eligible beneficiaries .

medicaid and chip program integrity are often limited to issues of fraud and abuse by providers ( as well as beneficiaries ) and efforts to curtail these problems .

the federal government pays a share of every state's spending on medicaid services and program administration , including expenditures for the reduction of waste , fraud , and abuse .

the federal share for most medicaid service costs is determined by a state's fmap .

the federal match for administrative expenditures does not vary by state and is generally 50% , but certain administrative functions have a higher federal match , including two program integrity expenditures: operation of required medicaid management information systems ( mmis ) and operation of state medicaid fraud control units ( mfcu ) .

operation of mfcus and mmis activities are matched at 75% , although the federal match is 90% for certain startup expenses .

thus , the federal government provides the majority of medicaid spending to combat fraud and abuse .

congress provided new dedicated medicaid program integrity funding in dra when it established a medicaid integrity program ( mip ) with an appropriation reaching $75 million annually for audits , identification of overpayments , education with respect to payment integrity and quality of care , and other purposes .

congress also provided in dra an additional $25 million annually for five years beginning in fy2006 for medicaid activities of the hhs office of inspector general ( oig ) , and an annual appropriation reaching $60 million to expand the medicare - medicaid data match project ( referred to as medi - medi ) that analyzes claims from both programs together in order to detect aberrant billing patterns .

improper payments are one measure of fraud and abuse activities under medicaid .

under the improper payments information act of 2002 ( ipia , p.l .

107-300 ) , federal agencies were required to identify programs that are susceptible to significant improper payments , estimate the amount of overpayments , and report annually to congress on those figures and on the steps being taken to reduce such payments .

in compliance with ipia provisions , the department of health and human services estimated fy2008 medicaid composite error rates at 10.5% , or $32.7 billion in improper payments of which the federal share was $18.6 billion , and , for chip , the rate was 14.7% , or $1.2 billion , with a federal share of $0.8 billion .

measures of improper payment measures focus on payments made in error , not the cause of those improper payments .

thus , improper payment measures provide no measure of fraud , which most often is undetected .

improper payment measures provide estimates of program losses in general .

the national health care anti - fraud association estimates that the losses to health insurers , including medicaid , attributable to health care fraud are in the range of 3% to 10% of paid claims .

division d of the h.r .

3962 , the "indian health care improvement act amendments of 2009," contains a number of sections related to improving american indian and alaska natives' access to the medicaid and chip programs .

this section includes a summary of the medicaid and chip - related sections of division d. the indian health service ( ihs ) , an agency in hhs , provides health care for eligible american indians / alaska natives through a system of programs and facilities located on or near indian reservations and in certain urban areas .

ihs may provide services directly , or indian tribes ( its ) or tribal organizations ( tos ) can operate ihs - services themselves through self - determination contracts and self - governance compacts negotiated with ihs .

urban indian organizations ( uios ) also provide ihs - services using grants and contracts from ihs .

ihs , and tribally - operated facilities are eligible to receive reimbursements from ssa programs including medicaid and chip .

uios may also be eligible to receive reimbursements from medicaid and chip .

for medicaid , services received through ihs facilities , whether operated by the ihs , a it or a to , the federal government pays the entire cost of covered services ; that is , there is no state share for such services delivered by such providers .

in recent years , there have been efforts to expand american indian and alaska native enrollment in the medicaid and chip programs .

for example , the children's health insurance programs reauthorization act ( chipra , p.l .

111-3 ) and american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) amended medicaid and chip statutes as they apply to american indians and alaska natives to require states to increase outreach , facilitate enrollment , and eliminate cost sharing for eligible american indians and alaska natives in medicaid and chip .

h.r .

3962 would amend the indian health care improvement act to include cross references to the chipra and arra amendments that relate to american indians and alaska natives in medicaid and chip .

these cross references are not discussed below because they do not change the medicaid or chip programs as they affect american indians and alaska natives .

cbo did not provide separate cost / savings estimates for the individual provisions described below .

however , cbo did estimate that division d would cost $0.2 billion in total over the fy2010-fy2019 period .

h.r .

3962 would require the secretary to establish an identifiable program or office within cms to improve coordination between medicare and medicaid and protection for dual eligible beneficiaries ( individuals eligible for both medicare and medicaid ) .

cms' dual eligible office or program would be required to ( 1 ) review medicare and medicaid enrollment , benefits , service delivery , and payment , policies as well as grievance and appeals processes for medicare parts a and b , medicare advantage , and medicaid ; ( 2 ) identify areas where improved coordination and protection could improve care and reduce costs ; ( 3 ) issue guidance to states on improving coordination and protection for duals .

in addition , under this provision of h.r .

3962 , the new dual eligible beneficiary coordination office or program would be responsible for simplifying dual eligibles' access to benefits and services under medicare and medicaid ; improving the care continuity for duals as well as their safe and effective care transitions ; harmonizing regulatory conflicts between medicare and medicaid ; and reducing the total cost and improving quality for services provided to duals under medicare and medicaid .

the secretary's responsibilities for implementing the cms office or program for coordination and protection for dual eligibles would include the following: ( 1 ) examination of medicare and medicaid payment systems to develop strategies to foster more integrated and higher quality care ; ( 2 ) development of methods to facilitate dual eligibles' access to post - acute and community - based services and to identify actions to improve coordination of community - based care ; ( 3 ) a study of enrollment in medicare savings program or msp ( for both medicare and medicaid ) to identify methods to more efficiently and effectively reach and enroll dual eligibles ; ( 4 ) an assessment of communication strategies aimed at dual eligibles , including the medicare website , 1-800-medicare , and the medicare handbook ; ( 5 ) research and evaluation of areas where service utilization , quality , and access to cost sharing protection could be improved and an assessment of factors relating to enrollee satisfaction with services and delivery ; ( 6 ) collection and dissemination to the public of data and a database that describes eligibility , benefits , and cost - sharing assistance available to dual eligibles by state ; ( 7 ) support for coordination of state and federal contracting oversight for dual eligible coordination programs ; ( 8 ) support for state medicaid agencies by providing technical assistance for medicaid and medicare coordination initiatives to improve integration of acute and long - term care services for duals ; ( 9 ) monitoring total combined medicare and medicaid program expenditures in serving dual eligibles and making recommendations to optimize total quality and cost performance across both programs ; and ( 10 ) coordination of medicare advantage plan activities under medicare and medicaid .

the office or program of dual eligible coordination and protection also would be required to work with relevant state agencies and appropriate quality measurement entities to improve and coordinate medicare and medicaid reporting requirements .

the office or program of dual eligible coordination and protection also would seek to minimize duplicate reporting requirements and identify ways to combine assessment requirements .

the office also would strive to identify quality metrics and assessment requirements that facilitate quality comparisons across ffs medicare , medicare advantage , ffs medicaid , and medicaid managed care .

the secretary would be required to seek endorsement by the quality metrics contractor described under sec .

1890 ( a ) of h.r .

3962 .

further the office or program of dual eligible coordination and protection would be required to consult with relevant dual eligible stakeholders .

finally , within one year of enactment of h.r .

3962 and every three subsequent years the secretary would be required to submit a report to congress documenting progress of the office or program of dual eligible coordination and protection .

cbo estimates this provision would have no effect on direct spending during the fy2010-fy2019 period .

under the supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

110-252 ) , congress directed the secretary of hhs to establish a medicaid improvement fund ( mif ) that is available to the secretary to improve the management of the medicaid program with regard to agency oversight of contracts and contractors , and the evaluation of demonstration projects .

mif funds are authorized and appropriated in the amount of $100 million for fy2014 , and $150 million for each of fiscal years 2015 through 2018 , and are available in addition to payments that would otherwise be made for such activities .

h.r .

3962 would strike mif funding amounts authorized and appropriated for the period between fy2014 through 2018 , and would specify that funds available for expenditures from the mif would be in an amount as appropriated or otherwise made available by law .

cbo estimates this provision would save $0.7 billion during the fy2010-fy2019 period .

a personal care attendant is a person who provides personal care to an individual with a significant disability by providing assistance with activities of daily living ( adls ) and instrumental activities of daily living ( iadls ) .

adls generally refer to eating , bathing and showering , using the toilet , dressing , walking across a small room , and transferring ( getting in or out of a bed or chair ) .

iadls include preparing meals , managing money , shopping for groceries or personal items , performing housework , using a telephone , among others .

under current law , states have the option to cover personal care services , including personal care attendant services , under a variety of optional state plan benefits .

these are the state plan: ( 1 ) personal care benefit ; ( 2 ) self - directed personal care benefit ; and ( 3 ) the h ome and community - based services benefit .

state also have the option to offer personal care under certain waiver authorities , including section 1915 ( c ) home and community - based waivers , and section 1115 research and demonstration waivers .

although states have significant flexibility to determine the amount and scope of these benefits , each statutory authority includes a unique set of rules defining and limiting the way in which a state may extend this benefit to medicaid beneficiaries .

h.r .

3962 states that it is the sense of the congress that states would be allowed to elect under their medicaid programs a community first choice option under which ( 1 ) coverage of community - based attendant services and supports furnished in home and communities would be available , at an individual's option , to individuals who would otherwise qualify for medicaid institutional coverage ; ( 2 ) such supports and services would include assistance to individuals with disabilities with activities of daily living , instrumental activities of daily living , and health - related tasks ; ( 3 ) the fmap for such services and supports would be enhanced ; ( 4 ) states , consistent with minimum federal standards , would ensure the quality of such supports and services ; and ( 5 ) states would collect and provide data to the secretary on the cost , effectiveness and quality of supports and services provided through state options .

cbo estimates this provision would have no effect on direct spending over the fy2010-fy2019 period .

federal assistance is provided to certain low - income persons to help them meet medicare part d premium and cost - sharing charges .

to qualify for the part d low - income subsidy ( lis ) , medicare beneficiaries must have resources ( assets ) no greater than the income and resource limits established by the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma , p.l .

108-173 ) .

individuals may qualify for the full subsidy in two ways: ( 1 ) if they are eligible for medicaid or one of the medicare savings programs ( msp ; qualified medicare beneficiary ( qmb ) , specified low income medicare beneficiary ( slmb ) , or qualifying individual ( qi ) ) , or are recipients of supplemental security income benefits , they are deemed automatically eligible ; or ( 2 ) if they apply for the benefit through their state medicaid agency or through the social security administration ( ssa ) and are determined to have an annual income below 135% of the federal poverty level and to have resources below a certain limit .

the commissioner of social security is required to conduct outreach efforts to identify persons potentially eligible for assistance under the msp and the lis programs and to notify such persons of the availability of assistance .

outreach efforts are to be coordinated with the states .

mippa extended the outreach requirements for the commissioner of social security .

beginning january 1 , 2010 , the commissioner is required , with the applicants' consent , to transmit data from the lis application to the appropriate state medicaid agency .

the transmittal initiates an application of the individual for msp benefits .

states are required to accept data transmitted under this provision and to act on the data in the same manner and in accordance with the same deadlines as if the data constituted an initiation of an msp application submitted directly by the individual .

the date of the individual's application for lis from which the summary data was derived constitutes the application date for msp .

under medicaid rules , states are required to process medicaid applications , including msp applications , with reasonable promptness .

h.r .

3962 would clarify that for the purpose of a state's obligation to furnish medical assistance ( medicaid - financed coverage ) with reasonable promptness and for the purpose of determining when medical assistance is to be made available , the date of the electronic transmission of low - income subsidy program data to the state medicaid agency would constitute the date of filing for benefits under the msp .

in addition , for the purpose of determining when medical assistance will be made available , the state would be required to consider the date of the individual's application for the lis to constitute the date of filing for benefits under the msp .

with respect to medicaid spending , cbo estimates this provision would cost $2.0 billion over the fy2010-fy2019 period .

 ( effects on medicare spending for this provision were estimated by cbo to be $11.8 billion over the same period. ) .

chipra restated prior law that federal funding for individuals who are not legal residents is not allowed , and that the law provides for the disallowance of federal funding of erroneous expenditures under medicaid and chip .

h.r .

3962 would make a technical correction to one sentence in chipra by replacing the reference to "legal residents" with the phrase "lawfully residing in the united states. .

thus , the new wording would be "nothing in this act allows federal payment for individuals who are not lawfully residing in the united states. .

cbo estimated this provision would have no effect on direct spending over the fy2010-fy2019 period .

approved section 1115 waivers are deemed to be part of a state's medicaid ( or chip ) state plan for purposes of federal reimbursement .

the provision would clarify that medicaid coverage offered under the special terms and conditions ( stcs ) of a section 1115 demonstration waiver approved by the secretary ( eg , benefit coverage , cost sharing rules , special financing arrangements , eligible populations , etc. ) .

would be considered part of the medicaid state plan .

medicaid program rules not explicitly listed in the waiver stcs would still apply .

cbo estimated this provision would have no effect on direct spending over the fy2010-fy2019 period .

chipra , the reauthorization of chip , included several provisions designed to improve the quality of care for children under medicaid and chip .

the law directed to secretary to develop ( 1 ) child health quality measures , ( 2 ) a standardized format for reporting information , and ( 3 ) procedures to encourage states to voluntarily report on the quality of pediatric care in these two programs .

examples of these initiatives included grants and contracts to develop , test , update and disseminate evidence - based measures , and demonstrations to evaluate promising ideas for improving the quality of children's health care under medicaid and chip .

h.r .

3962 would require the secretary to develop and publish measures on the quality of maternity care under medicaid and chip .

the secretary would also be required to publish a standardized reporting format for these measures , to be used by participating managed care entities , providers and practitioners in reporting such measures to the secretary .

the bill would also require the secretary to develop quality measures for services provided to adult medicaid and chip beneficiaries ages of 21 and 64 ( that are not part of the set of quality measures for the delivery of health care services in the u.s. established under a separate provision in this bill ) .

these measures would also be published , along with a standardized reporting format for use by participating providers .

in developing these quality measures , the secretary would be required to consult with certain academic institutions with related health quality measurement expertise , and to obtain input from stakeholders .

the development of these measures must be coordinated with the development of the child health quality measures established in chipra .

starting in 2013 , and annually thereafter , the secretary would be required to submit a report to congress on the availability of reliable data relating to the quality of maternity care and services provided to adults ages 21 to 64 under medicaid and chip , and recommendations for improving such quality of care under both programs .

a total of $40 million would be appropriated for these activities for the five year period beginning with fy2010 , to remain available until expended .

cbo estimates that the cost for this provision would be negligible ( i.e. , plus or minus $50 million ) .

h.r .

3962 would provide that a state plan for medical assistance under title xix , if considered by the secretary to require state legislation in order for the plan to meet an additional requirement imposed by an amendment made in this title , must not be regarded as failing to be in compliance solely on the basis of failure to meet the requirement prior to the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first regular session of the state legislature that begins after the date of the enactment of this act .

for states with a two - year legislative session , each year of its session would be required to be deemed a separate regular session of the state legislature .

cbo estimates this provision would have no effect on direct spending over the fy2010-fy2019 period .

