the united states has an abundance of natural resources .

for much of the nation's history , energy availability was not a concern as commerce and industry needs could be met by domestic supplies .

however , industrialization and population growth , and the continuing development of a consumer - oriented society , led to growing dependence on foreign sources of energy during the 20 th century to supplement the demands of a growing economy .

recognition of the implications of dependence on foreign sources of energy , coupled with concerns over the volatility of prices driven by fluctuations in supply spurred by world events , prompted federal efforts to increase u.s. energy independence and reduce domestic consumption .

a major result has been the establishment of a number of programs focused on energy efficiency and conservation of domestic resources and on research programs that target the development of renewable sources of energy .

many of these programs have roots going back almost 40 years and have been redesigned many times over that period .

many of the current programs have been reauthorized and redesigned periodically to meet changing economic conditions and national interests .

the programs apply broadly to sectors ranging from industry to academia , and from state and local governments to rural communities .

each program has been designed to meet current needs as well as future anticipated challenges .

since 2005 , congress has enacted several major energy laws: the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact 2005 ; p.l .

109-58 ) ; the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ; p.l .

110-140 ) ; the energy improvement and extension act ( eiea ) , enacted as division b of the emergency economic stabilization act ( eesa ; p.l .

110-343 ) ; and the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

each of those laws established , expanded , or modified energy efficiency and renewable energy research , development , demonstration , and deployment ( rdd&d ) programs .

the department of energy ( doe ) operates the greatest number of efficiency and renewable energy incentive programs .

the department of the treasury and the department of agriculture ( usda ) operate several programs .

a few programs can also be found among the departments of the interior ( doi ) , labor ( dol ) , housing and urban development ( hud ) , and veterans affairs ( va ) , and the small business administration ( sba ) .

this report outlines current federal programs and provisions providing grants , loans , loan guarantees , and other direct or indirect incentives for energy efficiency , energy conservation , and renewable energy rdd&d .

the programs are grouped by administering agency with references to applicable federal agency websites .

incentives are summarized and indexed in the appendixes .

most program descriptions were compiled from authorizing statutes , the u.s. code , and administration budget request documents .

other program descriptions and some funding information were compiled from the database of state incentives for renewables and efficiency ( dsire ) , the assistance listings ( formerly the catalog of federal domestic assistance or cfda ) housed on the beta.sam.gov website , and the energy star website .

most budgetary figures were compiled from executive agency budget justifications and congressional committee reports .

for more information on agriculture - related grant programs , please see crs report r43416 , energy provisions in the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) : status and funding , by [author name scrubbed] .

for more information on programs supporting the development and deployment of alternatives to conventional fuels and engines in transportation , please also see crs report r42566 , alternative fuel and advanced vehicle technology incentives: a summary of federal programs , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

please note that tax credits for biofuels and vehicles are covered in detail another crs report r42566 , alternative fuel and advanced vehicle technology incentives: a summary of federal programs , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

appendix a .

summary of federal renewable energy and energy efficiency incentives / index of programs appendix b .

index of programs by applicant eligibility and technology type appendix c. expired federal energy efficiency and renewable energy incentive programs 1 .

assisted housing stability and energy and green retrofit investments program ( recovery act funded ) 2 .

clean renewable energy bonds ( crebs ) 3 .

energy efficiency and conservation block grants program ( eecbg ) 4 .

energy efficiency and renewable energy technology deployment , demonstration , and commercialization grant program 5 .

energy efficient appliance rebate program ( eearp ) 6 .

energy efficient appliance tax credit for manufacturers 7 .

new era rural technology competitive grants program 8 .

program of competitive grants for worker training and placement in high growth and emerging industry sectors 9 .

qualified energy conservation bonds 10 .

qualifying advanced energy manufacturing investment tax credit 11 .

renewable energy grants ( 1603 program ) appendix d. appendix d. summary of expired federal renewable energy and energy efficiency incentives / index of program .

