u.s. departments and agencies engaged in combat or stability operations overseas are relying on private firms to perform a wider scope of security services than was previously the case .

rather than relying on the u.s. armed forces to provide protection from insurgents and other risks inherent in such an environment , the state department , usaid , and , reportedly , the central intelligence agency ( cia ) have outsourced a variety of security services .

the department of defense ( dod ) also employs civilian contractors to perform certain security services .

the use of private security contractors ( pscs ) to provide security for personnel and property in iraq and afghanistan has been a subject of debate in the press , in congress , and in the international community .

due to a spate of high - profile incidents involving contractors allegedly shooting civilians , using excessive force , committing other crimes , or otherwise behaving in a manner that may be offensive to the local population , there is concern that the reliance on contractors may be undermining u.s. counterinsurgency efforts in iraq and afghanistan .

some have questioned whether the legal framework is adequate to cover the activities of armed civilians performing roles that in previous conflicts were assigned to soldiers , or whether such activities could run counter to international law .

congress has , over the past decade , enacted legislation to close jurisdictional gaps that have made prosecution of civilian employees difficult for crimes they commit overseas .

as a result , there is statutory authority to subject civilian contractor personnel to prosecution in federal and sometimes military court in many cases , largely depending on the type and seriousness of the offense alleged , where the offense occurred , the nationality of the perpetrator or victim , and the nature of the contract employment and government agency ( or armed force ) affiliation .

the bases of jurisdiction , which remain relatively untested by the courts , may not have closed all of the gaps , and in cases they do cover , may affect agency responsibility for investigating and prosecuting the crimes as well as the venue for prosecution .

while some contractor personnel have been subject to prosecution in the united states for crimes they allegedly committed in iraq and afghanistan , it appears that many more investigations into possible criminal conduct have not resulted in charges , at least not yet .

the foreign affairs implications of these issues are illustrated by the iraqi reaction to the 2007 incident at nisoor square involving blackwater worldwide private security guards on contract with the state department , who reportedly opened fire in the crowded traffic circle in the belief that they were engaged in a firefight with insurgents .

outrage among the iraqi population over the incident , which resulted in the deaths of 17 civilians , spurred the iraqi government to revoke blackwater's operating license ( the company has since changed its name to xe services ) and to negotiate an end to the immunity from iraqi legal processes such contractors previously enjoyed .

news of the dismissal of the criminal indictments against five contract employees in connection with the incident appears to have further strained u.s. - iraq relations , with iraqi officials calling the outcome "unacceptable" and vowing to seek redress .

the united nations working group on the use of mercenaries released a statement calling on the united states and iraq "to cooperate to ensure that the nissour square incident is fully remedied and , in relation to the crimes that may have been committed , those responsible fully held accountable as appropriate. .

this report discusses the legal framework that applies to contractor personnel serving in iraq and afghanistan , including matters peculiar to private security contractors .

after presenting a general description of the types of law applicable , the report addresses some implications of international law and proposals for the adoption of international "best practices" regarding the use of pscs and an international convention to regulate and oversee their use .

there follows a description of the treaty frameworks applicable in iraq and afghanistan , in particular agreements that function as "status of forces" agreements .

the report briefly discusses the possible implication of the roles of private security contractors with respect to inherently governmental functions .

finally , the report discusses jurisdiction over contractor personnel in u.s. courts , whether federal or military , identifying possible means of prosecuting contractor personnel who are accused of violating the law overseas in the context of u.s. military operations and providing a brief listing of known cases that have occurred or are pending .

contractors to the coalition forces in iraq and afghanistan operate under three levels of legal authority: ( 1 ) the international order of the laws and usages of war , resolutions of the united nations security council , and relevant treaties ; ( 2 ) u.s. law ; and ( 3 ) the domestic law of the host countries .

under the authority of international law , contractors and other civilians working with the military are civilian non - combatants whose conduct may be attributable to the united states or may implicate the duty to promote the welfare and security of the local population .

the courts of iraq and afghanistan have jurisdiction to prosecute them pursuant to applicable status of forces agreements .

some contractors , particularly u.s. nationals , may be prosecuted in u.s. federal courts or military courts under certain circumstances .

according to many analysts and policymakers , private security contractors , by providing security for reconstruction and stabilization efforts , contribute an essential service to u.s. and international efforts to bring peace to iraq and afghanistan .

nonetheless , the use of armed contractors has raised concerns related to whether the role they play is suitable for outsourcing and whether the legal framework is adequate to hold contractors accountable under u.s. law for any abuses or other transgressions they may commit .

despite the amendment to the ucmj to subject military contractors supporting the armed forces during contingency operations to court - martial jurisdiction , and despite the extension of meja to cover certain non - dod contractors working with the military overseas , some private security contractors may remain outside the jurisdiction of u.s. courts , civil or military , for improper conduct in iraq or afghanistan .

as the courts begin to interpret and apply these statutes , and as the effects of the new contractual requirements are implemented , congress may be called on to review and amend the existing statutory framework .

