civilians in africa's conflict zones — particularly women and children , but also men — are often vulnerable to sexual violence , including rape , sexual assault , mutilation , forced prostitution , sexual slavery , and other abuses .

some incidences appear to be opportunistic , the product of a larger breakdown in the rule of law and social order that may occur amid conflict .

in other cases , sexual violence has also been employed by combatant groups as a strategic tool .

perpetrators may include members of the security forces , rebel movements , militias , or other non - state armed groups .

in some cases , individuals at the highest levels of the state have been accused of ordering , condoning , or tolerating such violence .

there have also been instances where humanitarian and peacekeeping workers have been accused of sexual abuse and exploitation .

the issue of sexual violence in conflict is far from confined to sub - saharan africa ( henceforth , "africa" ) , and it has not been a salient feature of all african conflicts .

sexual violence by combatant groups in the former yugoslavia in the 1990s , for example , drew widespread international attention .

moreover , conflict settings are not necessarily those in which sexual abuse is most prevalent .

sexual atrocities have nevertheless been a feature of many african conflicts over the past two decades , including in active conflicts in central african republic ( car ) , chad , democratic republic of congo ( drc ) , ethiopia , nigeria , somalia , and sudan ; and in recent conflicts in burundi , congo - brazzaville ( republic of congo ) , côte d'ivoire , liberia , rwanda , sierra leone , and northern uganda .

such acts have been particularly prevalent in eastern drc , where security forces , rebel organizations , militias , and other armed groups have inflicted sexual violence upon the civilian population on a massive scale .

this report focuses on conflicts in africa in which sexual violence is reported to be widespread or systematic .

it describes the context in which such violence takes place , selected cases where it is currently occurring , and u.s. policy responses .

the report concludes with a discussion of potential policy considerations , including the design and effectiveness of u.s. programs ; coordination between agencies and between international donors ; and the question of whether policy responses to sexual violence can be separated from the broader context in which such violence occurs .

the report includes a detailed case study of drc , which has drawn particular attention from the obama administration and the 111 th congress .

widespread sexual violence has been reported as a feature of several active conflicts in africa .

most prominent in scale are the conflicts in eastern drc and the darfur region of sudan .

in drc , which will be discussed in the " case study: democratic republic of congo ( drc ) " section below , armed groups have committed sexual atrocities on a massive scale during recurrent internal conflicts over the past two decades .

in darfur , rape has reportedly been perpetrated by government and government - allied forces since 2003 amid fighting between sudanese security forces and allied pro - government militias known as janjaweed , rebel groups , and other irregular forces .

united nations officials , advocacy groups , news reports , and witness accounts allege that sexual violence was systematically employed in darfur during the height of the conflict ( 2003-2006 ) as a weapon of war and ethnic cleansing , part of a government counterinsurgency strategy that has orchestrated mass violence against civilians .

similar allegations were made against the sudanese government in the context of the north - south civil war , which officially ended in january 2005 .

between july 2008 and june 2010 , the african union - united nations hybrid operation in darfur ( unamid ) recorded 166 incidents of sexual violence directly related to clashes between the government and armed groups , or to inter - communal fighting and banditry .

while few perpetrators have been traced , 73% of suspects were described as members of non - state armed groups ; another 16% were identified as belonging to the sudanese armed forces and police ; and other survivors reported rapes by elements of chadian armed opposition groups .

according to advocacy groups , assistance for rape survivors in darfur was "largely eliminated" in march 2009 , when sudan expelled 13 international relief organizations operating in the region in response to the international criminal court arrest warrant for sudan's president .

other active conflict zones with reportedly significant levels of sexual violence include areas of the central african republic ( car ) , chad , eastern ethiopia , southern nigeria , and somalia: car has seen a proliferation of anti - government rebel movements — some of which exercise territorial control in the north and northeast — as well as community defense militias and organized criminal gangs .

sexual violence has reportedly been committed by the security forces — especially the army , presidential guard , and police — and non - state armed groups , as well as chadian troops stationed within car and other factions .

according to the u.n. office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs , over 15% of women and girls in car's violence - ridden north have been victims of sexual violence .

in chad , multiple rebel groups based largely in the east are challenging the government's rule .

chadian security forces — particularly the army , police , and gendarmerie — have been accused of perpetrating sexual violence , along with ethnic militias , bandits , and armed groups connected to the spillover of conflict from neighboring darfur .

rape and other forms of sexual violence are reportedly pervasive in and around darfuri refugee camps in eastern chad .

according to united nations figures , there has been an increase in the number of reports of sexual and gender - based violence among refugees in chad , from 295 in 2006 to 860 in 2009 .

in ethiopia , according to human rights groups , systematic rape has been a feature of the ethiopian government's counterinsurgency campaign since 2007 against the ogaden national liberation front ( onlf ) , a largely ethnic somali rebel group operating in the east .

ethiopian security forces have allegedly frequently raped women detained on accusations of aiding the onlf .

in nigeria , state security forces deployed to the oil - producing niger delta region have reportedly used rape to intimidate the local population and retaliate for attacks on oil installations by militant groups .

there have also been occasional reports of rape by militant groups .

in somalia , forces allied with the transitional federal government ( tfg ) and clan militias have been accused by human rights groups of perpetrating sexual violence against civilian residents and displaced populations .

during ethiopia's occupation of south - central somalia between mid - 2006 and january 2009 , ethiopian troops were also accused of sexual assault .

in northeast drc , southeast car , and southern sudan , sexual violence has been carried out not only by domestic armed groups , but also by members of the lord's resistance army ( lra ) , an insurgent group that originated in northern uganda over 20 years ago .

lra fighters have reportedly raped and mutilated civilians and abducted boys and girls for sexual slavery .

the obama administration has sought to emphasize international women's issues as a foreign policy focus .

state department officials have repeatedly referred to sexual violence as a "weapon of war" and an issue that requires u.s. attention .

secretary of state hillary clinton and melanne verveer , the obama administration's ambassador - at - large for global women's issues , have spearheaded the administration's public efforts through multiple statements , official travel , writings , and actions at the united nations .

on september 30 , 2009 , clinton chaired a u.n. security council session on women , peace , and security in armed conflict ; the session resulted in the unanimous passage of security council resolution 1888 , which pertains to sexual violence in conflict situations .

president obama stated that the resolution reinforced the importance his administration places on issues of violence against women and children .

in october 2010 , the administration announced its decision to develop a "national action plan" on the implementation and promotion of u.n. security council resolution 1325 ( 2000 ) , which addresses the impact of war and conflict on women and highlights the need for protection of women and girls from human rights abuses .

the following case study is included in this report due to the relative gravity of sexual abuse perpetrated in drc , and due to recent high levels of attention from u.s. policy - makers , including within the obama administration and congress .

active u.s. programs aimed at addressing sexual violence in drc constitute a large share , in funding and number , of u.s. policy efforts focusing on sexual violence in african conflicts .

many observers have praised the obama administration for its attention to the issue of sexual violence in african conflicts .

secretary of state clinton's visit to goma , for example , was lauded by human rights advocates and humanitarian organizations .

at the same time , a number of concerns have been raised regarding the coordination , scale , and effectiveness of u.s. programs .

some have also questioned whether post - conflict ( or "peaceful" ) settings , where sexual violence levels may be equally high , receive sufficient attention and funding .

an overriding concern , as with many foreign assistance issues , is whether partner nations share u.s. priorities over the scale of the problem and the choice of programs and policies to counter it .

perceived gaps in political will , including a refusal among some governments to acknowledge rule - of - law shortcomings or recognize that state security forces play a role in the perpetration of sexual violence , may negatively impact the success of bilateral assistance programs .

in some ways , debates over program design and approach highlight this issue's multi - faceted nature , which includes diverse elements related to justice sector effectiveness , military professionalism , human security , and women's socio - economic status .

the emphasis of u.s. efforts to combat sexual violence in african conflicts has also evolved over time .

in many instances , u.s. programs have centered around the provision of health assistance to survivors , and support to multilateral entities that provide protection to vulnerable displaced and refugee populations .

however , in recent years , some policy - makers have come to see sexual violence in conflict as a security issue , and one that requires a security - oriented response ; this has led to a growing interest in incorporating sexual violence issues into foreign military and police training , and on promoting the roles of women in peace processes .

at the same time , the policy response to sexual violence may , in some instances , focus on the justice sector , or on long - term economic development and the socio - political empowerment of women .

some argue that donor interventions should focus attention on policy and legal advising for partner government actors .

in turn , these policy evolutions have sparked debates over whether to focus assistance efforts on the direct provision of care , or on long - term support to domestic institutions , the direct results of which may be difficult to ascertain .

some maintain that sexual violence in conflict zones cannot be disaggregated from wider security trends , and that policy efforts to prevent violence should therefore be primarily aimed at providing security on the ground for all civilians .

others argue that policies should emphasize long - range attempts to address shortfalls in the health sector and the perceived societal underpinnings of sexual violence .

some further maintain that policies are , at times , designed with little input from local communities , and emphasize solutions that may not be feasible in impoverished , conflict - affected regions of africa .

concerns have also been raised with regard to training programs , including those aimed at enhancing military professionalism and building capacity to prosecute sexual violence .

in some cases , for example , insufficient infrastructure and expertise on the part of partner agencies and individual recipients of training may inhibit their ability to implement new practices .

moreover , training programs for foreign military and law enforcement personnel often last only a few days or weeks , and may not address underlying problems such as massive gaps in capacity and expertise , insufficient salaries and resources , or an inept or non - existent chain of command .

many conflict - torn african countries lack sufficient numbers of courtrooms and trained personnel , including judges , prosecutors , and investigators , to staff them ; many also lack prisons or barracks in which to intern those convicted of sexual crimes .

enhanced police professionalism may not be effective in the face of a weak or corrupt judiciary .

it is difficult to evaluate the impact of training programs ; many agencies rely on the metric of how many individuals received training , rather than attempting to measure the holistic results or benefit of such training .

the mass rapes in mid - 2010 in the walikale region of drc caused many analysts and policy - makers to reiterate concerns over the role of u.n. peacekeeping missions in preventing sexual violence .

this debate is situated within a larger inter - agency and international discussion over civilian protection in the context of multilateral peacekeeping operations , which increasingly take place in intra - state conflicts marked by high levels of human rights atrocities .

while many advocates have urged troop contributors and commanders to integrate strategies for civilian protection into their activities , some argue that peacekeeping mandates and doctrine often do not provide sufficient guidance and prioritization .

moreover , advocates argue that peacekeeping missions often lack sufficient trained personnel , access to intelligence data and analysis , and "enabling assets" such as road and air transport vehicles , to effectively ensure civilian protection .

critics contend that as multi - national entities with competing policy interests , peacekeeping missions are ill - equipped to shoulder responsibility for the protection of civilians in war - torn , impoverished states .

in drc , this debate has been further influenced by the fact that the u.n. peacekeeping mission — monusco — is mandated to support and assist congolese military troops in counter - insurgency operations .

the goal of this mandate is ostensibly to build capacity among congolese troops while also directly carrying out missions to forcibly disarm and demobilize foreign - origin armed groups operating in eastern congo , as called for under congo's peace process .

however , u.n. support for the military is controversial because congolese troops are reportedly among the top perpetrators of abuses , including sexual assault .

as noted above ( see " u.n. peacekeeping activities " ) , some have argued that peacekeepers should cease support for all military operations in light of ongoing abuses , while others have called for u.n. operations that would directly interdict military attacks on civilians ; u.n. peacekeeping officials maintain that withdrawal of all u.n. support for congolese forces would lead to even greater civilian suffering .

few reliable statistics exist on sexual violence in most african conflicts , and data collection is not a component of most u.s. programs .

furthermore , little is known about the effectiveness of individual programs in reducing the scale of violence .

given necessarily limited resources , it is a matter of debate whether sexual violence programs should budget funding for data collection or monitoring and evaluation efforts .

some argue that better information is needed on the prevalence and context of sexual assault in order to inform policy decisions , and that better evaluation would allow for the establishment of best practices .

others counter that budgeting funds for data collection can reduce the amount of money available for programs themselves .

many critics allege that u.s. policy responses to address sexual and gender - based violence lack strategic focus and coordination .

some attribute this to the fact that there is no lead agency or foreign operations budgetary line item for sexual and gender - based violence programs ; such programs are often funded through accounts such as economic support funds ( esf ) , peacekeeping operations ( pko ) , international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) , section 1207 authority , earmarked funds , and other sources , which may inhibit long - term planning .

the u.s. response to sexual violence in african conflicts tends to be fragmented among many different agencies and implementers , often with reportedly little collaboration , cooperation , or coordination in design or implementation .

the health sector is also often treated separately from the security sector , in lieu of an integrated approach .

some humanitarian advocates maintain that u.s. resources would be most effective if channeled into multilateral efforts , such as those led by u.n. agencies and programs , which may have broad expertise in africa and the ability to coordinate assistance from various sources .

opponents emphasize that u.n. agencies may not act with the same efficiency as other potential implementers , and that u.n. activities may not always align with u.s. priorities .

