legislative branch revolving funds support the "business - type activities" of the house , senate , and legislative branch agencies .

the revolving funds generally fall into two categories: the first provides a means of accounting for services provided by one agency to other governmental entities , while the other covers services for the public .

although legislative branch revolving funds comprise a small portion of the total legislative branch operating budget , they have provided a means through which the house , senate , and legislative branch agencies are able to account for these types of activities .

over time , congress has revisited their use , structure , and solvency ; conducted oversight through hearings and the review of audits ; and considered legislation amending the revolving funds , either through proposals offered by members or at the request of legislative branch agencies .

revolving funds must be established statutorily .

they may be established for a number of reasons , including a desire ( 1 ) to provide separate accounting for transactions between agencies or business - type transactions , ( 2 ) to isolate and simplify accounting for a single activity , or ( 3 ) to increase flexibility and efficiency of operations .

receipts generated from revolving fund transactions are returned to the individual funds and may be expended without further congressional action , although expenditures are confined to authorized uses .

while revolving funds may receive additional budget authority from the legislative branch appropriations bills , the appropriations measures are generally not the primary means of support .

revolving funds are generally intended to operate on a self - sustaining basis with funds retained in the account rather than returned to the u.s. treasury .

authority to spend funds is provided for in law .

the period of availability for amounts in revolving funds also differs depending upon the budget authority provided in the annual appropriations bills .

while amounts in those bills are generally available for the fiscal year , unless otherwise specified , amounts in many of the funds are available without fiscal year limitation .

the legislative branch currently has 27 revolving funds , including eight funds for the house of representatives , nine for the senate , five for the architect of the capitol , four for the library of congress , and one for the government publishing office .

over time , the revolving funds have grown in number and size , undergone numerous reorganizations and legislative amendments , and been subject to the oversight of congressional committees and audits and investigations by the government accountability office ( gao ) .

this report traces the establishment , use , and recent development of these funds .

where applicable , the report refers to publications that provide further details on individual revolving funds .

these publications may provide additional information , including the current status of the fund and recent revenues and expenditures .

in recent years , legislation has been enacted ( 1 ) establishing , consolidating , and repealing legislative branch revolving funds ; ( 2 ) modifying the use of the funds ; ( 3 ) requiring the deposit of receipts associated with some activities while prohibiting expenses associated with others ; ( 4 ) limiting obligational authority ; ( 5 ) allowing a temporary transfer between accounts ; and , in the case of the government publishing office , ( 6 ) providing an appropriation to the fund .

provisions addressing the legislative branch revolving funds have been included in the annual and supplemental appropriations bills as well as authorizing legislation .

while some of the revolving funds legislation has been focused primarily on financial management , revolving funds have also been amended in response to new programs or activities ( for example , the capitol visitor center act ) or broader changes in congressional organization ( for example , the u.s. capitol police and library of congress police merger implementation act ) .

the house of representatives has operated revolving funds for decades .

table 1 provides a summary of the house revolving funds using available data from the statements of disbursements of the house as compiled by the chief administrative officer of the house .

subsequent sections provide additional information on each fund .

the senate has used revolving funds for many years to support the operation of business - like activities .

table 2 provides information on the status of the senate revolving funds from the report of the secretary of the senate .

a section on each revolving fund , including statutory history , follows .

data for the house and senate tables are presented differently because the secretary of the senate provides data on a semi - annual period , whereas the house chief administrative officer provides data quarterly .

in addition , the senate provides a summary of each revolving fund's revenues ( net of expenditures ) .

these data are not provided by the house .

the architect of the capitol maintains five legislative branch statutory revolving funds: the house member gym revolving fund , the senate staff health and fitness facility revolving fund , the senate restaurants revolving fund , the capitol visitor center revolving fund , and the recycling revolving fund .

in addition , the aoc operates the judiciary office building development and operations revolving fund .

the library of congress has long administered funds associated with intra - governmental programs , special events and programs , and services to other libraries and the general public .

while congress has considered a number of changes to the laws governing the administration and use of the library's revolving funds in recent years , these funds currently are operated under the authority of 2 u.s.c .

ยง182 et seq .

the annual legislative branch appropriations bills regularly place limits on the library's obligational authority in connection with reimbursable and revolving fund activities not funded through appropriations .

this language is pursuant to 2 u.s.c .

ยง132a - 1 , which beginning with fy1995 , has limited obligations for any reimbursable and revolving fund activities to the total amounts provided ( 1 ) in the annual regular appropriations act making appropriations for the legislative branch , or ( 2 ) in a supplemental appropriations act that makes appropriations for the legislative branch .

the legislative branch acts have also , since fy2002 , allowed the temporary transfer of funds from the "salaries and expenses" heading to the revolving fund for the fedlink program and for the federal research program , with reimbursement to the former following payments for these services from federal agencies and libraries .

the fy2015 legislative branch appropriations act , for example , contained language limiting the reimbursable and revolving fund activities not funded by appropriations to $203.1 million .

a summary of the revolving funds , as well as requested obligational authority , is presented in the library's annual budget justification and the annual budget requests .

in 1953 , a revolving fund was created for the operation and maintenance of the government printing office ( gpo ) .

the agency was renamed the government publishing office in 2014 , and its revolving fund was renamed the gpo business operations revolving fund .

the revolving fund , which is available without fiscal year limitation , was initially provided $1 million for [e]xpenses necessary for the operation and maintenance of the government printing office ( except the office of the superintendent of documents ) including rental of buildings ; expenses of attendance at meetings , when authorized by the joint committee on printing ; maintenance and operation of the emergency room ; purchase of uniforms for guards ; boots , coats , and gloves ; repairs and minor alterations to buildings ; and expenses authorized in writing by the joint committee on printing for inspection of government printing activities .

since its enactment , the revolving fund language was amended on multiple occasions .

the amendments prescribe the processes for adding capital to the original $1 million provided by congress , reimbursement to the fund , auditing the fund , and reporting its finances to congress .

four legislative branch revolving funds have been repealed .

in each case , the repealed revolving funds were replaced with either another revolving fund or with an annual appropriation .

between august 7 , 1953 , and june 27 , 1956 , a joint senate and house recording facility revolving fund existed to provide operating funds to the joint senate and house recording facility .

pursuant to section 105 ( m ) of p.l .

624 , the fy1957 legislative branch appropriations act ( 84 th congress ) , the revolving fund was repealed and replaced with separate revolving funds for the house and the senate .

see the " senate recording studio and senate photographic studio " and the " house recording studio " sections for more information .

originally created in 1976 , the senate barber shop revolving fund was renamed the senate barber and beauty shops revolving fund in 1988 .

the revolving fund was repealed with the passage of p.l .

105-275 in october 1998 .

the senate barber and beauty shops revolving fund was replaced by the senate hair care services revolving fund in 1998 .

for more information see the " senate hair care services revolving fund " section .

in 1995 , congress created the office of the chaplain expense revolving fund in the senate to fund the office of the senate chaplain .

initially provided with disbursements not to exceed $10,000 per fiscal year , the fund was available without fiscal year limitation for the payment of official expenses , including the purchase of food and food - related items .

additionally , the revolving fund served as a repository for moneys donated to the office of the chaplain .

for fy1999 , the revolving fund statute was amended to increase the maximum annual disbursement into the fund to $35,000 .

the fy2004 consolidated appropriations act repealed the office of the chaplain revolving fund and replaced it with an authorization for an appropriation not to exceed $50,000 per fiscal year .

statutory use of funds by the chaplain remained unchanged except for the approval of vouchers by the senate committee on rules and administration .

any funds remaining in the revolving fund following its repeal were returned to the general fund of the united states treasury .

the office of the attending physician revolving fund was established in 1976 and abolished in 1989 .

the fund formerly contained funds from the sale of prescription drugs .

amounts remaining in the fund upon its abolishment were to be deposited in the treasury as miscellaneous receipts .

