congressional office spending has been a regular topic of interest to academics , interest groups , newspapers , and constituents for many years .

it is a topic frequently mentioned in newspaper articles that address individual member spending or generally discuss financial accountability among elected officials , and it has been examined by watchdog organizations and interest groups covering congressional spending on internal operations generally .

a few scholars have also examined how members typically spend their office allowances , analyzing spending within broader theories of representation .

individual office spending may be as varied as the districts members represent .

factors affecting spending include the tenure or interests of the member , levels of casework , geography , unexpected events , and even the congressional calendar .

while representatives have a high degree of flexibility to operate their offices in a way that supports their congressional duties and responsibilities , they must operate within a number of restrictions and regulations .

the members' representational allowance ( mra ) , the allowance provided to members of the house of representatives to operate their dc and district offices , may only support members in their official and representational duties .

it may not be used for personal or campaign purposes .

additional regulations or restrictions regarding reimbursable expenses may be promulgated by the committee on house administration , the commission on congressional mailing standards , also known as the franking commission , and the committee on standards of official conduct , and may be found in a wide variety of sources , including statute , house rules , committee resolutions , the members' handbook , the franking manual , the house ethics manual , "dear colleague" letters , and formal and informal guidance .

this report provides a history of the mra and overview of recent developments .

it also demonstrates actual mra spending patterns in recent years for all voting members who served for a defined period .

spending and practices across offices and across time vary , and an examination of additional congresses would be required for a more complete picture of congressional office spending patterns .

the mra , which was first authorized in 1996 , was preceded by multiple allowances for each member covering different categories of spending — including the former clerk hire allowance , official expenses allowances , and official mail allowance .

the establishment of the mra followed efforts by the house , dating back to the late 1970s , to move to a system of increased flexibility and accountability for member office operations .

in september 1995 , the committee on house administration authorized the consolidation of these allowances .

subsequently , in november 1995 , the fy1996 legislative branch appropriations act combined the separate appropriations for personal office staff , official office expenses , and mail costs into a single new appropriations heading , "members' representational allowances. .

according to the house appropriations committee report on the fy1996 bill , the consolidation was adopted to simplify members' accounting practices and allowed members to more easily show savings achieved when they did not spend all of their allowance .

subsequent legislation in 1996 further defined the mra and made it subject to regulations and adjustments adopted by the committee on house administration .

additional provisions included in the fy2000 legislative branch appropriations act amended language regarding official mail and repealed obsolete language and terms .

funding is provided on a fiscal year ( beginning october 1 ) basis and a single total amount for all members is provided under the appropriations heading , "members' representational allowances," within the house account "salaries and expenses" contained in the annual legislative branch appropriations bills .

allowance or authorization levels for individual members of the house are authorized in statute and are regulated and adjusted by the committee on house administration pursuant to 2 u.s.c .

4313 et seq .

and house rule x ( 1 ) ( j ) .

the individual mras for the 441 members , delegates , and the resident commissioner are authorized for periods that correspond closely to the sessions of congress — from january 3 of each year through january 2 of the following year .

in addition to the complexity involved in different time frames and split responsibilities — with the appropriation on a fiscal year determined by the committee on appropriations , and the authorization roughly following the calendar year as allocated by the committee on house administration — the house has indicated that the total authorized level for all mras may be more than the total appropriation due to projections on spend - out rates .

the fy1997 report accompanying the legislative branch appropriations bill , for example , stated many members do not expend their full allowance .

that is why the committee bill does not fully fund this account .

the frugality of those members is already projected in the bill presented by the committee .

since these prospective savings are already taken in the bill , they reduce the need for appropriated funds and , therefore , contribute directly to the reduction in federal spending and consequently lower the projected deficit .

if the committee bill were to fully fund the members' representational allowance , the amount appropriated would have to be increased by $27 million .

thus , the account is underfunded by almost 7% .

a similar discussion of the use of prior spending patterns in the determination of mra appropriations levels was included in numerous other house reports , particularly in the first few years of the mra .

it was also discussed during a hearing on the fy2009 legislative branch appropriations requests .

pursuant to law , late - arriving bills may be paid for up to two years following the end of the mra year .

the permissibility of payment for late - arriving bills does not provide flexibility in the timing of the obligation , a point emphasized in the members' congressional handbook , which states: "all expenses incurred will be charged to the allowance available on the date the services were provided or the expenses were incurred" and the "mra is not transferable between years. .

the mra is funded in the house "salaries and expenses" account in the annual legislative branch appropriations bills .

one single line - item provides funding for all members' mras .

the mra funding level peaked at $660.0 million in fy2010 .

it was subsequently reduced to $613.1 million in fy2011 ( - 7.1% ) , and then to $573.9 million in fy2012 ( - 6.4% ) .

the fy2012 funding level was continued in the fy2013 continuing resolution ( p.l .

113-6 ) , not including sequestration or an across - the - board rescission ( - 5.2% ) .

the fy2014 level of $554.3 million was continued in the fy2015 act ( p.l .

113-235 ) and the fy2016 act ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

at an april 20 , 2016 , markup of the fy2017 bill , the house appropriations committee legislative branch subcommittee recommended a continuation of this level .

at the may 17 , 2016 , full committee markup , an amendment offered by representative farr to increase this level by $8.3 million , to $562.6 million ( +1.5% ) , was agreed to .

this level was included in the house - passed fy2017 bill ( h.r .

5325 ) .

h.r .

5325 was not enacted , however , this increase was provided in the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ) , which was enacted on may 5 , 2017 .

the fy2017 level was continued for fy2018 .

the fy2019 level of $573.6 million represents an increase of $10.998 million ( +2.0% ) .

this funding is separate from an allowance for interns in member offices ( $8.8 million was provided in the fy2019 legislative branch appropriations act for up to $20,000 per office ) .

figure 1 shows the appropriation for the overall mra account for all members from fy1996 through fy2019 in current and constant dollars .

the fy2019 funding level is approximately equivalent to the funding level provided when the account was established in fy1996 , when adjusted for inflation ; approximately 6% below the $609.0 million provided in fy2009 , not adjusted for inflation ; and approximately 13% below the peak funding provided in fy2010 , not adjusted for inflation .

figure 1 also shows that the mra is the largest category of appropriations within the house of representatives , regularly comprising approximately 50% of house appropriations .

the mra for each member is set by the committee on house administration based on three components: personnel , official office expenses , and official ( franked ) mail .

the personnel allowance component is the same for each member .

the office expenses and mail allowances components vary from member to member .

the office expense component includes a base amount ; a mileage allowance , which is calculated based on the distance between a member's district and washington , dc ; and an office space allowance , which is based on the cost of office space in a member's district .

the official mail component is calculated based on the number of nonbusiness addresses in a member's district .

the three components result in a single mra authorization for each representative that can be used to pay for official expenses .

table 1 demonstrates the variation in authorization levels that resulted from this formula since 1996 .

figure 2 presents this information graphically .

expenses related to official and representational duties are reimbursable under the mra in accordance with the regulations contained in the members' congressional handbook .

the handbook , for example , states that a member is personally responsible for the payment of any official and representational expenses incurred that exceed the provided mra or that are incurred but are not reimbursable under these regulations .

certain expenses , including personal expenses , greeting cards , alcoholic beverages , and most gifts and donations , are also not reimbursable .

the mra is not transferable between years , and unspent funds from one year cannot be obligated in any subsequent year .

other limitations on the use of official funds are also contained in house rule xxiv .

"dear colleague" letters — which are distributed among members , committees , and officers — frequently mention the mra .

these "dear colleague" letters have announced changes in the dissemination of information or the processing of vouchers , elaborated on procedures , reminded members and staff of guidelines on the use of funds , and asked for support for mra legislation .

the committee on house administration , for example , has distributed regular annual "dear colleagues" announcing or explaining regulations , such as those pertaining to end - of - year expenses , district office space , and travel .

other letters have been issued regarding allowable franking and mra expenses for the annual congressional art competition or travel for a member's funeral service , as well as reminders of prohibited expenses .

the letters have explained the implication of new regulations , rulings , or decisions on mra spending .

they also have summarized changes to the statement of disbursement s .

house spending is categorized by the standard budget object classes used for the federal government .

these may include personnel compensation ; personnel benefits ; travel ; rent , communications , and utilities ; printing and reproduction ; other services ; supplies and materials ; transportation of things ; and equipment .

the disbursement volumes also contain a category for franked mail .

certain costs are not included in the mra and will not be reflected in these totals .

the costs include the salaries of members and certain benefits — including any government contributions toward health and life insurance and retirement — for both members and staff .

additionally , the range of items that may be covered by an office , as well as staff pay ceilings , have changed over time .

the mra also does not reflect spending by house officers and legislative branch agencies in support of member offices .

the statements of disbursements are published as house documents and were historically available in bound volumes .

beginning with the disbursements for the quarter ending september 30 , 2009 , the statements have been posted on the house of representatives website , house.gov .

beginning with disbursements covering january - march 2016 , this website provides sod information in a sortable csv ( comma - separated values ) format .

this section examines the use of the mra in practice in recent years .

disbursement information for each authorization year may appear in statements for 12 quarters , since , as discussed above , late - arriving bills may be paid for up to two years following the end of the mra year ( although unspent funds from one year cannot be obligated in any subsequent year ) .

for example , while members could only obligate 2011 mra expenditures from january 3 , 2011 , until january 2 , 2012 , late - arriving receipts could be paid through the quarter ending december 31 , 2013 .

while some bills , particularly from outside vendors , may be settled up to eight quarters after the end of the mra year , the vast majority of billing occurs during the session or in the quarter immediately following the close of the mra year .

billing for some categories — like personnel compensation — is almost entirely within the disbursements for the calendar year of study .

by examining volumes from subsequent quarters , in addition to those from the authorization year , it is possible to provide a more complete picture of spending patterns .

numerous characteristics of individual congressional districts or member preferences can influence spending priorities , which is reflected in the flexibility provided to members in establishing and running their offices .

despite some variations , the data , however , show a relative consistency in the overall allocation of mra resources by category of spending both across members and over time .

table 2 provides a distributional analysis of office - level data .

as with the figures on house - wide total member office spending in figure 3 , the office - level data indicate that personnel compensation is by far the largest category of expense for member offices .

spending on personnel as a percentage of total spending varied ( as seen in the differences between the maximum and minimum percentages ) , but many offices clustered near the mean ( i.e. , the median and mean were close in all years ) .

data on other categories of spending also demonstrate that , while variations exist across offices , similar patterns have developed across the house .

table 3 shows spending as a proportion of the total individual authorization .

figure 3 demonstrates aggregate house spending in these years .

as with the data on office - level spending in table 2 , the aggregate data indicate that personnel compensation is the largest category of mra - related expenses .

