the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) has long been accused of unlawfully discriminating against minority and female farmers in the management of its various programs , particularly in its farm service agency loan programs .

while usda has taken concrete steps to address these allegations of discrimination , the results of these efforts have been criticized by some , and in 2008 and 2009 , the government accountability office ( gao ) issued reports that documented managerial and procedural failures , especially in usda's office of the assistant secretary for civil rights .

meanwhile , some minority and female farmers who have alleged discrimination by usda have filed various lawsuits under the equal credit opportunity act ( ecoa ) and the administrative procedure act ( apa ) .

pigford v. glickman , filed on behalf of african - american farmers , is probably the most widely known , although native american and female farmers also filed suit in keepseagle v. vilsack and love v. vilsack , respectively .

in addition , a group of hispanic farmers filed a similar lawsuit against usda in october 2000 .

the case , garcia v. vilsack , involved allegations that usda unlawfully discriminated against all similarly situated hispanic farmers with respect to credit transactions and disaster benefits in violation of the ecoa , which prohibits discrimination against credit applicants on the basis of race , color , religion , national origin , sex , marital status , age , or source of income .

the suit further claimed that usda violated the ecoa and the apa by systematically failing to investigate complaints of discrimination , as required by usda regulations .

after nearly a decade of litigation and numerous rulings on procedural and substantive issues , the garcia plaintiffs exhausted their final avenue of appeal to have their claims heard as a class action .

as a result , the garcia plaintiffs who wish to pursue their available claims in court must do so individually , or they and other eligible hispanic farmers may participate in a settlement process established by usda .

a detailed analysis of the legal rulings and settlement process in garcia is set forth below , following a section that provides background information on some of the policy issues surrounding the litigation .

this report also contains a brief discussion of some of the other discrimination cases that have been filed against usda , as well as a section describing some possible options for congress to consider if it wishes to respond to the garcia dispute or provide additional assistance that goes beyond the current settlement .

this section provides background information on some of the policy issues raised by the garcia litigation , including a discussion of the history of civil rights issues at usda and a description of the farm service agency , the usda agency whose actions are at issue in garcia .

as noted above , the garcia v. vilsack lawsuit involved allegations that usda unlawfully discriminated against hispanic farmers .

specifically , the lawsuit , which was filed in the u.s. district court for the district of columbia in 2000 on behalf of all similarly situated hispanic farmers across the country , alleged that usda discriminated against the plaintiffs with respect to credit transactions and disaster benefits in violation of the ecoa , which prohibits discrimination against credit applicants on the basis of race , color , religion , national origin , sex , marital status , age , or source of income .

the suit further claimed that usda violated the ecoa and the apa by systematically failing to investigate complaints of discrimination , as required by usda regulations .

as noted above , garcia is not the only discrimination lawsuit that has been filed against usda .

although pigford , the lawsuit filed by black farmers , is the first and perhaps most well - known case , native american farmers and female farmers also have filed lawsuits based on similar claims .

these cases are described below .

congress has , in the past , legislatively responded to discrimination issues at usda and could decide to intervene again in the future .

this section discusses past congressional actions and possible future responses for congress to consider if it wishes to become involved in usda - related discrimination issues generally or the garcia dispute specifically .

the ongoing civil rights issues within usda have led to various legislative responses by congress .

for example , in the 2002 farm bill , congress created the office of the assistant secretary for civil rights , which has the statutory responsibility of ensuring compliance with all civil rights laws and ensuring the incorporation of civil rights components into all strategic planning initiatives of the department .

meanwhile , the 2008 farm bill , the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , established a moratorium on acceleration and foreclosure proceedings by usda against any farmer or rancher who has filed a program discrimination claim .

accrual of interest and offsets are also to be waived while a complaint is pending , although if the farmer does not prevail in the discrimination complaint the accrued interest and offsets come due .

usda has issued a notice implementing the farm bill provision .

any borrower who has filed a discrimination complaint that has not yet been resolved should therefore not be subject to acceleration , foreclosure , the accrual of interest , or offsets .

in the 2008 farm bill , congress also inserted a non - binding sense of congress regarding claims brought by socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers .

the provision stated that all pending claims and class actions brought against usda by socially disadvantaged farmers or ranchers including native american , hispanic , and female farmers or ranchers , based on racial , ethnic , or gender discrimination in farm program participation should be resolved in an expeditious and just manner .

in addition , when final approval for the settlement in pigford ii became contingent on congressional action , congress approved the claims resolution act of 2010 to provide the $1.15 billion appropriation to fund the settlement agreement .

there are several other possible options for congressional involvement in the garcia dispute specifically or usda - related discrimination issues more generally .

at one end of the spectrum of options , congress could simply choose not to intervene , thus remaining neutral , as is typically the case .

in general , congress is not considered to be the institution that is best suited to mediate legal disputes , which is why such situations are resolved by the courts , which have both the means and the expertise to evaluate the merits of legal claims and to provide remedies when appropriate .

indeed , one could argue that congress already provided a remedy for situations involving discrimination against credit applicants when it enacted the ecoa .

under this view , congress's involvement could end with the enactment of this legislative remedy , and the application of that remedy would be left to the courts .

at the other end of the spectrum , if congress decides to become involved in the garcia dispute or related litigation , a number of approaches could be considered .

for example , congress could decide to create a fund to aid hispanic or other farmers who are deemed to have been victims of discrimination .

indeed , congress has established a number of programs to compensate or assist victims of certain circumstances , including negligence , terrorism , and "acts of god. .

notably , the vast majority of these programs have provided compensation in cases of physical injury or death .

congress could decide whether to create similar compensation funds for farmers who have been victims of discrimination by usda .

if congress were to create such a fund , it would likely have to establish the parameters under which the fund would operate , including designating a program administrator , establishing eligibility requirements , determining what types of benefits would be provided , and establishing the means by which the fund would be financed .

one possible approach would be for congress to model such a fund on the terms of the consent decree in the pigford case , which defined eligible claimants and established a system for notice , claims submission , consideration , and review that involved a facilitator , arbitrator , adjudicator , and monitor , all with assigned responsibilities .

the pigford consent decree established a two - track dispute resolution mechanism for those seeking relief , including a streamlined process with a lower evidentiary standard for a fixed settlement at a lesser amount and a more detailed process by which class participants could seek a larger , tailored payment by showing evidence of greater damages .

the funds to pay the costs of the settlement ( including legal fees ) come from the judgment fund operated by the department of the treasury , not from usda accounts or appropriations .

although congress was not involved in the creation of the compensation system established under the pigford consent decree , congress did make $100 million available in the 2008 farm bill and an additional $1.15 billion available in the claims resolution act of 2010 to settle pi gford ii claims .

another possible option would be for congress to change underlying statutory requirements relating to the filing of discrimination claims against usda .

for example , congress could extend the statute of limitations under the ecoa for hispanic farmers who are not party to the current litigation and who wish to file a discrimination lawsuit but who missed the two - year deadline for filing claims under the statute .

congress passed a similar measure waiving the statute of limitations under the ecoa on certain civil rights claims against usda when it became clear that some black farmers would otherwise have been excluded from the class that was certified in pigford .

yet another option available to congress would be to have the claims under the garcia case be considered by the united states court of federal claims as a non - binding congressional reference case .

a congressional reference case is a request from congress to the claims court to prepare an advisory report regarding a claim against the united states .

such claims are generally set out in a private bill for compensation , and then the bill is referred to the claims court by a house or senate resolution in order for the court to consider its merits .

in general , these reports are made pursuant to procedures set forth in statute and by court regulations .

it is important to note that the range of options described above is not exhaustive , but merely represents a sample of possibilities for congress to consider if it wishes to become involved in resolving some of the issues raised by garcia or related disputes involving allegations of discrimination against usda .

