one of the most significant developments in china's industrialization is the growth of china's automotive industry , which is a catalyst for many other linked sectors of its economy .

china's focus on its auto industry and the supporting infrastructure and development patterns could have significant implications for global auto manufacturing and trade .

while the u.s. automotive market was impacted by the global economic downturn that started in late 2008 and throughout 2010 , the chinese auto market has been growing rapidly .

it has been a bright spot for foreign auto makers with a presence in china , such as general motors ( gm ) and volkswagen ( vw ) .

spurred by the central government's stimulus spending and financial incentives to encourage vehicle ownership , the chinese vehicle production was over 18 million units each in 2010 and 2011 .

in the span of just a few years , china has become the world's top auto producer and also the biggest auto sales market .

it is not clear whether china will mainly consume automobiles in its own market , take a more aggressive export - oriented approach similar to that of japan and korea , or create some mixture of these two .

industry data and forecasts suggest that china may take a hybrid approach that focuses on domestic consumption while also building vehicles for export in order to induce chinese companies to produce world class cars .

additionally , china's automotive parts manufacturing sector is export focused , increasingly complex , and rapidly moving from low - cost to more value - added production .

as china becomes a bigger player in the global auto market , its impact on the domestic u.s. industry could increase .

so far the most significant impact may be in automotive parts exported into the united states .

while u.s. - china trade in motor vehicles is relatively limited , and likely to remain so for the short - to medium - term , bilateral trade in auto parts has grown significantly since 2001 .

the obama administration has taken direct measures to address u.s. - china automotive trade , such as the tariffs on chinese tires .

however , as china becomes a top automotive manufacturer and a major consumer market , there are lingering concerns about the conditions under which u.s. manufacturers must compete with chinese firms both in and outside china , including the domestic u.s. market .

these concerns have focused on such issues as china's export restrictions on certain raw materials , including rare earths , which are necessary for many auto parts production , including those for use in hybrid and electric cars ; china's incomplete implementation of its commitments as a member of the world trade organization , especially with respect to domestic content rules , protection of non - chinese firms' intellectual property rights , and technology transfer requirements ; the extent to which chinese firms are subsidized or otherwise supported and protected by the government when they compete with foreign companies domestically and with imports into china ; and the implications of china's recently announced restrictions on foreign carmakers' expansion in china amid the government's efforts to promote domestic producers , for example , how they may affect u.s. auto companies' profitability and business prospects in china .

this report provides an overview of china's auto sector development , including vehicle production , sales , market drivers , manufacturers , and automotive trade .

it discusses the operations of foreign auto makers in china , the emergence of domestic manufacturers , and the relationship between the two .

it also examines how the chinese government policies and measures guide and often direct the evolution of china's auto sector and discusses the prospects and implications for international automakers operating in china .

china's automotive industry was established in the 1950s , under the guidance of the chinese communist party central committee and with assistance from the former soviet union .

although the automotive industry has always been viewed as a strategic sector to move the country into the modern industrial age , it did not substantially develop until the late 1980s , after chinese leader deng xiaoping came to power and moved the country toward economic and trade liberalization .

in 1988 , after a visit to china and its fledgling automotive industry , then - chrysler corporation ceo lee iacocca is said to have reflected that china's modernization process would be , "a long haul .

a very long haul. .

since the late 1980s , chinese vehicles have become increasingly sophisticated as a result of partnerships with major foreign automakers ( eg , vw , gm , toyota , honda , nissan , mazda , hyundai , and kia ) designed to foster "cooperation in technology development. .

an activist government policy has liberalized the chinese automotive sector in some key respects such as permitting foreign investment , but it requires foreign manufacturers to undertake joint ventures with local partners in order to obtain market access .

the stated goal of the chinese government then was to create a market dominated by a limited number of internationally competitive joint venture assemblers , supplied by local parts manufacturers , and producing to world standards .

after nearly three decades of rapid economic growth , the domestic chinese auto industry has made substantial progress .

many independent domestic automotive manufacturers have emerged and have ambitions to become global auto companies .

although they have to overcome hurdles , such as creating their own designs and meeting world standards in terms of product quality , safety , and environmental features , the domestic manufacturers are expanding their market share and are slowly moving up the value chain .

china's annual vehicle output increased from less than 2 million vehicles in the late 1990s to over 18 million in 2011 .

its auto industry is already a major force propelling the chinese economy and its workforce , with an annual gross output of more than rmb 3 trillion yuan ( approximately $ 440 billion ) in 2009 and over 3.7 million workers in automotive production , according to china's auto industry association and official .

american automotive manufacturers were among the earliest international companies to move into china with the opening of the market to foreign investors in the 1980s .

in 1983 , after tedious and difficult negotiations , american motors corporation ( amc ) signed a joint - venture ( jv ) agreement with china's beijing automotive works , the first such major manufacturing deal reached by a western industrial company in china .

despite this early initiative , american companies largely lost out in the early period of growth in the chinese automotive market , first to japanese imports , and then to european investors , particularly vw .

one strategy the chinese government has been exploring is whether to allow domestic automakers to acquire foreign brands .

opportunities to purchase distressed foreign assets came during / following the 1997-1998 asian financial crisis and then the global economic slowdown in 2008-2009 .

the united states and other producers had been highly critical of china's 1994 industrial policy for the automotive sector .

this policy was replaced by a new one issued by the government in may 2004 , with provisions discouraging the importation of auto parts and encouraging the use of domestic technology to be discussed later in this report .

in march 2009 , the state council , the highest executive organ of the central government , released the automotive readjustment and revitalization plan ( the plan ) , an industry - specific development blueprint for the auto sector in china , aiming to boost the chinese auto sector amid the global economic slowdown .

the chinese auto industry , after the explosive growth during the past several years , has started to slow down .

car makers in china are likely to face intense competition and pressure on profitability amid falling demand and structural overcapacity in the industry .

at the same time , the auto market remains lackluster in many european countries , due to the euro zone financial crisis and related downturn in key markets , while the auto industry in the united states is starting to recover and become more competitive after restructuring .

although china has the ambition to make cars for the industrialized world , global acceptance of the quality and safety of chinese automobiles remains a challenge for now .

doubts remain if the central government's policies and measures to promote domestic automakers and indigenous brands , arguably at the expense of foreign automakers , are likely to help .

banning fleet purchases from foreign automakers may provide the domestic producers a captive ( and limited ) market but would not help them become more competitive with improved indigenous technology and brand recognition .

before it overcomes these issues , the chinese auto industry is likely to go through a period of consolidation and restructuring .

a broader question is how effective the chinese government's efforts would be to build globally competitive companies — whether its goals can be accomplished through government planning and directives or whether the chinese auto companies should make their own business decisions and allow market forces to work .

