congress is considering legislation to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases that may , depending on the specifics of the final legislation , affect the competitiveness of energy - or greenhouse gas - intensive industries .

competitiveness can be a rather abstract term for which any precise meaning can be elusive .

competitiveness is a continuing phenomenon , with companies becoming more or less competitive according to a host of factors , including productivity , market demand , resource costs , labor costs , exchange rates , and the like .

as stated by the australian government in its green paper on carbon reduction schemes: changes in the cost structures of entities and industries are not unusual and occur continuously in a market - based economy ; nor is it unusual for government policy to change cost structures .

for example , the adoption of high quality occupational health and safety standards have affected the profitability of australia's labour - intensive traded industries , making it more difficult for them to compete with foreign producers that are subject to lower standards .

assistance is not usually provided to offset the impact of domestic policies on traded industries , as those policies reflect the priorities and values of the government and community more generally .

most industries face a competitive market ( sometimes international in scope ) both in terms of producers of the same products and producers of substitute products .

also , in some cases , an industry may face a fairly elastic demand for its product .

thus , most industries are price sensitive , and therefore any increase in manufacturing costs — as by a carbon emission reduction requirement — hurts the competitiveness of a firm .

this complex situation is further complicated for energy - intensive industries as competitors within the same industry may experience different energy price increases ( particularly for electric power ) , depending on their individual energy needs and power arrangements .

for example , an aluminum plant receiving power from a hydro - electric facility may not be affected the same way as a similar plant whose power contract is with a coal - fired power supplier .

the addition of a carbon control regime to this competitive dynamic has raised concerns that , in the absence of similar policies among competing nations , if the united states adopts a carbon control policy , energy - or greenhouse gas - intensive , trade - exposed industries that must control their emissions or that find their feedstock or energy bills rising because of costs passed - through by suppliers may be less competitive and may lose global market share ( and jobs ) to competitors in countries lacking comparable carbon policies .

in addition , this potential shift in production could result in some of the u.s. carbon reductions being undercut by increased production in less regulated countries ; this is commonly known as "carbon leakage. .

greenhouse gas reduction legislation introduced over the last two congresses has included provisions to address carbon leakage and to mitigate the effect of carbon policies on u.s. competitiveness .

in general , two strategies have been proposed: ( 1 ) providing assistance to greenhouse gas - intensive , trade - exposed industries ; and ( 2 ) imposing tariffs on certain greenhouse gas - intensive goods imported into the country from countries not implementing comparable carbon policies .

such tariffs are frequently referred to as border measures .

h.r .

2454 , as passed by the house , contains both of these strategies .

this report examines the dynamics of this issue in three parts .

first , the european union ( eu ) has been implementing a cap - and - trade program for four years , and has finalized a third reduction phase that will run from 2013 through 2020 .

this report reviews and analyzes the experience of the eu in addressing its concerns about energy - intensive , trade - exposed industries , and the lessons those efforts may have for the united states .

second , the house - passed american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( h.r .

2454 ) contains both a free allocation scheme and a border measure among its provisions to address the concerns of energy - intensive , trade - exposed industries .

this report reviews and analyzes these provisions .

third , these same provisions could come under scrutiny under various u.s. trade agreements , particularly within the world trade organization ( wto ) .

concerns have been expressed that the border measure contained in h.r .

2454 would be suspect under various provisos of the wto .

this report analyzes the potential wto implications of any attempt to implement a subsidy or a border measure under h.r .

2454 .

greenhouse gas reduction legislation introduced over the last two congresses has included provisions to address carbon leakage .

in general , two strategies have been employed: ( 1 ) free allocation of allowances ( similar to that of the eu ) ; and ( 2 ) an international reserve allowance ( ira ) scheme .

h.r .

2454 , as passed by the house , contains both of these strategies .

title iv of h.r .

2454 would amend the bill's new title vii of the clean air act by creating a new part f to address carbon leakage .

the purpose of the new part f is both environmental , in terms of reducing potential carbon leakage resulting from potential shifts of production and investment from the united states to countries without carbon controls , and economic , in terms of preventing the associated job loss from such a shift .

specifically , the purposes of part f as a whole would be ( 1 ) "to promote a strong global effort to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions and , through this global effort , stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that will prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system," and ( 2 ) "to prevent an increase in greenhouse gas emissions in countries other than the united states as a result of direct and indirect compliance costs incurred under" the new title viii .

the free allocation scheme ( subpart 1 ) would be further aimed at the following: ( 1 ) "to provide a rebate to the owners of and operators of entities in domestic eligible industrial sectors for their greenhouse gas emissions costs incurred under this title , but not for costs associated with other related or unrelated market dynamics" ; ( 2 ) "to design such rebates in a way that will prevent carbon leakage while also rewarding innovations and facility - level investments in energy efficiency performance improvements" ; and ( 3 ) "to eliminate or reduce distribution of emission allowances under subpart 1 when such distribution is no longer necessary to prevent carbon leakage from eligible industrial sectors. .

the ira scheme ( subpart 2 ) would have these additional purposes: ( 1 ) "to induce foreign countries , and , in particular , fast - growing developing countries , to take substantial action with respect to their greenhouse gas emissions consistent with the bali action plan developed under the united nations framework convention on climate change" and ( 2 ) "to ensure that the measures described in subpart 2 are designed and implemented consistent with applicable international agreements to which the united states is a party. .

both vehicles in title iv of h.r .

2454 aimed at competitiveness and leakage concerns — the granting of free emission allowances to domestic firms and the imposition of border measures on imported products — raise issues involving u.s. obligations under world trade organization ( wto ) agreements .

legislation providing free emission allowances to carbon / energy - intensive trade - exposed industries may arguably confer a subsidy for purposes of the wto agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures .

although the bill would require epa to establish a border measure ( ira ) program consistent with u.s. international agreements , a category that would include u.s. trade agreements , a requirement that importers purchase iras to accompany particular imports might nonetheless be found to constitute a prohibited import surcharge or , if the product may not otherwise enter the united states , a prohibited quantitative restriction under the general agreement on tariffs and trade 1994 ( gatt ) .

if so , the requirement would need to be justified under a gatt exception to survive a wto challenge .

it is important to emphasize that while earlier gatt and wto cases may provide a guide to the types of issues that may concern a wto panel applying and interpreting gatt exceptions , measures are judged on a case - by - case basis .

thus , earlier decisions may not be fully predictive where a member seeks to justify a novel and complex measure that affects a broad range of imported products , production processes , sources of manufacture , and trading partners .

since the negotiating objectives set out in h.r .

2454 contemplate that a multilateral ghg - reduction agreement may include provisions permitting , or at least not prohibiting , individual parties to address trade - related "competitive imbalances that lead to carbon leakage," it is possible that such an agreement could establish a set of principles or rights and obligations among the parties that address the allocation of emission allowances by wto member countries in the context of wto subsidy obligations , provide scope for members to impose border measures , or both .

a provision limiting the initiation of disputes for a defined period , a so - called "peace clause," might also be included .

such an agreement might also be negotiated separate from multilateral climate change negotiations .

wto members could obtain a wto waiver for the provisions of such an agreement , incorporate binding commitments into wto law by amending the relevant wto agreements , or adopt separately negotiated principles or guidelines in a wto decision .

agreement on a binding wto - related climate change accord is far from certain , however , and thus , absent such an agreement or broad adherence thereto by wto members , the wto dispute settlement process may ultimately serve as the main forum for resolving wto legal issues involving problematic trade - related climate change measures .

disputes arising under wto agreements are heard under the terms of the understanding on rules and procedures governing the settlement of disputes ( dispute settlement understanding or dsu ) .

other wto agreements , such as the wto agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures , while providing for dispute settlement under the dsu rules and procedures , contain certain special and additional rules , which prevail over those in the dsu in the event of differences between the two .

dispute settlement is administered by the wto dispute settlement body ( dsb ) , consisting of all wto members .

wto dispute settlement may be characterized as a three - stage process , consisting of ( 1 ) consultations ; ( 2 ) panel and possibly appellate body proceedings ; and , ( 3 ) if a wto decision is adverse to the defending member , implementation .

once the dsb adopts panel and any appellate body reports finding that the defending member has violated a wto obligation , the defending member would ordinarily be expected to withdraw the violative measure .

if the member could not comply immediately , it would be given a reasonable period of time to do so .

in the event that the defending member fails to comply by the end of the established compliance period , the complaining member may seek compensation from the defending member or request authorization from the wto to impose countermeasures ( i.e. , to suspend wto concessions or other obligations owed the defending member , usually , to place additional tariffs on selected products imported from the member ) .

the dsu treats countermeasures as measures of "last resort," however , and permits them to be applied only as long as the measure found to violate wto obligations remains in place or until the disputing parties settle their dispute in a mutually satisfactory way .

certain actions by the dsb — namely , establishing a dispute settlement panel , adopting panel and appellate body reports , and authorizing a wto member to impose countermeasures — are virtually automatic ; that is , the action will be taken unless all members present at the dsb meeting agree not to do so ( "reverse consensus" rule ) .

the dsu contains an aspirational timeline of 18 months from the date a panel is established to the date a compliance period is determined .

complex cases are likely to require additional time , however , particularly at the panel stage .

dispute settlement is generally member - driven , so that it is up to the parties to a dispute to decide whether or not to take particular actions available to them ( eg , to request a panel , to request authorization to take countermeasures against a non - complying member , or to apply such measures even if the wto has authorized them ) .

while the possibility of paying compensation or suffering the effects of retaliatory action may exert a degree of pressure on defending members to comply with wto decisions , and while dsu provisions indicate an overall intent that members comply , the inclusion of compensation or retaliation as remedies , albeit temporary ones , recognizes that wto members may not always do so .

in practice , members have managed disputes at the implementation stage in a variety of ways short of taking retaliatory action .

under gatt and now wto dispute settlement practice , a wto member may challenge a measure of another member "as such," "as applied," or both .

an "as such" claim challenges the measure as violative of a wto agreement independent of its application in a specific situation and , as described by the wto appellate body , seeks to prevent the defending member from engaging in identified conduct before the fact .

panels in past "as such" challenges have used an analytical tool known as the "mandatory / discretionary distinction," under which a law or regulation was considered not to violate a gatt or wto obligation if it did not mandate a wto - inconsistent outcome or , in other words , could be applied in a wto - consistent fashion .

if found to be discretionary under this analysis , the measure would need to be challenged "as applied. .

at the same time , the wto appellate body , without examining the role of the distinction in a comprehensive way , has stated that the distinction should not be applied in a "mechanistic fashion," and thus the existence of discretionary elements in a statute or regulation may not necessarily shield it from an "as such" challenge .

an emission allowance may be defined as governmental permission to emit one ton of carbon dioxide or carbon dioxide - equivalent .

in a cap and trade system , recipients of emission allowances would include entities subject to emission caps and possibly other industrial entities that emit ghg gases directly in production processes and indirectly through the use of carbon - intensive fuels , as well as a broader array of entities that may be adversely affected by higher fuel prices resulting from compliance costs borne by capped fuel producers .

the government may allocate allowances free of charge , require that they be obtained through an auction , or operate a mixed system incorporating both approaches .

depending on its individual situation , a capped entity would use all of its allowances to cover emissions up to its annual cap ; purchase additional allowances if it exceeded its cap and did not hold sufficient allowances to account for these excess emissions ; or , in the event its annual emissions fell below the cap , sell unused allowances to other capped entities that need allowances to cover emissions that exceed their cap or bank them for future use or sale .

non - capped entities would either sell their allowances to capped entities or trade them in carbon markets .

thus , the situation of the recipient may differ depending on whether it is a capped or non - capped entity , and , if capped , whether the original allocation of allowances is sufficient , insufficient , or over - generous .

emission allowances have been recently characterized by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) as "'cash - like' in nature" because they may be traded "in a large and liquid secondary market. .

moreover , in assessing the budgetary treatment of distributed allowances in a system where the government determines the scope of covered emissions and the number of allowances to be issued , cbo concluded that the distribution by the federal government would be essentially equivalent to the distribution of cash grants , so cbo believes that such distributions should be treated as outlays .

at the same time , allowances in a cap - and - trade system would be valuable financial instruments , so cbo thinks that the creation of allowances by the federal government should be recorded as revenues .

that logic does not hinge on whether the government sells or , instead , gives away the allowances .

allowances would have significant value even if given away because the recipients could sell them , or if they are carbon dioxide emitters , use them to avoid incurring the cost of purchasing allowances or investing in costly emission mitigation mechanisms .

therefore , selling allowances and giving entities cash , and giving entities the allowances themselves and letting the entities realize their value , are essentially the same transaction .

sound budgeting requires that the budget treat equivalent transactions in the same way .

in explaining its approach , cbo considers that the government grant of an allowance to a firm , business , or other recipient that would sell the allowance to a capped entity is a transaction that is "equivalent" to the government's taxing the capped firm or selling it an allowance and subsequently giving the proceeds from the transaction to the recipient .

the joint committee on taxation has added that considering emission allowances to be tradable , and thus "cash - like," makes them similar to commodities , noting that sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emission allowances created by the clean air act and various types of carbon credits and their derivatives are already traded on commodities markets .

at the same time , the committee found that allowances also "bear some resemblance to licenses that the government grants in other contexts , eg , television broadcast licenses granted by the federal communication commission , liquor licenses granted by state and local governments , and certain agricultural production quotas. .

as with these licenses , "emission allowances are transferable , intangible assets , the useful life of which can be limited by statute. .

the committee continued: the application of different analogies can lead to very different answers to the most basic tax questions presented by cap and trade .

for example , whereas allocations of certain licenses by the government have been deemed to be nonrecognition events ( i.e. , no tax is imposed at the time the license is granted ) , few would argue that a government distribution of a commodity , such as gold , oil , or pork bellies , should not be taxable to the recipient .

the committee identified three alternatives for taxing allocated emission allowances , based on whether and when there would be an accession to wealth: ( 1 ) including them in income upon receipt , ( 2 ) including them in income when first available for use , and ( 3 ) excluding them from income .

it is clear that in providing emission allowances to domestic entities , the federal government would provide the recipient with a vehicle for the receipt of a monetary benefit , and thus it may be viewed in a broad sense as providing a subsidy to the recipient entity .

as explained below , however , for the provision of emission allowances to constitute a subsidy in wto terms , the government activity or practice must first qualify as a "financial contribution" or "an income or price support" as those terms are understood under wto agreements .

to date , neither gatt nor wto jurisprudence has addressed this type of instrument in light of wto subsidy obligations .

the provision of subsidies by wto members is governed by the wto agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures ( scm agreement ) , which elaborates upon and expands subsidy obligations contained in article xvi of the gatt 1994 and contains detailed obligations involving the imposition of countervailing duties permitted under gatt article vi .

wto members may impose countervailing duties on imported products that are found to be subsidized by an exporting wto member and cause or threaten material injury to ( or materially retard the establishment of ) a domestic industry .

a subsidy meeting the wto definition may be challenged in a wto dispute settlement proceeding or may be remedied by the imposition of countervailing duties on the subsidized product in an amount that does not exceed the subsidy conferred .

while the gatt 1994 contains general public policy - related exceptions that may be invoked to justify gatt - inconsistent measures , the scm agreement does not contain a separate set of exceptions that would permit wto members to deviate from agreement obligations .

for purposes of the scm agreement , the term subsidy is defined as a "financial contribution by a government or any public body within the territory of a member," or an income or price support in the sense of article xvi of the gatt 1994 that confers a benefit .

a financial contribution will be found where: ( i ) a government practice involves a direct transfer of funds ( eg , grants , loans , and equity infusion ) , potential direct transfer of funds or liabilities ( eg , loan guarantees ) ; ( ii ) government revenue that is otherwise due is foregone or not collected ( eg , fiscal incentives such as tax credits ) ; ( iii ) a government provides goods or services other than general infrastructure , or purchases goods ; ( iv ) a government makes payments to a funding mechanism , or entrusts or directs a private body to carry out one or more of the functions illustrated in ( i ) to ( iii ) above which would normally be vested in the government and the practice , in no real sense , differs from practices normally followed by governments .

while an income or price support may constitute the requisite governmental involvement for purposes of the scm agreement , this provision has not been cited to any great extent in gatt or wto jurisprudence .

with respect to the second prong of the wto definition , that is , the conferral of a benefit , a financial contribution will be found to do so if it places the recipient in a more advantageous situation than would have been the case absent the contribution .

to be challenged in a wto dispute settlement proceeding or to be subject to countervailing duties , the subsidy must be specific to an industry or enterprise or a group of industries or enterprises .

prohibited subsidies , as described below , are considered to be specific per se .

subsidies may be specific in law , that is , they may be explicitly limited to certain enterprises and not be administered under objective criteria or conditions , or they may be specific in fact .

regarding the rules under which the program operates , the scm agreement provides that specificity will not exist where legislation , or the granting authority operating under it , "establishes objective criteria or conditions governing the eligibility for , and the amount of , a subsidy ... provided that the eligibility is automatic and that such criteria and conditions are strictly adhered to. .

objective criteria or conditions mean those "which are neutral , which do not favour certain enterprises over others , and which are economic in nature and horizontal in application , such as number of employees or size of enterprise. .

the scm agreement divides subsidies into two categories: prohibited and actionable .

two types of subsidies are prohibited: ( 1 ) subsidies "contingent , in law or in fact … upon export performance" and ( 2 ) subsidies "contingent ... upon the use of domestic over imported products" ( also referred to as "import substitution" subsidies ) .

the mere fact that a subsidy is granted to a firm that exports is not enough to render it an export subsidy for purposes of the agreement .

subsidies fitting the wto definition that are not prohibited are considered "actionable," that is , they may be challenged in a wto dispute settlement proceeding if they cause "adverse effects" to the interests of another wto member .

under article 5 of the agreement , adverse effects may take any of three forms: ( 1 ) injury to the domestic industry of another member , as this concept is used in countervailing duty proceedings ( a standard that focuses on the effect of the subsidized goods in the domestic market of the complaining member ) ; ( 2 ) nullification or impairment of another member's wto benefits , generally tariff concessions on a given product ; and ( 3 ) serious prejudice to the member's interests .

as set out in article 6.3 of the scm agreement , serious prejudice occurs when the effect of the subsidy is ( 1 ) to displace imports of a like product of the complaining member into the market of the subsidizing member ; ( 2 ) to displace or impede the exports of a like product of the complaining member from a third country market ; ( 3 ) significant price undercutting by the subsidized product as compared with the price of a like product of the complaining member in the same market , or significant price suppression , price depression , or lost sales in the same market ; and ( 4 ) an increase in the world market share of the subsidizing member in a particular subsidized primary product or commodity as compared to the average share that the subsidizing member had during the previous period three - year period and the increase follows a consistent trend over a period when subsidies have been granted .

in any such case , defining the nature of the "like product" and the affected market would be important components in determining if serious prejudice exists .

under special dispute settlement rules for the scm agreement , if the wto dispute settlement body adopts a panel or appellate body report finding that a subsidy has resulted in adverse effects to another member , the subsidizing member "shall take appropriate steps to remove the adverse effects or shall withdraw the subsidy. .

if the member has not done so within six months after adoption , and absent an agreement on compensation , the dispute settlement body is to authorize the complaining member to take countermeasures , "commensurate with the degree and nature of the adverse effects determined to exist," unless the dispute settlement body decides by consensus to reject the complaining member's request to impose such measures .

this time period may be extended by mutual agreement of the disputing parties .

for the provision of emission allowances to fit within the scm agreement's definition of a governmental financial contribution , the action would need to constitute ( 1 ) an actual or potential direct transfer of funds , ( 2 ) the foregoing of revenue otherwise due , or ( 3 ) the provision of a good or service other than general infrastructure .

because wto panels have not had to deal with an instrument of this type , it is unclear how it would or should be characterized under this definition .

it is also unclear how domestic tax or budgetary treatment of an allowance might affect this characterization .

the precise nature of an allowance is elusive for these purposes , and thus a variety of scenarios can be contemplated .

this report addresses some of the more salient subsidy issues that may arise in this context .

while emissions have been characterized as "cash - like" in nature and would clearly constitute a valuable instrument from the point of view of the recipient , to the extent that an allowance is intended to be sold or traded , the allowance would in and of itself constitute a vehicle for a financial contribution by private parties , that is , the ultimate transfer of funds would be effected by the purchasers of the emission allowance rather than by the government .

in such case , the transfer may not be the type of "direct transfer" of funds by the government that is generally contemplated by the first type of financial contribution listed above .

as an emission allowance has also been characterized as a license and a commodity , one might alternatively argue that the provision of an allowance constitutes the provision of a good .

while the wto appellate body has confirmed that the granting of a government license may constitute the provision of goods to a recipient , its finding would appear to have limited utility in the current context .

because the license at issue permitted recipients to harvest standing timber on government lands , the government grant of a license was thus found to constitute the provision of timber , a potentially tradable product .

in contrast , the provision of a free allowance would represent permission or authority to emit a defined amount of carbon dioxide or a carbon dioxide equivalent , a substance that would not be a salable good in the same sense as timber was in the above - cited example .

thus , if a similar analysis is applied to emission allowances , this category of government financial contribution is not likely to apply .

further , unlike commodities that are in and of themselves tradable goods , the item that is being traded here would essentially be a right to take a particular action rather than a tangible product .

a case for a subsidy may be made , however , once emission allowances are subject to government auction , an event contemplated by h.r .

2454 to begin in 2012 .

under the scm agreement , the concept of revenue that is "otherwise due" requires an ascertainable standard against which a tax or other exemption is measured .

as described by the wto , this portion of the subsidy definition implies "an understanding that ( i ) 'a financial contribution' does not arise simply because a government does not raise revenue which it could have raised ; and ( ii ) the term 'otherwise due' implies a comparison with a 'defined normative benchmark.' .

in such case , the provision of an allowance without charge to a u.s. firm may arguably constitute the foregoing by the government of revenue that would otherwise be due , the specifics of the government auction serving as the applicable norm .

it is also possible that the future tax treatment of distributed allowances may itself result in such foregone revenue .

although wto jurisprudence on this portion of the subsidy definition most often focuses on tax measures , the provision itself is generally written and is not limited to the tax area .

in the event that the provision of free allowances or the tax rules that applied to them were found to qualify as foregone revenue , the existence of a benefit may , in some situations , not be difficult to discern .

in past cases , wto panels , in determinations not subsequently appealed , have found that the tax exemptions were virtually coterminous with the existence of a benefit .

for example , in a report involving tax exemptions under the u.s. foreign sales corporation ( fsc ) statute , the panel stated that , in its view , "the financial contribution clearly confers a benefit , in as much as both fscs and their parents need not pay certain taxes that would otherwise be due," noting further that the united states had not raised any contrary arguments regarding the benefit issue .

similarly , in a subsequent case that involved a statute that repealed the fsc statute and established a replacement tax regime permitting the exclusion from taxation of certain income , the panel stated that under the new statute: a taxpayer involved in a qualifying transaction may exclude qualifying foreign trade income from its gross income and therefore need not pay a certain amount of tax that it would otherwise have to pay to the united states government .

it is therefore "better off" than it would have been absent the contribution , that is , if had been in another situation , where the conditions for obtaining the tax treatment under the act were not fulfilled and it was therefore subject to otherwise applicable us taxation rules .

we are of the view that the tax treatment in the act confers a benefit .

similarly , in a case involving whether an exemption from an import duty constituted a subsidy , the wto panel , having determined that the exemption qualified as revenue foregone , easily found that it conferred a benefit since "the fact that manufacturer beneficiaries need not pay customs duties that would otherwise be due — and that would be paid by non - qualifying manufacturers — constitutes … an advantage" of the type that the appellate body had found in an earlier case .

in an assessment of whether a benefit is conferred , panels must focus on the recipient of the financial contribution rather than on the granting authority and the cost to the granting government .

because of the various situations of recipients of free allowances and because there may be particular legislative requirements or conditions accompanying their receipt , the existence or nature of the benefit , that is , whether a particular recipient is "better off," may vary with respect to the recipient involved .

since wto panels have not yet dealt with such an instrument , this remains a matter for further development by wto panels and the wto appellate body .

were the provision of free allowances to constitute a subsidy for purposes of the scm agreement , the subsidy would not be prohibited under the agreement so long as provision of the allowances was not contingent in law or in fact on export performance or on the use of domestic over imported products .

nevertheless , the subsidy would potentially be actionable , and thus subject to challenge if a complaining wto member could show that it had suffered one of the adverse effects set out in article 5 of the agreement .

the complaining member would also need to show that the subsidy was specific in law or fact to an industry or group of industries before proceeding with its showing of trade injury .

while free allowances may be available to entities in a broad range of economic sectors and might be viewed as not limited by statute to "certain enterprises," determining whether "objective criteria and conditions" governing the eligibility for , and the amount of , the subsidy exist would appear to be an important area of inquiry in determining if specificity is present .

h.r .

2454 , as passed , would also require that , if the president established an ira program for an eligible domestic industrial sector and once he determines that the 85% import threshold for the sector is not exceeded , importers of products corresponding to those produced by the sector submit emission credits upon the entry of these products into the united states .

the requirement would apply to a particular importation unless epa has adjusted the border allowance requirement to zero for the product or the product is imported from a statutorily exempted country .

in addition , "manufactured items for consumption," that is , downstream products containing inputs that are subject to sectoral ira requirements , may also be covered by border ira requirements .

exemptions would apply to products imported from countries that have entered into acceptable multilateral or bilateral ghg - reduction agreements or whose annual energy or ghg - intensity for the sector is equal to or less than that of the united states .

also exempted would be products imported from the least developed of developing countries and from countries that are de minimis emitters and are the source of less than 5% of u.s. imports of covered goods for a sector .

in issuing regulations establishing the program , epa , with the concurrence of u.s. customs and border protection , would incorporate certain statutory requirements , but would also be given discretion to establish a general methodology for calculating the quantity of iras that a u.s. importer of any covered good must submit and would be authorized to adjust ira requirements based on emission allowances distributed to eligible industrial sectors and to reduce the amount to zero .

the ira requirements would not apply to goods that enter the united states before january 1 , 2020 , the earliest date for application specified in the statute .

article i , the general most - favored - nation ( mfn ) obligation of the gatt , requires that certain trade - related benefits that a wto member grants to the products of any country must be granted "immediately and unconditionally" to like products of all wto members .

the obligation applies to any advantage involving customs duties and charges of any kind imposed on importation or exportation , the method of levying such duties , all rules and formalities connected with importation and exportation , and all matters related to internal taxation and regulation , that is , matters covered by the gatt national treatment article .

article ii , which generally prohibits tariff surcharges and border fees on imports , is aimed at ensuring that tariff concessions negotiated by wto members are maintained at negotiated rates .

each member's tariff commitments are set out in a schedule which lists the highest rate that a member may impose on a given product , also known as the "bound" rate .

article ii:1 ( b ) provides that products imported from other wto members are to be exempt from ordinary customs duties in excess of those set out in the importing member's schedule and from "all other duties and charges of any kind imposed on or in connection with importation in excess of those imposed" on april 15 , 1994 , the date the wto agreements were concluded .

at the same time , article ii:2 ( a ) provides that article ii does not prevent a wto member from imposing specific types of charges on bound items , including "a charge equivalent to an internal tax imposed consistently with the provisions" of the gatt national treatment article "in respect of the like domestic product or in respect of an article from which the imported product has been manufactured or produced in whole or in part. .

article iii , the gatt national treatment article , prohibits wto members from discriminating between like domestic and imported products when imposing internal taxes and regulations .

where an internal tax or regulation is enforced at the border with regard to an imported product , the tax or regulation will be considered an internal measure and , as such , subject to article iii .

article iii:1 of the gatt 1994 , which generally informs article iii obligations , states that "internal taxes and other internal charges and laws , regulations and requirements affecting the internal sale , offering for sale , purchase , transportation , distribution or use of products ... should not be applied to imported or domestic products so as to afford protection to domestic production. .

article iii:2 , which addresses taxes on products ( eg , excise and sales taxes , also referred to as "indirect taxes" ) states that the products of a wto member imported into the territory of another wto member "shall not be subject , directly or indirectly to internal taxes or other internal charges of any kind in excess of those applied , directly or indirectly , to like domestic products. .

to determine whether the tax on an import exceeds the tax on the like domestic product , a strict test is applied , under which "even the smallest amount of 'excess' is too much" ; neither a "trade effects" test nor a de minimis standard qualifies the prohibition .

further , article iii:2 requires that actual , rather than nominal , tax burdens be compared .

an identical tax rate can be found in some cases to result in a heavier tax burden on an import because of the method of taxation , and thus a wto review would likely take into account not only the tax rate but also "the taxation methods ( eg , different kinds of internal taxes , direct taxation of the finished products , or indirect taxation by taxing the raw materials used in the product during the various stages of its production ) and of the rules for tax collection ( eg , the basis of assessment ) . .

in general , panels have viewed the policy purpose behind a tax as irrelevant so long as the member imposing the tax does not violate the gatt or other wto obligations .

article iii:4 of the gatt 1994 , requiring national treatment in internal regulation , states that products of any wto member imported into the territory of any other member "shall be accorded treatment no less favourable than that accorded to like products of national origin in respect of all laws , regulations and requirements affecting their internal sale , offering for sale , purchase , transportation , distribution or use. .

in determining whether imported and domestic goods are "like" products for purposes of both gatt article iii:2 and article iii:4 , panels have ordinarily used four criteria: ( 1 ) the properties , nature , and quality of the products ; ( 2 ) end - uses ; ( 3 ) consumers' tastes and habits ; and ( 4 ) tariff classification .

to date , gatt / wto case law has not permitted members , under gatt article iii , to distinguish between products that would otherwise be considered "like" on the basis of a processing and production method ( ppm ) that does not relate to a product characteristic .

thus , applying such a distinction in a regulatory scheme and subjecting products to different requirements based on this distinction may provide a basis for finding that an imported good is treated less favorably than the like domestic item or that any resulting import prohibition constitutes a quantitative restriction prohibited under article xi , below .

article xi:1 of the gatt generally prohibits quantitative restrictions on imports and exports , providing that "[no] prohibitions or restrictions other than duties , taxes or other charges , whether made effective through quotas , import or export licenses or other measures , shall be instituted or maintained by any contracting party [i.e .

wto member] on the importation of any product of the territory of any other contracting party or on the exportation or sale for export of any product destined for the territory of another contracting party. .

deviations from this rule are allowed only in certain well - defined circumstances , generally unrelated to climate change issues .

a quantitative restriction may be distinguished from an internal regulation enforced at the border by examining whether the measure affects the opportunity for importation or entering the market , in which case article xi would apply , or whether it affects competitive opportunities in the domestic market , in which case article iii would govern .

article xx , containing the gatt general exceptions and operating as a defense in gatt disputes , allows a wto member to justify , on a variety of public policy grounds , a measure that has been found to violate a gatt obligation .

conditioning market access on compliance with a policy unilaterally prescribed by a wto member , while potentially irksome to trading partners , has been viewed by the wto appellate body as a common feature of measures falling within the scope of article xx exceptions , and thus such a policy may be pursued under the gatt providing implementing measures satisfy article xx requirements .

of relevance in the climate change context are article xx ( b ) , covering measures "necessary to protect human , animal or plant life or health" and article xx ( g ) , covering measures "relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic production or consumption. .

any law or regulation that is provisionally justified under article xx ( b ) or article xx ( g ) must also comply with the proviso to article xx , which requires that the measure not be applied "in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where the same conditions prevail , or a disguised restriction on international trade. .

as explained earlier in this report , the manufacture of certain products results in direct carbon emissions .

production of these and other products may also result in what are deemed to be indirect carbon emissions due to the high amount of energy ( generally electrical energy ) needed for their production and the heavy use of carbon - based fuels to provide such energy .

thus , a focus of concern in a domestic ghg - reduction program is its implications for goods that are carbon - intensive , energy - intensive , or both .

where emission caps are placed on energy producers and on manufacturers of carbon - intensive products , the cost of the caps for these producers and manufacturers , as well as for manufacturers that are heavy users of carbon - intensive energy , may adversely affect the competitiveness of these manufacturers' products vis à vis the same or similar products produced in countries without carbon controls .

depending on the situation of the firm and the products produced , the loss of competitiveness may occur on the import side , the export side , or both .

a significant and irremediable loss of competitiveness may cause such firms to move their production to countries without ghg - reduction controls , potentially resulting in increased ghg emissions in these countries , or "carbon leakage. .

increased emissions may also result from increased production by existing foreign facilities whose presumably more price - competitive goods would be in greater demand worldwide .

in such case , a loss of competitiveness , an economic concern , would be the reason for an adverse environmental effect .

a border ira requirement that takes into account the level of greenhouse gases emitted in the production of the imported product in light of domestic regulatory requirements may seek to "level the playing field" for a particular product or sector and so prevent the carbon leakage that may negate the beneficial environmental outcome of the domestic ghg - reduction program .

a border requirement of this type proposed under h.r .

2454 — that is , requirement that an importer of a product from a country that has not taken sufficient action to reduce ghg emissions , as judged by the importing country — potentially implicates the gatt articles described above , namely , article i , requiring most - favored - nation treatment ; article ii , prohibiting added duties and other fees and charges on goods subject to negotiated tariff rates ; article iii , requiring national treatment of imported products ; and article xi , prohibiting quantitative restrictions on imports .

since an importer of a foreign - produced item would incur a cost in amassing the iras that would be needed for importation under h.r .

2454 , the fees and charges paid by the importer may be found to constitute a "charge of any kind imposed on or in connection with the importation" of a item subject to tariff rates bound under gatt article ii and , as such , be prohibited under article ii:1 ( b ) .

because the vast majority of products in the u.s. gatt schedule are subject to bound tariff rates , the requirements of article ii would apply broadly to products imported into this country .

in one instance , a gatt panel found that the interest charges and other costs connected with the posting of security to guarantee that imports of a particular item would be made at a minimum price were "'other duties or charges of any kind imposed on or in connection with the importation' in excess of the bound rate within the meaning of article ii:1 ( b ) ," and thus inconsistent with this obligation .

more recently , a wto panel , citing this gatt case , found that the interest charges , costs , and fees incurred by importers in connection with posting an additional customs bond required by the united states were import charges prohibited by the above - quoted article ii:1 ( b ) language .

the united states did not appeal this finding .

as in these cases , the importer subject to the ira requirements would incur the cost of obtaining the allowances to satisfy a requirement associated with an importation rather than pay a specified fee imposed directly on the carbon - intensive or energy - intensive product .

since article ii:1 ( b ) speaks broadly of "duties or charges of any kind ," the expenditure of funds to obtain the required allowances may well result in the type of charge that falls within the scope of the article ii:1 ( b ) obligation .

if the importer's failure to comply with such requirements serves to prohibit a product from being imported into the united states , this aspect of the ira program may also be viewed as inconsistent with the general prohibition on quantitative restrictions in gatt article xi:1 .

further , to the extent that a fee or charge would not apply to goods originating in a country with a ghg - reduction program or in a country exempted for other reasons ( eg , de minimis emissions ) , there may arguably exist discriminatory treatment of like products from non - exempted countries for purposes of the most - favored - nation obligation of gatt article i. alternatively , the united states may be able to avoid the article xi prohibition on quantitative restrictions if the ira requirement on imports could be shown to be part of an internal regulatory regime governing the "internal sale , offering for sale , purchase , transportation , distribution , or use" of carbon - intensive and energy - intensive products for purpose of gatt article iii:4 .

if so , the united states may be able to prohibit imports that do not meet u.s. regulatory requirements from entering the united states without violating article xi .

it appears difficult , however , to fit a border program such as provided for in h.r .

2454 within the parameters of this gatt article .

generally speaking , the regulation of products based on their carbon emissions raises issues as to whether otherwise like items ( eg , a particular type of steel product ) may be distinguished on this basis under current wto law .

if steel products are found to be like products based on the criteria ordinarily used by panels ( i.e. , product characteristics , end uses , consumer preference , and tariff classification ) , distinguishing them based on a substance emitted in their production may thus be a problematic basis for differing regulatory requirements , and thus a case for less favorable treatment of the like imported good could be made .

more fundamentally , however , because h.r .

2454 would place its relevant domestic requirement ( i.e. , emission caps , on producers and not on the sale , purchase , or use of domestically produced carbon - intensive and energy - intensive goods ) , the bill would not appear to create the sort of domestic regulatory regime affecting domestic and imported products that is essentially contemplated under article iii .

thus , even though the production of domestic carbon - intensive and energy - intensive products may be economically affected by the requirements placed on domestic producers , the sale , purchase , or use of these goods would not be subject to regulatory requirements .

the absence of a counterpart internal regulatory program applicable to goods produced in the united states would thus render the import prohibitions under the ira program liable to the article xi claims discussed above .

as noted above , if a trade - related ghg reduction measure is challenged in a wto dispute settlement proceeding and found to violate a gatt obligation , the defending member may seek to justify it under a gatt general exception , the most likely candidates in the climate change context being articles xx ( b ) , covering measures "necessary to protect human , animal , or plant life or health" and article xx ( g ) , covering measures "relating to the conservation of exhaustible natural resources if such measures are made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic production or consumption. .

a measure falling within the scope of an exception is also subject to the overall article xx proviso or "chapeau" requiring that any such measure not be "applied in a manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where the same conditions prevail or a disguised restriction on international trade. .

finding that a measure is justified under an exception involves a complex analysis of the alleged policy goal , the relationship of the measure to the goal , and details of the measure's implementation in light of the discriminatory and protectionist application to be avoided under the proviso .

if challenged , it would not be the gatt - inconsistency that would need to fall within the scope of the exception , but rather the border measure program as a whole .

because article xx ( b ) requires a showing that a challenged measure is "necessary" to achieve the aim of health protection , whereas article xx ( g ) requires only that a relationship be shown between the challenged measure and the stated conservation goal , it would generally be more difficult for a measure to qualify under the former than under the latter .

in either case , however , since maintaining domestic competitiveness per se is not a policy goal protected by article xx , the extent to which the ira requirements of h.r .

2454 address articulated goals of protecting health or conserving natural resources would be critical in determining whether the program falls within the scope of the relevant exception .

article xx ( b ) successful invocation of article xx ( b ) first requires a showing that the policy objective of the challenged measure is to protect human , animal , or plant life or health , and that the measure is necessary to achieve this end .

as noted below , the wto appellate body has implied that health protection may be a goal of a domestic climate change program .

at the same time , since the purported health protection would be achieved through the prevention of carbon leakage that is manifested as increased carbon emissions in foreign countries , and because article xx ( b ) does not expressly state whether the objects of protection need to be located in the territory of the member imposing the restriction , a jurisdictional issue may arise in a climate change case , requiring a panel to clarify article xx ( b ) 's territorial reach and how it may be satisfied .

the global impact of the climate change problem may be sufficient , however , to find any local nexus that may be needed .

to find necessity , the appellate body has articulated a test that includes weighing and balancing of "the relevant factors" with an examination of less trade - restrictive alternatives .

under this process , the panel ( 1 ) considers "the importance of the interests or values at stake , the extent of the contribution to the achievement to the measure's objective , and its trade restrictiveness," and ( 2 ) if the panel preliminarily finds necessity , "confirms" this conclusion "by comparing the measure with possible alternatives that may be less trade restrictive while providing an equivalent contribution to the achievement of the objective. .

the comparison "should be carried out in the light of the importance of the interests or values at stake. .

the wto appellate body has stated that the more vital or important the value being pursued , the easier it would be to find that the chosen measure is necessary to achieve the chosen level of health protection .

the measure does not need to be shown to be indispensable , but , under recent wto jurisprudence , it must be "apt to produce a material contribution to the achievement of its objective" ; in other words , a measure providing a "marginal or insignificant" contribution would not be considered necessary to achieve the stated goal .

immediate impact of the measure need not be shown , the wto appellate body having recognized that solving complex environmental problems may require a range of interacting measures and that "the results from certain actions — for instance , measures adopted in order to attenuate global warming and climate change … — can only be evaluated with the benefit of time. .

a higher level of contribution to achieving the stated goal may be needed where the measure is particularly restrictive , as is the case with an import ban .

it would be up to the complaining member in a dispute to identify possible alternative measures ; if it does so , the defending member would be able to rebut such suggestions on the grounds that the alternative inadequately contributes to the goal or is not reasonably available for this purpose .

article xx ( g ) for article xx ( g ) to apply to a gatt - inconsistent climate change measure , the wto member would need to show ( 1 ) that conservation of an exhaustible natural resource is at issue ; ( 2 ) that the measure relates to conservation of this resource ; and ( 3 ) that the measure is made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic consumption or production .

in united states – import prohibition of certain shrimp and shrimp products ( u.s. shrimp ) , the wto appellate body took a broad view of exhaustibility in light of evolving multilateral agreement and action in the conservation area since the adoption of the gatt in 1947 and found that the article xx ( g ) applies not only to exhaustible mineral or other non - living natural resources , but also to all exhaustible resources , whether living or non - living .

since the renewability of a resource would not preclude it from falling within the scope of the exception , the exhaustible resource at issue in the climate change context might be the atmosphere at a suitable temperature or a species adversely affected by rising global temperatures .

as with article xx ( b ) , however , the jurisdictional reach of the provision may need to be addressed , with similar considerations coming into play .

for a measure to "relate to" the conservation of exhaustible natural resources , it must be "primarily aimed at" this goal .

as articulated in u.s. shrimp , this test requires a "substantial relationship" between "the general structure and the design of the measure … and the policy goal it purports to serve," a situation also characterized as "a close and genuine relationship of ends and means. .

the relationship of a climate change measure to the claimed conservation goal is key , thus requiring a focus on how the measure would prevent carbon leakage and therefore conserve the earlier - identified natural resources .

evolving studies on the prevention of leakage may , however , present problems in this regard .

even though the wto appellate body has indicated that the immediate effect of a gatt - inconsistent climate change measure may not need to be established in order to successfully invoke a gatt exception , the existence of credible studies questioning whether leakage would be prevented by such measures may increase the difficulty of showing that the program is primarily aimed at preserving the natural resource or resources shown to be at risk .

to show that the measure is made effective in conjunction with restrictions on domestic consumption or production , a panel would examine whether the restriction on the imported product is imposed with respect to the same domestic items and whether the restriction , while not needing to provide true equality of treatment between the two , is "even - handed" in its approach to imports vis à vis the restriction placed on domestic goods .

the existence of "even - handedness" may become an issue to the extent that h.r .

2454 permits border measures to apply to "manufactured items for consumption" or the imported counterparts of items produced by industrial sectors that did not initially qualify for the receipt of emission allowances under the statute .

article xx "chapeau" the article xx "chapeau," which is aimed at preventing abuse of the article xx exceptions , focuses on how the gatt - inconsistent measure is applied .

in the view of the wto appellate body , interpreting and applying the proviso is a "delicate" task of finding "a line of equilibrium" between the right of a member to invoke an article xx exception and the rights of other members under gatt substantive obligations ; the line moves "as the kind and the shape of the measures at stake vary and as the facts making up specific cases differ. .

in a 2007 case , brazil — measures affecting imports of retreaded tyres ( brazil tyres ) , the wto appellate body examined earlier cases in which it has applied the proviso and determined that the common mode of analysis in cases involving arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination involved a determination as to whether the discrimination "had a legitimate cause or rationale in light of the objectives listed in the paragraphs of article xx. .

the second element of the proviso has been the subject of less jurisprudence , but it appears to be agreed upon that the prohibition on creating a "disguised trade restriction" is aimed at avoiding a protectionist effect .

unjustifiable discrimination was found to arise in two aspects of the u.s. pollution reduction program at issue in united states — standards for reformulated and conventional gasoline ( u.s .

gasoline ) , a case challenging the application of a statutory baseline to foreign refiners in assessing whether imported gasoline met clean air act standards , while more favorable individual baselines were applied to their u.s. counterparts .

first , the united states had failed to engage affected exporting countries in exploring cooperative arrangements to mitigate administrative difficulties that the united states claimed would exist in acquiring foreign data for verification and assessment purposes if individual foreign baselines were used .

second , the united states had taken into account burdensome costs that would be placed on domestic refineries if they too were subject to the statutory baseline , but had not considered costs that would be incurred by foreign firms under the program .

in u.s. shrimp , the appellate body found unjustifiable discrimination in the "intended and actual coercive effect" on foreign government policy decisions of the u.s. program prohibiting the importation of shrimp from countries not certified by the united states as maintaining a regulatory program and an incidental taking rate of sea turtles comparable to that of the united states or having a fishing environment that did not pose a threat to sea turtles .

according to the appellate body , the united states had implemented the statute to require that exporting countries adopt a regulatory program with policies and enforcement practices that were "not merely comparable , but rather essentially the same , " as the program applied to u.s. shrimp trawlers , and in some cases , to prohibit the importation of shrimp caught with methods identical to those employed in the united states because the shrimp were harvested in waters of countries not certified by the united states as using acceptable techniques .

the appellate body stated that discrimination results "not only when countries are differently treated , but also when the application of the measure at issue does not allow for any inquiry into the appropriateness of the regulatory program for the conditions prevailing in those exporting countries. .

as in u.s .

gasoline , the appellate body in u.s. shrimp also found unjustifiable discrimination in the failure of the united states to engage affected wto members diplomatically — here , "serious across - the - board negotiations with the objective of concluding bilateral or multilateral agreements for the protection and conservation of sea turtles" — before enforcing the import prohibition on shrimp against these countries .

actual conclusion of an international agreement is not required , however , so long as "serious , good faith efforts" are made to negotiate an accord .

the appellate body has also indicated that it will look at the length of the phase - in period for foreign compliance with a regulatory program , both as to compliance burdens resulting from a relatively short period and any differences in treatment between affected countries .

arbitrary discrimination may likewise result from placing a "single , rigid , unbending requirement" on foreign countries under a regulatory program , as well as from not according agency officials sufficient flexibility in making determinations under it .

the appellate body looked for flexibility in implementation , stating that where market access is conditioned on an exporting member adopting a regulatory program that is "comparable in effectiveness" to that of the importing member , the exporting member will have "sufficient latitude … with respect to the programme it may adopt to achieve the level of effectiveness required" and may thus adopt a program that is "suitable to the specific condition prevailing in its territory. .

avoiding arbitrary discrimination has also been found to implicate due process concerns , and thus , where a statute requires that exporting countries fulfill certain conditions before their exports are permitted entry into the united states , the accompanying regulatory process should be "transparent" and "predictable " and should not be ex parte , that is , conducted only with input from the importing member's agencies and officials .

instead , the importing member should give affected exporting countries an opportunity to explain their situation to agency decision - makers , and provide them with a reasoned explanation for denial of requests and petitions , as well as procedures for review of any such denials .

determining whether a disguised restriction on international trade exists involves focusing not on the restriction per se , but rather on what it may mask .

since this portion of the article xx proviso is also aimed at avoiding abuse and illegitimate use of the article xx exceptions , the appellate body has found that a restriction that formally meets the requirements of an exception "will constitute an abuse if such compliance is in fact only a disguise to conceal the pursuit of trade - restrictive objectives. .

because the aim of a measure "may not be easily ascertained … the protective application of a measure can most often be discerned from its design , architecture , and revealing structure. .

while the appellate body has indicated that the same considerations that are used to determine if discrimination exists may be used to find a disguised trade restriction , a subsequent wto panel chose not to examine whether discrimination existed for this portion of the proviso where discrimination had not already been found .

instead , it focused on possible protectionist objectives of the measure and the extent to which it had benefited a domestic industry to the detriment of foreign producers .

given these cases , were the ira program found to violate u.s. gatt obligations but the program was found to fall within the scope of a gatt general exception , the united states would seemingly need to address issues such as the following to show that the program was applied consistently with the article xx proviso: ( 1 ) engagement of trading partners for the purpose of negotiating a bilateral or multilateral solution both to the ghg - reduction goal and addressing the use of border measures to remedy the competitiveness concerns that lead to leakage and administrative problems that may arise in implementing the border measure program , particularly in regard to the use of foreign data ; ( 2 ) use of a flexible regulatory standard under which the member permits comparability in the effectiveness of foreign programs in achieving the importing member's policy goal ; ( 3 ) creation of a regulatory process that gives exporting members a meaningful opportunity to be heard and to resolve problems and deficiencies in seeking and obtaining access to the importing member's market ; ( 4 ) providing an adequate phase - in period before import requirements enter into effect ; and ( 5 ) permitting the importation of goods that in fact comply with the requirements of the regulatory program , thus avoiding overly broad regulatory categories that may result in penalizing such compliance .

as discussed earlier , the negotiating objectives under part iv , subpart 2 include seeking both multilateral ghg - reduction commitments and provisions permitting parties to remedy competitive imbalances that lead to leakage .

additionally , however , seeking data cooperation agreements may also be important in that the regulatory program may rely heavily on foreign emissions and production statistics .

the avoidance of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination may depend on the quality of such data where they are used to assess emissions - reduction activity in order to determine whether and to what extent border adjustment apply , as well as to distinguish between countries "where the same conditions prevail. .

arguably , even though modeling may potentially be used under the legislation to produce otherwise unobtainable hard data , a general lack of usable emissions data may raise questions as to whether the border requirement may be applied in a nondiscriminatory fashion in all cases for purposes of article xx .

further , even assuming that reliable foreign data existed , problems may nevertheless arise in obtaining it .

in the absence of a wto agreement , such as the wto antidumping agreement and the agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures ( under which wto members have agreed that they or their exporters will provide information to authorities of the importing member for investigatory or regulatory purposes ) , exporting countries and their firms may be reluctant to provide emissions or production data to epa for purposes of making comparability or other determinations under the ira program .

unlike the situation in u.s .

gasoline , where the quality of the imported gasoline directly affected the quality of the atmosphere within the united states , the carbon - intensive and energy - intensive goods that would be subject to ira requirements would not themselves be environmentally harmful within u.s. territory .

in such case , foreign entities may arguably feel less compelled to produce data than they would in a situation where their products clearly contributed to a problem within the sovereign jurisdiction of the united states .

the issue of penalizing compliant imports may arise where the importing country measures the comparability of a foreign program by determining an average national emissions rate , bases the required amount of border emission credits for an imported product on this average , and subjects all such goods originating in the country to the same requirement , regardless of actual ghg gases emitted in their production .

other issues are likely to arise where import requirements are based on ghg emissions , for example , accurately determining the level of emissions attributable to production of goods occurring in multiple countries under a variety of production processes .

in addition , the extent to which a border program covers imported goods that are downstream from the type of products that are produced by domestically capped manufacturers or by initially eligible industrial sectors could be a factor in examining whether the program is applied in a manner that constitutes a disguised restriction on international trade .

