figure 1 .

map of uruguaysource: map resources .

adapted by crs graphics .

on november 29 , 2009 , senator josé "pepe" mujica of the ruling center - left broad front ( fa ) coalition was elected president of uruguay in a second - round runoff vote .

in legislative elections held concurrently with the october 25 , 2009 , first - round vote , the fa retained its majorities in both houses of the uruguayan congress .

the new legislature and president are to be inaugurated to their respective five - year terms on february 15 and march 1 , 2010 .

mujica will replace popular incumbent president tabaré vázquez , who was constitutionally ineligible to run for a second consecutive term .

most analysts expect broad policy continuity from the mujica administration .

uruguay enjoys friendly relations with the united states , though it traditionally has had closer ties to europe ( the origin of the vast majority of the population ) and its south american neighbors .

ties between uruguay and the united states have increased in recent years , especially since the administration of jorge batlle ( 2000-2005 ) , which closely aligned itself with the united states .

in 2002 , the united states provided uruguay with a one week balance of payments loan to assist the country in countering the fallout from the argentine financial crisis .

moreover , batlle laid the groundwork for ongoing trade discussions with the united states through the 2002 creation of a joint commission on trade and investment ( see " trade " below ) .

while many analysts expected the vázquez administration to distance the country from the united states and forge closer relations with fellow members of the common market of the south ( mercosur ) once it took office , those predictions have not been borne out .

ongoing disputes within mercosur over trade asymmetries and a bitter conflict with argentina over the construction of a cellulose pulp mill along the shared uruguay river have led to frosty relations between uruguay and its neighbors .

likewise , the vázquez administration has sought to strengthen ties with the united states in order to diversify its trade relations and reduce its economic reliance on argentina and brazil , which played a significant role in the country's 1999-2002 recession .

president - elect mujica has indicated that he will prioritize relations with uruguay's neighbors and push for increased regional integration through mercosur .

nonetheless , he has also expressed his desire to continue strengthening u.s. - uruguay relations and will likely build upon the bilateral agreements signed during the vázquez administration .

additionally , mujica may attempt to amplify uruguay's growing trade relations with asia , as he has reportedly designated former ambassador to china luis almagro as his foreign minister .

trade ties between the united states and uruguay have grown substantially since 2002 , when the countries created a joint commission on trade and investment .

the joint commission has provided the means for ongoing u.s. - uruguay trade discussions , which led to the signing of a bilateral investment treaty in october 2004 and a trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) in january 2007 .

the tifa is a formal commitment to pursue closer trade and economic ties .

it established a council on trade and investment , which serves as the formal mechanism for liberalizing bilateral trade and investment between the two countries .

protocols to the tifa on trade facilitation and public participation in trade and environment were signed by the united states and uruguay in october 2008 .

although president bush and president vázquez initially sought to negotiate a free trade agreement ( fta ) , internal pressure from the more leftist sectors of the fa and external pressure from fellow members of mercosur ultimately led the vázquez administration to back away from the fta and sign the more flexible tifa .

while a fta may be possible at some point in the future , it is unlikely that mujica would pursue such an agreement and the obama administration has indicated that it prefers to move forward within the tifa framework for now .

in 2008 , u.s. exports to uruguay totaled $893 million , a 39% increase from 2007 , while u.s. imports from uruguay totaled $244 million , a 50% decline from 2007 .

capital goods , such as heavy and electrical machinery , comprised a substantial portion of u.s. exports , while beef , repaired goods , leather , wood , and fish accounted for the majority of u.s. imports ( see table 1 ) .

in 2008 , the united states was uruguay's sixth - largest trade partner , after argentina , brazil , russia , china , and venezuela .

the same year , uruguay was the united states' 96 th - largest trade partner , representing just 0.3% of total u.s. trade .

on september 14 , 2009 , the atpdea expansion and extension act of 2009 ( s. 1665 , lugar ) was introduced in the senate .

among other provisions , the bill would amend the andean trade promotion and drug eradication act ( title xxxi of the trade act of 2002 , p.l .

107-210 ) to provide unilateral trade preferences to uruguay .

under the bill , certain uruguayan products , such as wool - based textiles , would be eligible to receive duty - free or reduced tariff treatment until december 31 , 2012 .

uruguay is one of the top 10 per capita contributors of forces to u.n. peacekeeping missions .

it currently has between 2,500 and 3,000 soldiers deployed in 15 countries worldwide .

uruguay's largest deployment is part of the u.s. - supported united nations stabilization mission in haiti ( minustah ) , which it has participated in since 2004 .

it is the second - largest contributor of forces to minustah , with some 1,100 soldiers currently deployed .

uruguay is currently pushing for an extension of minustah's mandate and a more comprehensive focus that includes long - term development .

although uruguay does not receive substantial amounts of u.s. foreign assistance as a result of its relatively high level of development , it does receive military assistance designed to provide equipment and training to improve uruguay's interoperability with u.s. and international peacekeeping forces .

the united states provided uruguay with $238,000 in international military education and training ( imet ) in fy2008 and $250,000 in imet in fy2009 .

under the obama administration's fy2010 request , uruguay would receive $1.7 million in u.s. assistance , including $1 million in foreign military financing ( fmf ) and $480,000 in imet .

