t his report discusses what constitutes a "disadvantaged" small business for purposes of federal and federally funded contracting programs and how firms are certified or otherwise designated as such .

three primary categories of disadvantaged small businesses are currently eligible for various contracting programs under federal law: ( 1 ) small businesses participating in the small business administration's ( sba's ) minority small business and capital ownership development program ( commonly known as the 8 ( a ) program ) ( 8 ( a ) participants ) ; ( 2 ) "small disadvantaged businesses" ( sdbs ) ; and ( 3 ) "disadvantaged business enterprises" ( dbes ) .

these firms are characterized as "disadvantaged" because they are at least 51% unconditionally owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals or groups .

members of certain racial and ethnic groups are presumed to be disadvantaged , and other individuals can prove personal disadvantage by a preponderance of the evidence .

veterans and persons with disabilities are not presumed to be disadvantaged for purposes of these programs .

however , there are separate contracting programs for them .

disadvantaged groups include indian tribes , alaska native corporations , native hawaiian organizations , and community development corporations .

in fy2014 , the federal government awarded $34.7 billion in contracts or subcontracts to sdbs , including $16.3 billion in contracts to 8 ( a ) participants .

similar data about contracting with dbes is not publicly available .

contracting opportunities for disadvantaged small businesses are perennially of interest to the members and committees of congress because of small businesses' widely asserted role in job creation .

also , there has been concern that the recession of 2007-2009 disproportionately affected disadvantaged small businesses , and that such businesses have been slow to recover .

a separate report , crs report r43573 , federal contracting and subcontracting with small businesses: legislation in the 113th congress , by [author name scrubbed] , discusses recently enacted and introduced legislation pertaining to the 8 ( a ) and sdb programs .

all federal programs for disadvantaged small businesses currently define "disadvantage," in part , based on the presumption that racial and ethnic minorities , or women , are disadvantaged .

presumptions based on race have been found to constitute "explicit racial classifications," subjecting programs that incorporate them to "strict scrutiny" if they are challenged on the grounds that they violate the constitutional guarantee of equal protection .

for a challenged program to survive strict scrutiny , the government must show that the program is necessary to meet a compelling government interest .

presumptions based on gender are similarly subject to heightened scrutiny , with the supreme court in united states v. virginia having required the state of virginia to provide an "exceedingly persuasive justification" for its policy of maintaining an all - male military academy .

in contrast , classifications that are not based on race , gender , or another suspect classification , and that do not involve the exercise of a fundamental right , will generally be upheld so long as they are rationally related to a legitimate government interest .

the ability of programs to withstand strict or other heightened scrutiny may depend , in part , upon how the program is structured .

in a recent decision , the u.s. district court for the district of columbia found that the 8 ( a ) program is not unconstitutional on its face , although it is unconstitutional as - applied in the military simulation and training industry .

particularly in its rejection of the facial challenge to the 8 ( a ) program , the court emphasized certain aspects of the program's history and requirements when finding that "breaking down barriers to minority business development created by discrimination" constituted a compelling government interest , and the government had a strong basis in evidence for concluding that race - based action was necessary to further this interest .

for example , the court rejected the plaintiff's assertion that the 8 ( a ) program was "not truly remedial," but rather favored "virtually all minority groups … over the larger pool of citizens," because non - minority individuals may qualify for the program , and all 8 ( a ) applicants must demonstrate economic disadvantage .

similarly , in finding that the program was narrowly tailored to meet the government's interests , the court noted ( 1 ) that goals for contracting with small disadvantaged businesses are purely aspirational , and there are no penalties for failing to meet them ; ( 2 ) the nine - year limits on program participation for individual owners and firms ; and ( 3 ) that sba may not accept a requirement for the 8 ( a ) program if it determines that doing so will have an adverse effect on another small business or group of small businesses .

the court emphasized that the last two factors , in particular , helped ensure that race - conscious remedies do not "last longer than the discriminatory effects [they are] designed to eliminate," and "work the least harm possible to other innocent persons competing for the benefit. .

on the other hand , in 2008 , the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit focused less on the details of the program than on the evidence of discrimination before congress when congress reauthorized the program when striking down a department of defense ( dod ) program for sdbs .

specifically , the federal circuit found that the dod program — which allowed dod to take 10% off the price of bids or offers submitted by sdbs when determining which bid or offer had the lowest price or represented the best value for the government — was unconstitutional on its face because congress lacked a strong basis in evidence for concluding that race - conscious contracting was necessary to remedy discrimination in the defense industry when it reauthorized the program in 2006 .

the district court , which had upheld the constitutionality of the challenged sdb program , had found that six state and local disparity studies , along with other statistical and anecdotal evidence , constituted a strong basis in evidence for the re - enactment .

however , the federal circuit disagreed .

it found that the six state and local disparity studies — which had been the "primary focus of the district court's compelling interest analysis and of the parties' arguments on appeal" — did not constitute a strong basis in evidence because they did not provide the "substantially probative and broad - based statistical foundation ... that must be the predicate for nationwide , race - conscious action. .

a similar lack of evidence of discrimination also played a part in the u.s. district court for the district of columbia finding that the 8 ( a ) program is unconstitutional as applied in the military training and simulation industry .

however , in this case , dod conceded that it had "no evidence of discrimination , either in the public or private sector , in the simulation and training industry. .

