the senate finance committee approved a measure , america's healthy future act of 2009 , on october 13 , 2009 .

s. 1796 , based on that approved measure , was ordered reported on october 19 .

included in the committee report accompanying s. 1796 was preliminary analysis conducted by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) on october 7 regarding the potential impact of the chairman's mark .

cbo projected that the mark legislation would reduce federal deficits by $81 billion over a 10-year period ( 2010-2019 ) , and would insure 94% of the non - elderly , legally present u.s. population by 2019 .

this report summarizes the key provisions affecting private health insurance in titles i and vi of s. 1796 , american's healthy future act of 2009 , as ordered reported by the senate committee on finance on october 19 , 2009 .

title i of the bill focuses on restructuring the private health insurance market , setting minimum standards for health benefits , and providing financial assistance to certain individuals and , in some cases , small employers .

overall , the bill includes the following provisions: individuals would be required to maintain health insurance , and certain employers with more than 50 employees would be required to either provide insurance or pay a tax , with some exceptions .

several market reforms would be made , such as modified community rating and guaranteed issue and insurance renewal .

both the individual mandate and any employer requirements would be linked to essential health benefits coverage .

qualifying coverage would include: qualified health benefits plans ( qhbps ) offered in or out of an exchange ; new group or individual coverage that meets or exceeds minimum health benefits ; grandfathered employment based plans ; grandfathered nongroup plans ; and other coverage , such as medicare and medicaid .

either a state would establish separate exchanges to offer individual versus small group coverage , or the secretary of health and human services ( hereafter referred to as the "secretary" or "hhs secretary" unless noted otherwise ) would contract with a nongovernmental entity to establish and operate exchanges in states that did not establish them .

exchanges would not be insurers but provide eligible individuals and small businesses with access to private plans in a comparable way .

certain individuals with incomes below 400% of the federal poverty level could qualify for credits toward their premium costs and subsidies towards their cost - sharing .

this financial assistance would be available only through exchanges .

states would be provided the flexibility to establish basic plans for low - income individuals not eligible for medicaid .

existing plans offered by employers as well as plans offered in the individual market ( the nongroup market ) would be grandfathered .

however , existing small group plans would have to meet the applicable private market reforms by july 1 , 2013 .

new plans could also be sold in both the individual and group market outside of an exchange , but only those new plans that meet the minimum requirements specified in the bill would satisfy the requirements for individuals and employers .

title vi includes a number of provisions to raise revenues to pay for expanded health insurance coverage .

the revenue provisions include excise taxes and annual fees on health insurers , as well as limitations on executive compensation of insurance companies .

in addition , a number of revenue provisions limit contributions to tax - advantaged accounts ( i.e. , flexible spending accounts and health savings accounts ) and other itemized deductions used for health care expenses .

this report begins by providing background information on key aspects of the private health insurance market as it exists currently .

this information is useful in setting the stage for understanding how and where s. 1796 would reform health insurance .

this report summarizes key provisions affecting private health insurance in titles i and vi of america's healthy future act of 2009 , as ordered reported by the senate committee on finance on october 19 , 2009 .

although most of the provisions would be effective beginning in july 1 , 2013 , the table in the appendix shows the timeline for implementing provisions effective prior to that date .

although the description that follows segments the private health insurance provisions into various categories , these provisions are interrelated and interdependent .

for example , the bill includes a number of provisions to alter how current private health insurance markets function , primarily for individuals who purchase coverage directly from an insurer or through a small employer .

s. 1796 would require that insurers not exclude potential enrollees or charge them premiums based on pre - existing health conditions .

in a system where individuals voluntarily choose whether to obtain health insurance , however , individuals may choose to enroll only when they become sick .

this can lead to a situation known as "adverse selection," which may result in higher premiums and greater uninsurance .

when permitted , insurers often guard against adverse selection by adopting policies such as underwriting health insurance policies based on individual health status and excluding coverage for pre - existing conditions .

if reform eliminates many of the tools insurers use to guard against adverse selection , america's health insurance plans ( ahip ) , the association that represents health insurers , has stated that all individuals must be required to have coverage ( "individual mandate" ) , so that not just the sick enroll .

furthermore , some individuals currently forgo health insurance because they cannot afford the premiums .

if individuals are required to obtain health insurance , one could argue that adequate premium subsidies must be provided by the government and / or employers to make practical the individual mandate to obtain health insurance , which is in turn arguably necessary to make the market reforms possible .

in addition , premium subsidies without cost - sharing subsidies may provide individuals with health insurance that they cannot afford to use .

so , while the descriptions below discuss various provisions separately , the removal of one from the bill could be deleterious to the implementation of the others .

the private health insurance provisions are presented under the following topics , with the primary crs contact listed for each: individual mandate and employer requirements: the mandate for individuals to maintain health insurance and any requirements for employers .

[[author name scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed]] private health insurance market reforms .

[[author name scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed]] exchange [chris peterson , [phone number scrubbed]] , through which the following two items can only be offered: health care cooperatives .

[[author name scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed]] premium subsidies .

[chris peterson , [phone number scrubbed]] title vi: select revenue provisions relating to private health insurance [[author name scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] .

americans obtain health insurance in different settings and through a variety of methods .

people may get health coverage in the private sector or through a publicly funded program , such as medicare or medicaid .

in 2008 , 60% of the u.s. population had employment - based health insurance .

employers choosing to offer health coverage may either purchase insurance or choose to self - fund health benefits for their employees .

other individuals obtained coverage on their own in the nongroup market .

however , there is no federal law that either requires individuals to have health insurance or requires employers to offer health insurance .

approximately 46 million individuals ( 15% of the u.s. population ) were estimated to be uninsured in 2008 .

individuals and employers choosing to purchase health insurance in the private market fit into one of the three segments of the market , depending on their situation — the large group ( large employer ) market , the small group market , and the nongroup market .

more than 96% of large employers offer coverage .

large employers are generally able to obtain lower premiums for a given health insurance package than small employers and individuals seeking nongroup coverage .

this is partly because larger employers have a larger "risk pool" of enrollees that makes the expected costs of care more predictable .

employers generally offer large subsidies toward health insurance , thus making it more attractive for both the healthier and the sicker workers to enter the pool .

so , not only is the risk pool large in size , but it is also contains diverse risks .

states have experimented with ways to create a single site where individuals and small employers could compare different insurance plans , obtain coverage , and sometimes pool risk .

although most of these past experiments failed ( eg , california's pacadvantage ) , other states have learned from these experiences and have fashioned potentially more sustainable models ( eg , massachusetts' connector ) .

there are private - sector companies that also serve the role of making various health insurance plans easier to compare for individuals and small groups ( eg , ehealthinsurance ) , available in most , but not all , states because of variation in states' regulations .

less than half of all small employers ( less than 50 employees ) offer health insurance coverage ; such employers cite cost as the primary reason for not offering health benefits .

one of the main reasons is a small group's limited ability to spread risk across a small pool .

insurers generally consider small firms to be less stable than larger pools , as one or two employees moving in or out of the pool ( or developing an illness ) would have a greater impact on the risk pool than they would in large firms .

other factors that impact a small employer's ability to provide health insurance include certain disadvantages small firms have in comparison with their larger counterparts: small groups are more likely to be medically underwritten , have relatively little market power to negotiate benefits and rates with insurance carriers , and generally lack economies of scale .

allowing these firms to purchase insurance through a larger pool , such as an association , gateway or an exchange , could lower premiums for those with high - cost employees .

depending on the applicable state laws , individuals who purchase health insurance in the nongroup market may be rejected or face premiums that reflect their health status , which can make premiums lower for the healthy but higher for the sick .

even when these individuals obtain coverage , there may be coverage exclusions for certain conditions .

reforms affecting premiums ratings would likely increase premiums for some , while lowering premiums for others , depending on their age , health , behaviors , and other factors .

states are the primary regulators of the private health insurance market , though some federal regulation applies , mostly affecting employer - sponsored health insurance ( esi ) .

the federal health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) requires that coverage sold to small groups ( 2-50 employees ) must be sold on a guaranteed issue basis .

that is , the issuer must accept every small employer that applies for coverage .

all states require issuers to offer policies to firms with 2-50 workers on a guaranteed issue basis , in compliance with hipaa .

as of january 2009 in the small group market , 13 states also require issuers to offer policies on a guaranteed issue basis to self - employed "groups of one. .

and as of december 2008 in the individual market , 15 states require issuers to offer some or all of their insurance products on a guaranteed issue basis to non - hipaa eligible individuals .

most states currently impose premium rating rules on insurance carriers in the small group and individual markets .

the spectrum of existing state rating limitations ranges from pure community rating to adjusted ( or modified ) community rating , to rate bands , to no restrictions .

under pure community rating , all enrollees in a plan pay the same premium , regardless of their health , age or any other factor related to insurance risk .

as of december 2008 , only two states ( new jersey and new york ) use pure community rating in their nongroup markets , and only new york imposes pure community rating rules in the small group market .

adjusted community rating prohibits issuers from pricing health insurance policies based on health factors , but allows it for other key factors such as age or gender .

rate bands allow premium variation based on health , but such variation is limited according to a range specified by the state .

rate bands are typically expressed as a percentage above and below the index rate ( i.e. , the rate that would be charged to a standard population if the plan is prohibited from rating based on health factors ) .

federal law requires that group health plans and health insurance issuers offering group health coverage must limit the period of time when coverage for pre - existing health conditions may be excluded .

as of january 2009 in the small group market , 21 states had pre - existing condition exclusion rules that provided consumer protection above the federal standard .

and as of december 2008 in the individual market , 42 states limit the period of time when coverage for pre - existing health conditions may be excluded for certain enrollees in that market .

moreover , while there are a handful of federal benefit mandates for health insurance that apply to group coverage , there are more than 2,000 cumulative benefit mandates imposed by the states .

one issue receiving congressional attention is whether a publicly sponsored health insurance plan should be offered as part of the insurance market reform .

some proponents of a public option see it as potentially less expensive than private alternatives , as it would not need to generate profits or pay brokers to enroll individuals and might have lower administrative costs .

some proponents argue that offering a public plan could provide additional choice and may increase competition , since the public plan might require lower provider payments and thus charge lower premiums .

some opponents question whether these advantages would make the plan a fair competitor , or rather provide the government with an unfair advantage in setting prices , in authorizing legislation , or in future amendments .

ultimately , opponents are concerned that these advantages might drive private plans from the market .

health insurance is provided by organizations that are either for - profit or non - profit in terms of their tax status .

some studies have suggested that non - profits perform better in key areas such as quality .

for example , a study published in the journal of the american medical association ( jama ) in 1999 found that non - profit health maintenance organizations ( hmos ) scored higher on all 14 healthplan employer data and information set ( hedis® ) quality measures studied .

these results were generally replicated in a study published in 2006 of 272 health plans conducted by researchers at the university of california at berkeley and the national committee for quality assurance ( ncqa ) .

health insurance co - operatives , a subset of non - profit plans , have performed particularly well as detailed in recent case studies of group health cooperative of seattle ( ghc ) and healthpartners of minnesota .

as of 2008 , 47% of the enrollment in private health plans was in non - profit health insurance organizations .

however , there are relatively few health insurance co - operative organizations in the united states .

some congressional attention has been focused on options to incentivize the creation of new health insurance co - operatives .

advocates of this position argue that co - operatives invest retained earnings back into the plan or return the dollar to the membership , thus resulting in lower premiums , lower cost - sharing , expanded benefits , and innovations such as wellness programs , chronic disease management , and integrated care .

opponents of the proposal assert that co - operatives have not been successful in most of the country and that evidence is lacking that co - operatives would make health insurance more affordable .

s. 1796 would establish new health insurance plans and define existing ones in the private market applicable to title i .

new health plans include the following: in the individual and small group markets , any new health plan must meet the specified requirements to be a "qualified health benefits plan" ( qhbp ) .

qhbps must comply with new federal standards related to market reforms ( eg , guaranteed issue ) and essential benefit requirements , and state rules including licensure requirements .

any plan offered through the exchange ( described below ) must be a qhbp .

a "qualified basic health plan" would be a plan established and maintained by the state under which only eligible individuals may enroll .

such a plan would provide coverage equal to at least the essential benefits package ( described below ) , and have a medical loss ratio of at least 85% .

the senate finance bill defines several terms related to health insurance applicable to title i , including: "health benefits plan" refers to health insurance coverage and a group health plan , not including self - insured plans and multiple employer welfare arrangements ( mewas ) .

"offeror" refers to the plan sponsor in the case of a group health plan and health insurance coverage , or the employer in the case of a plan jointly offered by one or more employers and one or more employee organizations in which the employer is the primary financing source .

essential health benefits coverage ( i.e. , coverage required to fulfill the individual mandate ) is defined as coverage under a qhbp , a grandfathered health benefits plan , eligible employer - sponsored plans , medicare part a , medicaid , coverage for members of the armed forces and their dependents ( including tricare ) , certain veteran's health care program coverage , federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) , and as determined by the hhs secretary and secretary of labor , any other health benefits coverage such as a state health benefits risk pool or coverage while incarcerated .

s. 1796 would establish new federal standards applicable to private health insurance plans .

these standards would primarily affect private health insurance in the individual market and the small group ( small employer ) market .

these standards would impose new requirements on states related to the allocation of insurance risk , modify the current state - based regulatory system applicable to private plans , and require coverage for specified categories of benefits .

before 2015 , states would have the option to define "small employers" either as those with ( 1 ) 100 or fewer employees , or ( 2 ) 50 or fewer employees .

beginning in 2015 , small employers would be defined as those with 100 or fewer employees .

large employers would be affected by some provisions .

after 2009 , health insurance offered in the large and small group markets ( excluding grandfathered plans and qualified health benefits plans ) would be prohibited from imposing "unreasonable annual or lifetime limits" on plan enrollees .

after june 30 , 2013 , health plans offered in the large group market could not charge cost - sharing for preventive services and would be required to adhere to the annual out - of - pocket limits applicable to high deductible health plans ( hdhps ) as defined under the health savings account ( hsa ) section of the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

employers with more than 200 employees that offer coverage would be required to automatically enroll new employees in a plan unless the employee opted out .

the senate finance bill includes a number of provisions in title vi that would raise revenues in order to pay for expanded health insurance coverage .

the revenue provisions would include excise taxes and limitations on employer deductions that would impact health insurers , health plan sponsors and administrators .

in addition , there are a number of revenue provisions that would affect workers through modifications to current tax - advantaged accounts and deductions used for health care spending and coverage .

table 3 shows those revenue provisions directly related to private health insurance , their effective dates and estimates by the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) of the revenues each provision will raise over a 10-year period .

according to the jct , these provisions are expected to raise $304 billion in revenues over a 10-year period .

s. 1796 would impose excise taxes on health insurers and health plan administrators .

specifically , two provisions would impose the following taxes directly on health insurers and plan administrators: an excise tax on high - cost employer - sponsored health insurance , and an annual fee on health insurance providers .

in addition , s. 1796 would limit the deductibility of compensation for health insurance executives .

the bill also would affect employers who currently provide retiree health insurance and would limit their ability to deduct federal subsides for retiree prescription drug coverage from their taxable income .

s. 1796 would impose an excise tax of 40% on health insurance coverage that exceeds certain thresholds in 2013 .

the thresholds are $8,000 for single coverage and $21,000 for family coverage , and would be indexed by growth in the consumer price index ( cpi ) plus 1% in subsequent years .

taxpayers who are retired and age 55 and older , and workers engaged in high risk professions would be subject to higher thresholds ( $9,850 for single coverage and $26,000 for family coverage in 2013 ) .

in addition , for individuals residing in high - cost states the thresholds would be phased in between 2013 and 2016 .

specifically , they would be 20% above the proposed levels in 2013 , 10% above in 2014 , and 5% above in 2015 .

health insurance coverage subject to the excise tax is broadly defined to include not only the employer and employee premium payments for health insurance ( including self - insured plans ) , but also premiums paid by the employee and the employer for dental and vision .

in addition , tax - advantaged accounts such as flexible spending accounts ( fsas ) , health savings accounts ( hsas ) and health reimbursement accounts ( hras ) are also specified as health insurance coverage and subject to the excise tax .

for these tax - advantaged accounts , the plan administrator ( which is often the employer ) would be subject to the excise tax .

the excise tax would be levied on each of these components ( i.e .

health insurance , dental and vision , fsas , etc. ) .

based on their share of the total for health insurance coverage .

this share would then be applied to the amount of the total contribution that exceeds the applicable threshold to determine the excise tax imposed on each component .

s. 1796 would impose additional reporting requirement on employers providing health insurance coverage .

specifically , under the proposal , employers would be responsible for: determining the aggregate amount of health insurance coverage subject to the excise tax , estimating the share of the tax allocated to the insurer and the plan administrator , reporting these amounts to the insurer , plan administrator and the internal revenue service , and reporting the total value of health insurance coverage subject to the excise tax on the worker's w2 form .

employers who under - report the amount of the excise tax to be paid by insurers and plan administrators would be subject to a penalty .

the amount of the excise tax would not be deductible from federal income taxes .

the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) has estimated that the excise tax would raise $201 billion in revenues from 2010 to 2019 and would be levied on nearly one - third of health plans by 2019 .

in addition to an excise tax on high cost plans , s. 1796 would also impose a fee on all health insurers based on their market share .

the fee would be applied to net premiums written and would be imposed beginning in 2010 .

the fee would not apply to self - insured plans or federal , state or government entities .

however , it would apply to companies or organizations that underwrite these government - funded insurance ( i.e. , medicaid managed care plans , federal employee health benefit plans [fehbp] ) .

according to the jct , this fee is expected to raise $60.4 billion over a 10-year period ( see table 3 ) .

the senate finance bill would limit the amount of executive compensation that is deductible by health insurers .

specifically , health insurance providers where at least 25% of their gross premium income is derived from health insurance plans that meet the minimum creditable coverage requirements ( i.e. , covered health insurance provider ) would not be able to deduct compensation above $500,000 per year .

this income threshold would include deferred compensation .

this provision would be effective for compensation paid in taxable years beginning after 2012 with respect to services performed after 2009 .

according to the jct , this limitation on executive compensation would raise $600 million over a 10-year period ( see table 3 ) .

under current law , employers providing prescription drug coverage to retirees that meet federal standards are eligible for subsidy payments from the federal government .

these qualified retiree prescription drug plan subsidies are excludible from the employer's gross income for the purposes of regular income tax and alternative minimum tax calculations .

the employer is also allowed to claim a business deduction for retiree prescription drug expenses even though they also receive the federal subsidy to cover a portion of those expenses .

s. 1796 would require employers to coordinate the subsidy and the deduction for retiree prescription drug coverage .

in this provision , the amount allowable as a deduction for retiree prescription drug coverage would be reduced by the amount of the federal subsidy received .

according to the jct , this provision would raise $5.4 billion over a 10-year period ( see table 3 ) .

there are a number of tax - advantaged accounts and tax deductions for health care spending and coverage that would be affected by the revenue provisions in title vi of s. 1796 .

s. 1796 includes a number of provisions that directly and indirectly would affect tax - advantaged accounts to help workers pay for their health care expenses .

under current law fsas , hsas , hras and medical saving accounts ( msas ) all allow workers under varying circumstances to exclude a certain portion of qualified medical expenses from income taxes .

under current law , health fsas are employer - established benefit plans that reimburse employees for specified health care expenses ( eg , deductibles , co - payments , and non - covered expenses ) as they are incurred on a pre - tax basis .

about one - third of workers in 2007 have access to an fsa .

under current law , it is at the discretion of each employer to set their limits on fsa contributions .

in 2008 , the average fsa contribution was $1,350 .

s. 1796 would limit the amount of annual fsa contributions to $2,500 per fsa beginning in 2011 .

according to the jct , this provision would raise $14.6 billion over 10 years ( see table 3 ) .

hsas are also tax - advantaged accounts that allow individuals to fund unreimbursed medical expenses ( deductibles , copayments , and services not covered by insurance ) on a pre - tax basis .

eligible individuals can establish and fund accounts when they have a qualifying high deductible health plan and no other health plan ( with some exceptions ) .

unlike fsas , hsas may be rolled over and the funds accumulated over time .

distributions from an hsa that are used for qualified medical expenses are not included in taxable income .

distributions from an hsa that are not used for qualified medical expenses are taxable as ordinary income and , under current law , an additional 10% penalty tax .

s. 1796 would raise this penalty on non - qualified distributions to 20% of the disbursed amount .

according to the jct , this provision would raise $1.3 billion over 10 years ( see table 3 ) .

in addition to the specific provisions in s. 1796 that would directly modify these tax - advantaged plans , this proposal would also modify the definition of qualified medical expenses .

under current law qualified medical expenses for fsas , hsas , and hras can include over - the - counter medications .

s. 1796 would restrict this practice and excludes over - the counter prescriptions ( except those prescribed by a physician ) as a qualified medical expense .

according to the jct , this provision would increase revenues by $5.4 billion over 10 years ( see table 3 ) .

currently , taxpayers who itemize their deductions may deduct unreimbursed medical expenses that exceed 7.5% of adjusted gross income ( agi ) .

medical expenses include health insurance premiums paid by the taxpayer , but also can include certain transportation and lodging expenses related to medical care as well as qualified long - term care costs , and long - term care premiums that do not exceed a certain amount .

about 7% of tax returns for tax year 2007 reported a deduction for medical expenses .

taxpayers with adjusted gross income below $50,000 accounted for 52% of those taking this itemized deduction for medical expenses .

s. 1796 would increase the threshold to 10% of agi for taxpayers who are under age 65 which would limit the amount of medical expenses that can be deducted .

taxpayers over age 65 would still be subject to the 7.5% limit under current law .

according to the jct , this provision would raise revenues by $15.2 billion over 10 years ( see table 3 ) .

