the 111 th congress has devoted considerable effort to health reform that seeks to increase health insurance coverage for more americans and help control increasing costs while improving quality and patient outcomes .

h.r .

3962 , the affordable health care for america act , was passed by the house of representatives on november 7 , 2009 .

h.r .

3962 is based on h.r .

3200 , america's affordable health choices act of 2009 , which was originally introduced on july 14 , 2009 , and was reported separately on october 14 , 2009 , by three house committees — education and labor , energy and commerce , and ways and means .

one major difference between h.r .

3200 and h.r .

3962 is the addition of division d , "indian health care improvement," which would reenact , authorize , and amend the indian health care improvement act ( ihcia ) .

division d differs from much of the other divisions of h.r .

3962 in that it targets a specific population group — american indians and alaska natives , a group that , in general , has lower health status , lower life expectancy , and higher rates of a number of diseases , including diabetes , than the u.s. population as a whole .

the goal of the division — to improve the health of american indians and alaska natives — is consistent with the changes proposed in other divisions that also propose to improve health care access and quality , augment the health care workforce , and increase access to mental health services .

provisions to reauthorize and amend ihcia were also included in h.r .

3590 , the patient protection and affordable care act , as passed by the senate on december 24 , 2009 .

on february 25 , 2010 , president obama hosted a health reform summit with congressional democrats and republicans in an effort to find common ground and revive stalled legislative activity on health reform .

ahead of the summit , the president released his proposal for a health care overhaul .

the president's proposal is based on the senate - passed bill , including ihcia reauthorization .

it also incorporates several policies from the house - passed measure , as well as a number of the president's priorities and some provisions from republican - sponsored legislation .

5 the house is preparing to vote on h.r .

3590 , as passed by the senate , and on an accompanying reconciliation bill ( h.r .

4872 ) .

the reconciliation bill would change several controversial elements in h.r .

3590 — none of these changes would modify ihcia — and otherwise amend the underlying legislation so that its budgetary impact meets the reconciliation instructions in last year's budget resolution .

if the house approves h.r .

3590 , it will be sent to the president to be signed into law .

the reconciliation measure , if approved by the house , would then be taken up by the senate .

the indian health service ( ihs ) , an agency in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , provides health care for approximately 1.8 million eligible american indians / alaska natives through a system of programs and facilities located on or near indian reservations , and through contractors in certain urban areas .

ihs is organized into 12 areas administered by an area office ; areas , in turn , are further subdivided into service units .

ihs may provide services directly , or indian tribes ( its ) or tribal organizations ( tos ) may operate ihs facilities and programs themselves through self - determination contracts and self - governance compacts negotiated with ihs .

urban indian organizations ( uios ) also provide services using contracts and grants from ihs .

ihcia authorizes many specific ihs activities , sets out the national policy for health services administered to indians , and states the federal goal for the health condition of the ihs service population , which is to "assure the highest possible health status for indians and urban indians. .

significantly , ihcia also authorizes direct collections from medicare , medicaid , and other third party insurers .

ihcia also gives ihs authority to grant funding to urban indian organizations to provide health care services to urban indians , and establishes substance abuse treatment programs , indian health professions recruitment programs , and many other programs .

the ihcia was last fully reauthorized by the indian health amendments of 1992 , which extended authorizations of its appropriations through fy2000 .

in 2000 , all ihcia appropriations authorizations were extended through fy2001 .

congress has continued to appropriate funds for ihcia programs since 2001 .

ihcia reauthorization has been under consideration in congress since 1999 .

in the current congress , ihcia reauthorization bills were introduced in the house ( h.r .

2708 ) and the senate ( s. 1790 ) .

another act , the snyder act of 1921 , provides an additional , but very general , authorization for indian health programs .

the snyder act is a permanent , indefinite authorization for federal indian programs , including for "conservation of health. .

in 1921 , all indian programs , including health , were under the management of the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) in the department of the interior ( interior ) .

the snyder act was passed in order to authorize all the activities the bia was then carrying out .

the act's broad language might be read as authorizing — although not requiring — nearly any indian program , including health care , for which congress enacts appropriations .

the act , however , gives no directions or policies for federal indian health care .

when congress transferred indian health care programs from the bia to the public health service ( phs ) in the then - department of health , education , and welfare ( predecessor to the department health and human services ( hhs ) ) in 1954 , the snyder act's authorization accompanied the transfer .

the affordable health care for america act ( h.r .

3962 ) , as passed on november 7 , 2009 , would make sweeping reforms of the u.s. health insurance and health care system .

h.r .

3962 contains four major divisions: a , b , c , and d. division a , "affordable health care choices," focuses on reducing the number of uninsured , restructuring the private health insurance market , setting minimum standards for health benefits , and providing financial assistance to certain individuals and , in some cases , small employers .

division b , "medicare and medicaid improvements," proposes modifications to the largest two health insurance programs to make them consistent with the changes proposed in division a and to amend other provisions in existing federal statute .

division b also introduces a number of technical changes intended to improve quality of care , reduce federal and state expenditures , and address coverage gaps for both medicare and medicaid .

division c , "public health and workforce development," would amend and expand existing health professions and nursing workforce programs .

division d , "indian health care improvement," would reenact , authorize , and amend the indian health care improvement act ( ihcia ) .

this report does not discuss other divisions of h.r .

3962 ; reports on these divisions can be found at crs's website under "issue in focus - health reform. .

proposals in other divisions of h.r .

3962 may also affect american indians and alaska natives .

for example , indian tribes may be eligible for grant or contract programs proposed in h.r .

3962 , may benefit from proposed medicaid reforms .

this report summarizes the provisions of division d of h.r .

3962 as passed on november 7 , 2009 .

the division contains two titles .

title i contains three sections .

section 3101 ( a ) would replace current ihcia language with new language that would reenact , amend , and reauthorize all eight titles of ihcia .

section 3101 ( b ) and ( c ) and would make technical corrections to other federal law as necessitated by ihcia section 601's creation of a new assistant secretary for indian health .

sections 3102 and 3103 make changes to indian programs not in ihcia .

title ii of division d contains five sections ( sections 3201-3205 ) , three of which amend sections of the social security act ( ssa ) , and none of which amend ihcia .

this report summarizes the major sections of division d ; for analysis of selected provisions and issues in each title of ihcia and related ssa programs , see pages 22-50 of crs report rl33022 , indian health service: health care delivery , status , funding , and legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

the first part of this report covers title i of division d , especially section 3101 ( a ) .

section 3101 ( a ) contains ihcia's general provisions and its eight titles: ( 1 ) indian health workforce , ( 2 ) health services , ( 3 ) health care and sanitation facilities , ( 4 ) access to federal reimbursements , ( 5 ) health services for urban indians , ( 6 ) ihs organizational improvements , ( 7 ) behavioral health programs , and ( 8 ) miscellaneous .

most authorizations of appropriations are included in the final section of each ihcia title .

division d would make each title's authorizations of appropriations permanent and indefinite ( as noted above , appropriations authorizations in the current ihcia expired in fy2000 ) .

sections that include only appropriations authorizations are not summarized in the discussions below .

section 3101 ( a ) would replace current ihcia language ; in doing so it would provide new language for some , but not all , of the existing ihcia provisions .

sections 3101 ( b ) and 3101 ( c ) make technical corrections to other laws based on ihs organizational improvements made in section 3101 ( a ) ; these changes are discussed with the relevant ihs organizational changes .

this report's second part covers title ii of division d. title ii ( sections 3201-3205 ) includes provisions related to improving indian health care provided through federal health programs authorized in the social security act ( ssa ) — medicare , medicaid , and the children's health insurance program ( chip ) .

these sections amend the ssa and cross - reference a number of provisions included in section 3101 ( a ) , especially ihcia title iv , which , among other things , amends the current ihcia as it relates to these ssa programs .

these two titles will be discussed separately with appropriate cross - references .

for title i of division d , in most instances , the discussion of each ihcia title begins with some background on current law to provide context for the descriptions of the bill's provisions .

the appendix includes a list of acronyms used in this report .

the children's health insurance program reauthorization act of 2009 renamed the state children's health insurance program and its acronym , schip .

the program is now the children's health insurance program , or chip .

the text of division d in h.r .

3962 refers to this program as schip , but this report uses the new acronym , chip .

the term "secretary," as used in this report , means the secretary of hhs , unless otherwise indicated .

the term "indian" in this report refers to "indian" as defined in ihcia and maintained in section 4 below .

under this definition , an indian is a person who is a member of a federally recognized tribe , band , nation , or other organized group or community , including any alaska native village or group , or regional or village corporation , as defined in or established pursuant to the alaska native claims settlement act .

the report also includes , in footnotes , instances where there are potential technical errors in the bill .

this report will be updated to reflect future legislative actions .

separate from the reauthorization of the ihcia in section 3101 ( a ) , division d would amend several sections of the ssa , specifically those related to titles xviii ( medicare ) , xix ( medicaid ) , xxi ( chip ) , and xi ( general provisions ) .

h.r .

3962 would amend the ssa to define a number of indian terms as they are defined in ihcia section 4 .

these terms include ihs , it , tos , and uios , ihps , and thps .

these definitions would apply for all of the ssa , including medicare , medicaid , and chip .

section 3201 also includes these definitions as related to amending ssa sections 1101 , 1911 , 1880 , and 2107 .

this subsection would amend ssa section 1911 ( a ) to provide that ihps are eligible for medicaid payments for all items and services provided under a state plan or under a waiver , if the provision of those services meets all the conditions and requirements generally applicable to the delivery of such care .

the subsection would repeal ssa section 1911 ( b ) regarding ihs - funded facilities that do not yet meet all conditions and requirements .

the subsection would amend ssa section 1911 ( c ) to permit the secretary to enter into an agreement with a state for the purpose of reimbursing that state for medicaid services provided by the ihs , an it , to , or uio , either directly , through referral , under contracts or other arrangements between these entities and another health care provider , to indians eligible for medicaid under the state medicaid plan or a waiver .

the subsection strikes ssa section 1911 ( d ) .

it would add a new ssa section 1911 ( c ) that cross references the special fund for improvement of ihs facilities in ihcia section 401 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( as amended ) .

it would also add a new section 1911 ( d ) that cross references direct - billing provisions in ihcia section 401 ( d ) ( as amended ) .

this subsection would amend and renumber sections of ssa section 1880 .

it would amend ssa 1880 ( a ) , regarding medicare payments to ihs hospitals , to specify that , subject to ssa section 1880 ( e ) ( regarding medicare physician payments to ihs , it , and to facilities ) that ihps are eligible for medicare payments for items and services furnished by ihps , provided that the services provided meet all the conditions and requirements generally applicable to delivery of such care under the medicare program .

the subsection would repeal ssa sections 1880 ( b ) , regarding ihs - funded facilities that do not yet meet all conditions and requirements ; 1880 ( c ) , regarding the special fund for improvement of ihs facilities ; and 1880 ( d ) , regarding a compliance status report .

it would add new sections 1880 ( b ) and 1880 ( c ) to cross reference the special fund established under ihcia section 401 ( c ) ( as amended ) and cross reference the direct billing authority in ihcia section 401 ( d ) ( as amended ) .

the subsection would also make a conforming change to existing ssa section 1880 ( e ) ( 3 ) ( as amended ) , regarding medicare part b payments , to specify that ihcia section 401 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( as amended ) and the new ssa section 1880 ( b ) , both regarding the special fund , would not apply to payments made under ssa section 1880 ( e ) .

this subsection would amend ssa section 2107 ( regarding medicaid provisions applicable to chip ) to apply all but one of the medicaid provisions in ssa section 201 ( a ) , as amended , to the chip program , including the provisions regarding eligibility of indian entities to receive medicaid reimbursement , compliance with conditions and requirements , agreements with states to provide medicaid reimbursement to indians , direct billing , and definitions of indian terms .

the provision regarding the special fund for improvement of ihs facilities ( as defined in the new ssa section 1911 ( c ) ) would not apply to chip .

this section would amend ssa section 2102 , regarding assurances required in state chip plans , to strike the definition of "indian" by reference to ihcia section 4 ( c ) from the requirement for a description in the plan of procedures to ensure the provision of child health assistance to targeted low - income indian children in the state , and add to the requirement a description of how the state will ensure that payments are made to indian health programs and urban indian organizations providing chip benefits in the state .

the section also would amend ssa section 2105 regarding the prohibition of chip payments where other federal payments can be made , to exempt health care programs operated or financed by ihs , tribes , and tos and uios from such prohibitions ( currently only ihs programs are exempted ) .

ssa sections 1128 and 1128b and related provisions exclude certain activities for individuals and entities under federal health programs , but allow waivers and "safe harbors" under certain circumstances .

among the excluded activities are knowingly and willfully soliciting or receiving remuneration in return for referrals for services for which a federal health program payment may be made , or in return for purchasing , leasing , or ordering ( or arranging for the same ) any good , facility , service , or item for which a federal health program payment may be made .

this section would direct the secretary , through the hhs inspector general , to publish a notice soliciting a proposal on the development of safe harbors as described for health care items and services provided by ihps or uios .

the section would suggest potential areas that these safe harbor may relate to .

this section would amend ssa section 1139 , as amended , to add a new subsection 1139 ( e ) , which would require the secretary , acting through cms and ihs , to submit an annual report to congress covering the enrollment and health status of indians receiving items or services under the health benefit programs funded under the ssa during the preceding year .

the section would specify the information to be included in the report , including the number of indians enrolled in or receiving items or services under each such ssa program and under programs funded by ihs ; the health status of these indians , disaggregated by diseases or conditions consistent with individual privacy ; the status of ihs , it , to , or uio facilities' compliance with the applicable terms and conditions under medicare , medicaid , and chip , and the progress being made by such facilities toward achievement and maintenance of compliance ; and such other information as the secretary determines appropriate .

this section would require the secretary to conduct a study to identify barriers to interstate coordination of enrollment and coverage of medicaid - and chip - enrolled children who frequently change their state of residence or may temporarily be outside their state of residence for a variety of reasons ( eg , educational needs , family migration , or emergency evacuations ) .

the section would require that the study include an examination of enrollment and coverage coordination issues faced by medicaid - and chip - enrolled indian children temporarily residing in an out - of - state bia boarding school or peripheral dormitory .

the section would also require the secretary , in consultation with state medicaid and chip directors , to submit a report to congress , not later than 18 months after enactment , containing recommendations for legislative and administrative actions to address the enrollment and coverage coordination barriers identified in the study .

