like other manufacturing industries , the worldwide recession is weighing heavily on aerospace manufacturing .

this is especially true for commercial aerospace companies and their suppliers , which are being buffeted by the significant decline in global air travel , resulting in a sharp drop in new orders for aircraft and parts .

the aerospace industry's commercial side anticipates difficult business conditions for the near and medium term , but long - term projections by boeing , for instance , are positive , with airlines expected to need 29,000 new planes valued at $3.2 trillion between 2009 and 2028 .

for now , the defense segment of the aerospace sector has offset the downward trend because it still benefits from continuing government expenditures for military aircraft .

aerospace industry analysts nonetheless predict that there could be tough times ahead for producers of military aircraft .

the international market for aerospace manufacturing is also rapidly changing , and it raises the question of what impact nascent competitors in countries such as china and russia will possibly have on the future competitiveness of u.s. aircraft manufacturers .

one possible issue of interest to members of congress is increased competition to the domestic industry from low - cost competitors , including the emergence of possibly strong aerospace manufacturing centers in china and russia .

as the above discussion indicates , non - u.s. firms dominate the rj market and participate in the ga market .

the large commercial jet aircraft manufacturing sector is a boeing and airbus duopoly .

over the years , aerospace firms from several non - traditional aircraft manufacturing nations have attempted to enter various parts of the international commercial aircraft sector .

with the exception of some ga products , these attempts have largely been commercial failures .

as mentioned earlier , a number of new initiatives appear to be under way .

while aerospace firms in europe and japan have long driven competition with the united states , russia and china have not , until recently , been strong competitors in the international market .

nowadays , both nations appear to have plans to dominate a much larger share of their own domestic markets and , in turn , perhaps the global market .

most notable is a new chinese initiative to build an aircraft to compete in the same markets as the a320 series and the b737 series .

comac was launched by the chinese government in may 2008 for the express purpose of overseeing the development and production of large civil aircraft .

the comac c919 , an approximately 156-seat aircraft with dimensions similar to the a320 , is in development , though a production date has not yet been announced .

slated for certification no later than 2016 , that model would compete directly with boeing and airbus .

though still in early design , chinese officials have said the c919 should have operating costs 10% below those of comparable western jetliners .

another competitor could be russia's united aircraft corporation ( uac ) , a russian government - owned joint stock company .

uac has stated it plans to become the third - largest aircraft manufacturer worldwide by 2015 .

both chinese and russian aircraft manufacturers face significant hurdles in building commercial aircraft , since neither has ever built such airplanes for the commercial market , which requires planes to be reliable , have low operating costs , and be easily maintained .

another outstanding barrier to their market entry is certification by u.s. and eu aviation authorities .

congress has been discussing broad issues affecting the competitiveness of the nation's aerospace manufacturing industry for most of this decade .

in the early 2000s , the presidential commission on the future of the u.s. aerospace industry released its recommendations on how to maintain the competitiveness of the aerospace sector .

the aerospace commission called for a national aerospace policy along with a government - wide framework to implement this policy , as well as the removal of prohibitive legal and regulatory barriers that impede the ability of the industry to grow .

the commission also advanced policies to maintain u.s. global aerospace leadership by proposing investments in america's industrial base , workforce , and research and development infrastructure .

many industry analysts argue that globalization helps the united states achieve its business objectives and enhances the competitiveness and vitality of aerospace exporters .

but u.s. export licensing laws can negatively impact a customer's ability to acquire aerospace products and parts from the united sates .

while larger firms have learned to manage export control requirements , they remain a heavy burden for smaller companies , which in some cases inhibits the ability of second - and third - tier suppliers to compete in the international marketplace .

the response by some overseas competitors to u.s. export control policies has been to develop products that do not contain any u.s. components .

like all other sectors of the u.s. economy , environmental concerns impact the aerospace industry .

as the world debates the possible implications of climate change , it appears that the aerospace industry will have to contribute to reduction of carbon emissions .

how to limit the environmental impact of aviation is a hotly debated topic in the united states and many foreign countries .

concerns include the possibility that some countries could establish unilateral measures to limit greenhouse gas emissions ( ghg ) for aviation .

for instance , the eu's emissions trading scheme ( ets ) — a cap - and - trade system — wants the aviation industry to take responsibility for the emissions it contributes to the atmosphere , and all intra - eu and international flights are set to be included under the ets beginning on january 1 , 2012 .

the aerospace industry confronts a considerable workforce challenge , which is part of an overall problem in the u.s. science and technology workforce .

the industry claims that the united states is not producing enough qualified workers to meet the needs of aerospace companies , and not enough students are opting for science and engineering careers .

the number of students receiving engineering bachelor's degrees dropped by 11% between 1986 and 2006 , but more recent data indicate a change in this trend , with engineering degrees conferred to undergraduates up 14% since 2000 .

in addition , the current aerospace industry workforce is aging , with an increase in retirements projected in coming years .

according to aviation week's 2009 workforce study , the average age of the broad u.s. aerospace and defense industry workforce is 45 , with an average age of 43 among engineers .

boeing reports the average age of today's aerospace engineer at 54 years , which is even older .

a 2008 report by the american institute of aeronautics and astronautics found that 26% of aerospace professionals will be eligible to retire this year , and potential additional retirements of "baby - boom" personnel will create a virtual "silver tsunami" of skilled workforce reduction .

as a consequence , there is concern among aerospace companies that they are rapidly losing their institutional knowledge base .

at the same time , the industry is finding it difficult to replenish its workforce with a younger engineering base .

significant competition for the small pool of technically trained aerospace talent comes from other industries , such as information technology and financial services , and increasingly other countries .

