on october 5 , 2009 , president obama signed executive order ( eo ) 13514 , federal leadership in environmental , energy , and economic performance , to establish an integrated strategy towards "sustainability" in the federal government and to make reduction of "greenhouse gas" ( ghg ) emissions a priority for federal agencies .

the order requires federal agencies to set ghg emissions reduction targets , increase energy efficiency , reduce fleet petroleum consumption , conserve water , reduce waste , support sustainable communities , and leverage federal purchasing power to promote environmentally - responsible products and technologies .

the federal government represents the largest single consumer of energy in the u.s. economy , occupying nearly half a million buildings , operating more than 600,000 vehicles , and purchasing over $500 billion in goods and services annually .

eo 13514 directs federal agencies to lead by example in setting sustainability performance standards "to create a clean energy economy" in order to increase the nation's prosperity , promote energy security , protect the interests of taxpayers , and safeguard the health of the environment .

federal agencies must weigh both economic and social benefits and costs in annual evaluations of project performance , expanding projects with net benefits , and reassessing or discontinuing under - performing projects .

these evaluations must be transparent , with actions taken to comply with the order disclosed on publicly available federal websites .

military and related national security activities appear to be exempted from the requirements of eo 13514 .

this report discusses the more significant provision of eo 13514 .

however , the concept of "sustainability" is left for a separate report .

eo 13514 establishes new goals and provisions , augments or expands many existing provisions , and extends some dates for compliance .

it does not revoke any provision of previous executive orders .

previous administrations issued several executive orders addressing various energy and environmental goals and practices of federal agencies .

specifically , eo 13423─ strengthening federal environmental , energy and transportation management ( january 24 , 2007 ) ─replaced five earlier executive orders addressing energy and environmental management by agencies of the federal government , establishing goals , practices , and reporting requirements for environmental , energy , transportation performance , and accountability .

refer to this report's appendix for a summary of eo 13423 provisions .

the following sections summarize the major energy and environmental provisions and goals in the new eo 13514 .

they also compare provisions and goals to previous environmental and energy efficiency goals of eo 13423 , with a summary provided in table 1 .

eo 13514 creates an implementation team and a management structure to coordinate federal agencies activities that is similar in structure and make - up to the management and reporting structures created previously by eo 13423 .

while the new order continues to afford federal agencies flexibility in making recommendations to meet the goals , it should guide the agencies as to the types of actions they can consider and hold them accountable for meeting the requirements .

federal agencies may consider various market - based solutions in making sustainability improvements .

using the private sector in this way can help federal agencies meet the goals of eo 13514 while conserving financial resources to meet their primary missions .

two widely used contracts ─ energy savings performance contracts ( espcs ) and utility energy savings contracts ( uescs ) ─ provide federal agencies with the means of improving energy efficiency through private sector financing .

under an espc , a private - sector energy services company ( esco ) develops and installs energy improvements such as energy efficient lighting or heating , ventilation and air conditioning systems ( hvac ) .

the federal agency then repays the esco for the capital expenditure over a maximum of 25-year period from resultant energy savings .

epscs , in particular , have gained widespread use throughout the federal sector .

federal agencies have invested approximately $2.3 billion through espcs , with more than 460 contracts awarded in 47 states .

espcs come with an incentive that allows facility managers to apply the cash benefit of energy savings to other improvements or programs .

the congressional budget office's ( cbo ) view of espcs is that they impose a future financial obligation on the federal government .

cbo began scoring espcs as mandatory spending , coinciding with the expiration of the 1990 budget enforcement act pay - as - you - go ( paygo ) rules .

the cbo scoring reflects how espcs create future commitments to appropriations .

the government accountability office ( gao ) finds that the benefits of espcs could be achieved using upfront funds ( that is , fully funded in advance ) and with lower financing costs , but agencies generally do not receive sufficient funds upfront for doing so and see espcs as a necessary supplement to upfront funding in order to achieve the longer - term energy savings benefits .

uescs can accomplish the energy efficiency improvements similar to espcs .

with a uesc , a utility finances the costs of capital improvements and recovers its investment over the contract term from the customer's utility rates .

the utility benefits by reducing its customer's demand for energy , thus increasing its spare capacity for periods when energy demands peak .

unlike espcs , however , there are no statutory requirements that an agency realize savings from reduced energy consumption .

facility managers , however , can stipulate terms for energy cost savings .

much of eo 13514 requires federal agencies to examine the environmental and social impacts of their mission , personnel and logistical operations with regard to sustainability .

the definition of sustainability carries over from eo 13423 , without discussion of how the private sector views or generally implements the concept .

given that the order has elevated sustainability to a high priority , a broader discussion would help clarify the concept and possibly promote better policy solutions .

reducing greenhouse gas emissions is eo 13514's most significant requirement .

energy consumption , and thereby fossil fuels use , is arguably involved in almost every aspect and activity of all federal agencies .

in establishing targets for reducing ghg emissions , agencies may need to weigh the potential impacts on their missions while also considering whether advances in technology are likely over the timeframe of compliance .

the requirement for federal agencies to reduce scope 3 ghg emissions could have many implications , including the evaluation of telecommuting as an imperative for many federal employees to reduce gasoline consumption .

upgrading security for computer - based systems and adding equipment for communications could be major considerations on the cost side .

this latest energy - and environment - related executive order requires federal agencies to recommend how they will achieve mandatory goals , but ceq and omb must approve and decide the federal actions that agencies may actually employ .

ceq and omb may become arbiters of these recommendations , weighing the mission and criticality of agency activities , as solutions deemed appropriate in some circumstances may not be appropriate for others .

conflicts between priorities can emerge .

for example , if more electricity is required to charge hybrid and electric vehicles and that electricity comes from traditional steam - electric power plants , water consumption could increase thus making water - use goals less achievable .

increased coal use to generate the electricity could exacerbate ghg emissions .

such potential conflicts and possible impacts on the priorities of other agencies are likely to be taken up by the steering committee .

the development of a process for resolving such issues is likely be an area of considerable focus .

in signing executive order ( eo ) 13423 , strengthening federal environmental , energy and transportation management , president george w. bush revoked five earlier executive orders affecting federal agencies' energy and environmental management .

section 11 of the order consolidated and strengthened the five executive orders and two memorandums of understanding ( mou ) and established new and updated goals , practices , and reporting requirements for environmental , energy , and transportation performance and accountability .

in some cases , the bush order put in place replacement energy and environmental efficiency goals for previous goals with target dates that had passed .

eo 13423 also implemented and supplemented provisions of the 2005 energy policy act ( epact ; p.l .

110-140 ) dealing with energy and environmental management by federal agencies .

the combination of epact ( title i , part a ) and eo 13423 defined the energy efficiency objectives for federal agencies under the bush administration .

eo 13423 directed all federal agencies to improve energy efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emissions through reductions in energy intensity ( 3% annually through the end of fy2015 , and 30% by the end of fy2015 , relative to each agency's baseline energy use in fy2003 ) .

agencies scored progress in reaching building energy - efficiency goals in terms of reductions in energy consumption versus gross building area .

for the energy reduction goals of epact , eo 13423 excluded some inherently inefficient industrial types of buildings were from this scoring .

eo 13423 ( section 2f ) mandated specific energy reduction targets for new construction and renovations .

further , it directed federal agencies to meet objectives set in the federal leadership in high performance and sustainable buildings memorandum of understanding ( "sustainable buildings mou" ) .

the sustainable buildings mou called for new buildings to be 30% more cost efficient than industry standards , and for buildings undergoing major renovations to be 20% more cost efficient than a pre - renovation , 2003 baseline .

the order also encouraged federal agencies to incorporate sustainable practices into projects underway , and sell or dispose of unneeded assets .

the revoked eo 13123 had directed improvements in building energy efficiency , promoted the use of renewable energy , and set goals for reduction of greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions associated with energy use in buildings , among other energy - related requirements .

in contrast , bush's eo 13423 had no specific ghg reduction target .

however , section 2.a of eo 13423 did include the goal of cutting ghg emissions by federal agencies through reductions in the energy intensity of agency operations , but does not specify a ghg reduction target .

epact only credited electricity from renewable energy sources in meeting federal purchase requirements .

eo 13423 required that at least half of the epact renewable energy requirement comes from new ( put in service after january 1 , 1999 ) renewable energy sources .

agencies could also use new non - electric renewable energy sources to meet the requirement for new renewable energy .

 ( examples of non - electric renewable energy include thermal energy from solar ventilation pre - heat systems , solar heating and cooling systems , solar water heating , ground source heat pumps , biomass heating and cooling , thermal uses of geothermal and ocean resources. ) .

however , these non - electric renewable energy sources could not apply toward meeting the epact renewable electricity requirement .

in meeting epact's energy - intensity reduction goals ( btu / gsf ) , agency credits for renewable energy purchases started to phase out in fy2008 and reduce to zero by fy2011 .

finally , eo 13423 required each federal agency to annually report to the president .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) provided general reporting guidance in circular no .

a - 11 ( section 55 , information on energy use , costs , and efficiency ) .

a 2008 doe memorandum provided detailed reporting guidance in to federal agency energy coordinators .

