the role of prevention in improving the quality of health care by preventing illness , disability , and death through expanded coverage or use of preventive services is a key topic of discussion among those seeking to reform the nation's health care delivery system .

many argue that preventive services have the potential to greatly improve patients' health .

they cite , among other things , the burdens of disease and premature death that result from tobacco use , poor diet , and other unhealthy behaviors .

preventive services that improve health outcomes are seen as a means to improve the quality of care provided by the nation's health care system .

chronic diseases place a growing health burden on older americans , and an increasing cost burden on the medicare program .

according to the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , "without any changes in federal law , total spending on health care will rise from 16 percent of gdp in 2007 to 25 percent in 2025 and close to 50 percent in 2082 ; net federal spending on medicare and medicaid will rise from 4 percent of gdp to almost 20 percent over the same period .

many of the other factors that will play a role in determining future fiscal conditions over the long term pale by comparison with the challenges of containing growth in the cost of federal health insurance programs. .

some stakeholders have touted prevention as a means to contain health care costs .

whether expanding coverage or utilization of preventive services would actually save money for medicare is , however , a matter of continuing debate .

some clinical preventive services may both improve the patient's health and save money for payers .

most clinical preventive services , however , add to health care costs borne by the payer .

when effective , these services may nonetheless be considered to provide a good value for their cost ; that is , they are cost - effective .

whether or not a preventive measure is cost - effective depends on the type of intervention and the population that is targeted .

for example , an expensive screening test that is provided to the general population is likely to be very costly and provide limited clinical benefit if only a small fraction of those individuals would have become ill in the absence of the screening .

but a less expensive intervention targeted at a population at high risk for a disease is likely to yield much greater value , and may even yield a net savings to the health care system .

in general , medicare law authorizes the secretary to cover services for the diagnosis and treatment of illness , while coverage of preventive services ( i.e. , services provided in the absence of symptoms ) has generally required legislation .

although there is no statutory definition of "preventive services" that refers to these services collectively , medicare law outlines specific coverage criteria for many preventive services , including factors such as the types of screening tests or services covered , and the age or risk profiles to which a service applies ( see " which preventive services does medicare cover ? .

" ) .

over the years , congress has sought expert advice to determine , for the purposes of medicare coverage , whether a given preventive service is effective , and whether its clinical use is likely to benefit the patient without posing potential risks from the procedure itself .

current medicare coverage of preventive services does not always comport with evidence - based recommendations of expert panels such as the u.s. preventive services task force ( uspstf ) .

congress provided the first administrative authority for the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) to add coverage of additional preventive services in the medicare improvements for patients and providers act of 2008 ( mippa , p.l .

110-275 ) , if , among other things , such a service is recommended by the uspstf ( see " u.s. preventive services task force ( uspstf ) " ) .

a recent uspstf recommendation regarding screening mammography has refocused congressional attention on the appropriate role of advisory panels with respect to medicare coverage decisions .

this report examines medicare coverage of clinical preventive services .

first , it provides a brief overview of the medicare program and history of congressional actions that added coverage of various clinical preventive services under medicare , including , most recently , a comprehensive health assessment for new medicare beneficiaries , and a new administrative authority of the secretary of hhs to expand medicare coverage of preventive services .

next , this report discusses how medicare makes coverage decisions for its services , including preventive services .

the report then discusses several advisory groups — in particular the uspstf — and their recommendations regarding the effectiveness of clinical preventive services , medicare coverage of these services , or related matters .

then it discusses two issues: ( 1 ) do clinical preventive services help medicare control costs ? .

and ( 2 ) what is the utilization of medicare clinical preventive services , and how might it be improved ? .

this report then discusses current legislative proposals to reform the health care system , with respect to provisions regarding medicare coverage of preventive services .

finally , the appendix provides a comparison of medicare coverage of preventive services with uspstf recommendations for such services .

this report will be updated as events warrant .

to be eligible for payment under medicare , items or services must meet the following three conditions: ( 1 ) the item or service must fall within a defined medicare benefit category ; ( 2 ) the item or service must be "reasonable and necessary" for diagnosis or treatment ; and ( 3 ) the item or service is not statutorily excluded from coverage .

the statute vests the authority with the secretary of hhs to determine what constitutes medically reasonable and necessary .

thus , the secretary has the legal authority to specify which items or services are covered in a defined benefit category and under what conditions .

as previously mentioned , medicare law has been amended several times to add new coverage , including coverage of certain preventive health care services .

the process for medicare coverage decisions for new technologies and procedures are made through two pathways .

the first is through the national coverage determination ( ncd ) process .

the second are those determinations made at the local level through local coverage determinations ( lcds ) .

the vast majority of these coverage policies are lcds made by medicare's claims administration contractors who , as of 2001 , had made more than 9,000 separate policies .

these local contractors determine if a claim applies to a covered benefit and , if so , whether the medical service , procedure , or device is reasonable and necessary and therefore eligible for medicare coverage .

according to cms instructions , a service may be considered reasonable and medically necessary if it is safe and effective , not experimental , and appropriate in terms of duration and frequency .

lcds are only binding on a contractor's local service area .

therefore a service covered in one state may not be covered in a neighboring state , resulting in variations in medicare coverage across the country .

at the national level , the national coverage determination ( ncd ) process is used by cms' central office to issue national policy statements that grant , limit , or exclude medicare coverage for a specific medical service , procedure , or device .

the coverage and analysis group of the office of clinical standards and quality at cms is responsible for making ncds .

to date cms has issued approximately 300 ncds .

cms may issue a ncd in response to a formal request from an outside party such as a beneficiary , provider , or manufacturer ; or the agency may internally decide to develop an ncd .

as previously mentioned , under mippa the secretary is authorized to add coverage of preventive services that are not already provided in statute , using the ncd process , if the secretary determines that certain conditions ( described above ) are met .

the agency has published guidance listing the conditions that may prompt the agency to consider developing an internal ncd for a medicare item or service: providers , patients or other members of the public have raised significant questions about the health benefits of currently covered items or services .

interpretation of new evidence or re - interpretation of previously available evidence indicates that changes may be warranted in current policies .

local coverage policies are inconsistent or conflict with each other to the detriment of medicare beneficiaries .

program integrity concerns have arisen under existing local or national policies such as variations in billing practices not related to variation in clinical need .

cms's process for developing ncds has generated concern over the years .

specifically , some observers have expressed that there is a lack of transparency in the agency's decision - making process for making medicare coverage determinations .

beginning in 1999 , cms took a number of steps to increase transparency in its national coverage process including publishing coverage decisions on its website , establishing a medicare coverage advisory committee ( mcac , now the medicare evidence development and coverage advisory committee , medcac ) to conduct public meetings on coverage proposals , and publishing guidance documents to educate the public on the criteria and standards cms uses when producing a ncd .

a few years later , congress mandated certain requirements to improve the ncd process , such as implementing timelines in the development of ncds and requiring public input in the development of ncds .

there is good evidence , and general agreement , that many preventive services can improve health care quality by preventing illness , disability , and death .

it is less clear , however , whether expanded coverage or utilization of clinical preventive services could stem cost growth or produce savings for the medicare program or other payers of health services .

for example , covering screening services for early detection of serious conditions such as cancer may not be cost - saving for payers .

because it is usually not possible to know beforehand which patients will go on to develop a serious illness , screenings must be delivered to large numbers of people who would never have developed the condition .

also , prevention interventions may be shown to yield a net cost in the short term , but a net saving over a longer period , or vice versa .

cost analyses that cover longer time periods may be more useful , but they are also more difficult to conduct , and are therefore less common .

the national commission on prevention priorities , a private research group , developed a priority ranking for clinical preventive services , based on measurements of under - utilization and cost - effectiveness .

 ( the latter is a measure of the value of the service , defined by its cost in relation to its benefits. ) .

although the commission determined that a number of services were cost - effective , only a few of them were cost - saving .

these were discussing aspirin use for adults at risk of heart attack ; screening for tobacco - use , followed by brief counseling and referral for drug therapy ; vision screening in adults age 65 and older ; and certain immunizations .

several other effective and underutilized services — including screenings for cholesterol , blood pressure , and several types of cancer — were found to yield a net cost .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) recently commented on proposals to expand coverage of preventive services , saying , with respect to federal costs , "although different types of preventive care have different effects on spending , the evidence suggests that for most preventive services , expanded utilization leads to higher , not lower , medical spending overall. .

the agency reviewed several studies that demonstrated improved quality and outcomes associated with increased use of certain preventive services , but that increased the costs for the payer .

cbo provided several explanations , including , as mentioned above , the costs associated with screenings in individuals who would not go on to develop the disease being screened .

cbo also noted that some proposals could encourage a shift to federal coverage for services that individuals already receive under private insurance , thereby yielding a net cost to the government without a concurrent improvement in health care quality .

cbo also noted that a preventive service that is particularly effective and increases longevity would probably incur a net cost for the medicare and social security programs , because it would prevent a portion of premature mortality among beneficiaries , who would then use program benefits for a longer period of time .

the agency has cited influenza vaccination as an example .

in this vein , in 1987 congress required the secretary of hhs to conduct a demonstration project to determine if covering influenza vaccination would be cost - effective for medicare , and to provide coverage if such a finding was made .

congress explicitly prohibited consideration of the effects of reduced mortality in the cost - effectiveness analysis .

influenza vaccination coverage began in 1993 after the finding of its potential cost - effectiveness under this qualified definition .

cbo , the national commission on prevention priorities , and others note that although preventive services do not always yield cost savings for the government or other payers , those services that are effective and beneficial should nonetheless be considered for reimbursement based on their value .

because covering some effective preventive services , or waiving cost - sharing for others that are already covered , could incur net costs for the medicare program , congress may choose to consider raising revenues , or offsetting the costs in medicare or through other federal programs , if it wishes to expand medicare coverage of these services under current budget rules .

there has also been some debate about whether prevention activities funded through other means could improve health outcomes and control costs in medicare .

such activities include health care services provided to the "pre - medicare" population , and population - based health promotion ( "primary prevention" ) interventions , such as expansions in the primary care workforce , smoking cessation campaigns , and other public health measures .

cms has an interest in the health status of the "pre - medicare" population for at least two reasons .

first , behaviors that could improve the health of the medicare population — such as smoking cessation , proper diet , and exercise — are desirable earlier in life , rather than being initiated upon enrollment .

second , medicare may experience a wave of morbidity and costs associated with care for new enrollees whose diseases advanced as a result of deferral of care prior to enrollment .

a recently published study by a public health advocacy group , based on an economic model it developed , estimated that $3 billion ( $10 per capita ) in federal spending on effective population - based health promotion activities in the united states could lead to savings of more than $5 billion for medicare within five years .

congress provided $650 million to expand these types of activities in the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) .

cbo has not provided its own estimate of the possible effects of such discretionary spending on medicare , noting that scorekeeping rules prohibit consideration of the effects of federal discretionary spending proposals on federal mandatory spending .

expanding medicare coverage to include preventive services is meant to improve quality of care , and , ideally , to improve health status among beneficiaries .

however , preventive services that are effective can usually improve health status only for those beneficiaries who use them .

the government accountability office ( gao ) analyzed patient and physician survey data from 2000 and found that although nine in ten medicare beneficiaries visited a physician at least once during the year , many of them did not receive recommended preventive services such as vaccinations and cancer screenings .

similarly , a review of medicare claims data for 2001 showed that even when all patient visits for the year were included , fewer than half of medicare beneficiaries received all five of the studied preventive services to which they were entitled .

a study of 2001 medicare current beneficiary survey ( mcbs ) data found that the use of clinical preventive services was lower among beneficiaries with certain characteristics , including lower income ; black race ; and dual enrollment in medicare and medicaid .

authors of these studies report that medicare beneficiaries were not always aware that they were at risk for certain illnesses , that they could potentially benefit from preventive services , and that such services were covered by medicare .

beneficiary cost sharing has been shown to decrease the utilization of preventive services in some contexts , including the use of screening mammography by beneficiaries in medicare managed care plans .

based on an evidence review , the task force on community preventive services ( tfcps ) recommends reducing beneficiaries' out - of - pocket costs in order to improve utilization of screening mammography .

however , the tfcps found that there was insufficient evidence to make the same recommendation regarding screenings for cervical or colorectal cancer .

the tfcps has reviewed evidence of additional means to improve cancer screening rates , and recommends patient and client reminder systems and certain education and outreach approaches , based on evidence of their effectiveness .

there have been numerous efforts by executive branch agencies , sometimes directed by congress , to improve utilization of preventive services through patient and provider education campaigns and other means .

for example , the iom national cancer policy forum , with funding from cdc , has studied approaches to improve the utilization of colorectal cancer screening .

the medicare initial preventive physical examination ( ippe ) offers an opportunity for providers to review beneficiaries' health status and recommend or deliver appropriate preventive services .

the ippe may not assure optimal utilization of covered services , however .

it is currently covered only once in a beneficiary's lifetime .

some have advocated more frequent health care encounters designed to encourage , coordinate , and deliver recommended preventive services .

however , the effectiveness of this approach , whether in improving either utilization of services or health outcomes , has not been systematically studied .

this section summarizes provisions regarding medicare - covered preventive services in comprehensive senate - and house - passed bills on health reform .

each bill contains provisions that could result in the expansion ( and in the case of the senate bill , the curtailment ) of coverage of certain preventive services under medicare , in some cases in accordance with recommendations of the uspstf .

in addition , each bill would authorize or reauthorize the current functions of the uspstf , to be administered in each case by ahrq .

the house is preparing to vote on h.r .

3590 , as passed by the senate , and on an accompanying reconciliation bill ( h.r .

4872 ) .

the reconciliation bill would change several controversial elements in h.r .

3590 and otherwise amend the underlying legislation so that its budgetary impact meets the reconciliation instructions in last year's budget resolution .

however , it would not alter the medicare preventive services provisions in h.r .

3590 , which are summarized below .

if the house approves h.r .

3590 , it will be sent to the president to be signed into law .

the reconciliation measure , if approved by the house , would then be taken up by the senate .

unless otherwise specified , references in the summaries to "the secretary" mean the secretary of hhs .

this section will be updated to reflect major legislative actions .

on december 24 , 2009 , the senate passed an amended version of the patient protection and affordable care act ( h.r .

3590 ) .

the bill is a comprehensive health reform proposal that represents an amalgam of separate measures reported by the committee on finance and the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) .

it contains the provisions below regarding medicare coverage of preventive services .

cbo has scored most , but not all , of these proposals as incurring a net cost for the medicare program .

an adopted amendment could affect the implementation of several provisions in the senate bill .

on december 2 , 2009 , the senate adopted s.amdt .

2808 , introduced by senator vitter , which would provide that "for the purposes of this act , and for the purposes of any other provisions of law , the current recommendations of the [uspstf] regarding breast cancer screening , mammography , and prevention shall be considered the most current other than those issued in or around november 2009. .

as noted earlier , in november 2009 , the uspstf updated its recommendation regarding the use of mammography for breast cancer screening .

previously , the panel had recommended routine screening for women beginning at age 40 ; it now recommends that routine screening begin at age 50 .

the vitter amendment , which would appear to negate the november 2009 recommendations , could affect provisions in the health reform bills that link uspstf recommendations to coverage as such coverage would apply to screening mammography for female beneficiaries between age 40 and 49 .

section 4103 , "medicare coverage of annual wellness visit providing a personalized prevention plan," as amended by section 10402 ( b ) of the bill , would amend ssa section 1861 to require that medicare part b cover , beginning in 2011 , personalized prevention plan services , including a comprehensive health risk assessment .

the personalized plan could include several specified elements , among them: review and update of medical and family history ; a 5- to 10-year screening schedule and referral for services recommended by the uspstf and acip ; a list of identified risk factors and conditions , and a strategy to address them ; lists of all medications currently prescribed and all providers regularly involved in the patient's care ; review or referral for testing and treatment of chronic conditions ; and cognitive impairment assessment .

all enrolled beneficiaries would be eligible for personalized prevention plan services once every year , without any cost sharing .

during the first year of part b enrollment , beneficiaries could receive only the initial preventive physical examination ( ippe ) .

beneficiaries could receive personalized prevention plan services each year thereafter provided that they have not received either an ippe or personalized prevention plan services within the preceding 12 months .

section 4104 , "removal of barriers to preventive services in medicare," as amended by section 10406 of the bill , would , effective in 2011 , amend ssa section 1861 to define preventive services covered by medicare to mean a specified list of currently covered services , including colorectal cancer screening services even if diagnostic or treatment services were furnished in connection with the screening .

the list also would include the ippe , as well as the personalized prevention plan services that would be covered pursuant to section 4103 of the bill .

coverage would continue to be subject to all criteria that apply to each preventive service covered under current law .

in addition , this section would amend ssa section 1833 to waive beneficiary coinsurance requirements for most preventive services , requiring medicare to cover 100% of the costs .

services for which no coinsurance would be required are the ippe , personalized prevention plan services , any additional preventive service covered under the secretary's administrative authority , and any currently covered preventive service ( including medical nutrition therapy , and excluding electrocardiograms ) if it is recommended with a grade of a or b by the uspstf .

the section would generally waive the application of the deductible for the same types of preventive services noted above for which coinsurance would be waived .

it would not , however , waive the application of the deductible for any additional preventive service covered under the secretary's administrative authority .

section 4105 , "evidence - based coverage of preventive services in medicare," would , effective january 1 , 2010 , authorize the secretary to modify the coverage of any currently covered preventive service ( including services included in the ippe , but not the ippe itself ) , to the extent that the modification is consistent with uspstf recommendations .

this section also would allow the secretary to withhold payment for any currently covered preventive service graded d ( i.e. , not recommended ) by the uspstf .

the enhanced authority would not apply to services furnished for the purposes of diagnosis or treatment ( rather than as preventive services furnished to asymptomatic patients ) .

in addition , section 4003 , "clinical and community preventive services task forces," would reauthorize current authority for the uspstf ( calling it the "preventive services task force" ) , requiring the task force to review the scientific evidence related to the effectiveness , appropriateness , and cost - effectiveness of clinical preventive services for the purpose of developing recommendations for the health care community , and updating previous clinical preventive recommendations , to be published in the guide to clinical preventive services .

the provision also states that "all members of the task force convened under this subsection , and any recommendations made by such members , shall be independent and , to the extent practicable , not subject to political pressure. .

this section would also codify the existing tfcps .

on november 7 , 2009 , by a vote of 220-215 , the house passed a comprehensive health reform bill , the affordable health care for america act ( h.r .

3962 ) .

the legislation , introduced by representative dingell on october 29 , 2009 , is based on an earlier measure , the america's affordable health choices act of 2009 ( h.r .

3200 ) , which was jointly developed and reported by the house committees on ways and means , energy and commerce , and education and labor .

the legislation contains the following provisions regarding medicare coverage of preventive services .

cbo has scored most of these proposals as incurring a net cost for the medicare program .

section 1305 , "coverage and waiver of cost - sharing for preventive services," would amend section 1861 of the social security act ( ssa ) to define "medicare covered preventive services" as a specified list of currently covered services , and any services subsequently covered under the secretary's administrative authority .

coverage would be subject to conditions and limitations that currently apply to each listed service , except that any cost - sharing ( deductible and / or coinsurance ) that currently applies would be waived .

section 1306 , "waiver of deductible for colorectal cancer screening tests regardless of coding , subsequent diagnosis , or ancillary tissue removal," would amend ssa section 1833 to clarify that coinsurance and the deductible would be waived for colorectal cancer screening services even if diagnostic or treatment services were furnished concurrently as a result of findings of the screening .

section 1310 , "expanding access to vaccines," would provide medicare part b coverage for all federally recommended vaccines , defined as any approved vaccine that is recommended by the cdc upon advice from the advisory committee on immunization practices ( acip ) .

section 1311 , "expansion of medicare - covered preventive services at federally qualified health centers" ( fqhcs ) , would amend ssa section 1861 to provide that fqhcs may receive medicare reimbursement for medicare covered preventive services ( as defined in section 1305 of this bill ) .

section 1313 , "recognition of certified diabetes educators as certified providers for purposes of medicare diabetes outpatient self - management training services," would amend ssa section 1861 to designate certain certified diabetes educators as medicare - certified providers of covered diabetes self - management training ( dsmt ) services .

a "certified diabetes educator" would be defined as an individual who meets specified criteria , including certification by a "recognized certifying body," which also would be defined .

in addition , section 2301 would establish new sections 3131 and 3132 in the public health service act ( phsa ) , requiring the secretary to establish two task forces: a task force on clinical preventive services ( comparable to the uspstf ) , to be administered by ahrq , and a task force on community preventive services , to be administered by cdc .

 ( the latter provision would codify the existing tfcps. ) .

each task force would be required , among other things , to review evidence regarding the benefits , effectiveness , appropriateness , and costs of clinical or community preventive services , respectively , and to develop and disseminate recommendations for the use of such services .

the following table a - 1 compares currently covered medicare preventive services with recommendations of the u.s. preventive services task force ( uspstf ) for older adults .

for simplicity , this analysis is limited to services and recommendations for individuals age 65 years or older , the core age group for medicare eligibility .

individuals younger than 65 years who may also be medicare eligible include persons with certain disabilities or with end - stage renal disease .

for these individuals , additional uspstf recommendations — such as those for younger age groups or for pregnant women — may apply , but are not presented in this table .

services listed in the table include any services that are either ( 1 ) currently covered as preventive services under medicare part b ; or ( 2 ) recommended ( i.e. , with a grade of a or b ) by the uspstf for adults including or limited to those age 65 years or older .

in some cases both criteria apply .

listed uspstf recommendations include , in parentheses , the uspstf grades for the service , as follows: grade a: the uspstf recommends the service , based on high certainty that the net benefit is substantial .

grade b: the uspstf recommends the service , based on high certainty that the net benefit is moderate or there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial .

grade c: the uspstf recommends against routinely providing the service .

there may be considerations that support providing the service in an individual patient .

there is at least moderate certainty that the net benefit is small .

grade d: the uspstf recommends against the service , based on moderate or high certainty that the service has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits ; or i statement: the uspstf concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of the service .

evidence is lacking , or of poor quality , or conflicting , and the balance of benefits and harms cannot be determined .

only those services graded a or b are recommended for routine clinical use .

the year in which the uspstf published its recommendations regarding the specific service is also provided in parentheses .

as with clinical recommendations in general , specific uspstf recommendations may not be appropriate for individuals with certain risk factors or other special considerations , or may be modified by certain clinical considerations .

