since 1945 , the mccarran - ferguson act has provided the "business of insurance" generally with a statutory exemption , albeit one limited over the past 30 years or so by the courts , from the federal antitrust laws .

although congress has on several occasions considered repealing the exemption in its entirety , current repeal efforts are restricted to providers of health and medical malpractice insurance .

in paul v. virginia ( 75 u.s. ( 8 wall. ) .

168 ( 1868 ) ) , the supreme court ruled that "[i]ssuing a policy of insurance is not a transaction of [interstate] commerce. .

in united states v. south - eastern underwriters ass'n .

 ( 322 u.s. 533 ( 1944 ) ) , the court held , however , that the federal antitrust laws were applicable to an insurance association's interstate activities in restraint of trade .

although the 1944 court did not specifically overrule its prior determination , the case was viewed as a reversal of 75 years of precedent and practice , and created significant apprehension about the continued viability of state insurance regulation and taxation of insurance premiums .

congress' response was the 1945 mccarran - ferguson act .

it prohibits application of the federal antitrust laws and similar provisions in the federal trade commission ( ftc ) act , as well as most other federal statutes , to the "business of insurance" to the extent that such business is regulated by state law ; the single exception to that immunity is the statement that nothing in mccarran - ferguson "shall render the sherman act inapplicable to any agreement to [or act of] boycott , coerc[ion] , or intimidat[ion]. .

early mccarran - ferguson decisions mostly favored insurance companies .

after 1969 , however , the exemption for the "business of insurance" was generally limited to activities involving the underwriting and spreading of risk , and those surrounding insurance companies' relationships with their policyholders ; agreements between insurance companies and entities outside the insurance industry were specifically not deemed any part of "the business of insurance. .

in 2003 , the supreme court ruled that mccarran case law prohibiting the indirect application of federal antitrust ( or other ) laws to the "business of insurance" would no longer control with respect to those areas over which congress has unquestionable legislative authority ( eg , erisa , civil rights , securities ) , notwithstanding insurance - company involvement .

recommendations for the repeal of mccarran - ferguson have been voiced for a number of years , coming , for example , from the american bar association ( aba ) and , most recently , from the antitrust modernization commission ( amc ) , a body established by congress to "to examine whether the need exists to modernize the antitrust laws and to identify and study related issues. .

the aba has repeatedly expressed the "view that industry - specific exemptions from the antitrust laws are rarely justified , and that evidence that the exemption results in consumer benefit should exist to justify any such exemption. .

in its chapter on "government exceptions to free - market competition," the 2007 amc report and recommendations cautions that the harms of an antitrust exemption be "carefully weigh[ed]" against any loss of consumer benefit .

with respect , specifically , to the exemption contained in the mccarran - ferguson act , the amc stated that "no immunity should be granted to stabilize prices in order to provide an industry with certainty and predictability for purposes of investment or solvency. .

several bills addressing mccarran - ferguson repeal have been introduced in prior congresses , including s. 430 ( 102 nd congress ) , the insurance competitive pricing act of 1991 ; and s. 618 and h.r .

1081 ( 110 th congress ) , the insurance industry competition act of 2007 .

they would each have modified mccarran - ferguson as it affects every segment of the insurance industry ; the measures in the 110 th would also have restored the ability of the federal trade commission ( ftc ) to conduct investigations of the insurance industry , a power limited in 1980 in section 5 of the federal trade commission improvements act of 1980 .

currently , all states regulate the insurance industry , giving rise to potential mccarran - ferguson immunity .

if mccarran - ferguson antitrust protection for "the business of insurance" were , in fact , curtailed or abolished ( whether generally , or for a subset including health and medical malpractice insurance ) , lawsuits challenging some insurer - cooperation practices as violations of the federal antitrust laws would be likely .

if all of the cited examples of cooperation were found to be in violation , it would necessitate major changes in the operation of insurers , particularly small insurers which do not have large pools of information from their own experience .

should additional data be unavailable to small insurers in some way , further consolidation in the insurance industry as small insurers merge in order to gain the competitive advantage of additional information is a likely , albeit , ironic , possibility .

that outcome , however , is only one of a range of possibilities .

many of the cooperative activities that insurers engage in , but that could be prohibited by h.r .

3596 , s. 1681 , h.r .

4626 , or section 262 of h.r .

3962 ( eg , joint rate - setting ) , might nevertheless be found to be permissible under the "state action" doctrine ; or found not to be violations of the antitrust laws at all , even without the protection of either mccarran - ferguson or the "state action" doctrine .

in the event that any insurer practices are determined to be violations of the antitrust laws , the issue in the absence of ( some or all ) mccarran - ferguson immunity , likely would be whether and to what extent existing state mandates or authorizations , while adequate to meet the requirements of the mccarran - ferguson exemption , would be adequate to meet the more rigorous requirements of the antitrust "state action" doctrine .

inasmuch as "state action" immunity is available only if a state "clearly articulates" a state policy that mandates or contemplates anticompetitive conduct , and engages in the "active supervision" of any private activity that occurs in response to that articulation , it is at least questionable whether a general scheme of insurance regulation would be sufficiently specific to allow successful invocation of "state action. .

that issue , too , would likely be subject to extensive litigation .

