on april 23 , 2010 , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , after determining that additional supplies of raw cane sugar are required in the u.s. market , announced a 200,000 short ton ( st ) increase in the fy2010 raw sugar import quota .

manufacturers of sugar - containing food products welcomed the news , but signaled that they will press usda to again quickly raise the quota to avoid a sugar shortage later this year .

sugar producers responded that usda's decision "shows that the farm bill is operating as intended and gives usda the time and the tools it needs to ensure adequate supplies. .

on march 23 , 2010 , the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) announced the reallocation of shares of the fy2010 raw sugar trq from countries unable to fill the amount of their allocations ( i.e. , what they can export to the united states ) to countries able to do so .

this action is intended to increase the amount of imported sugar supplied to u.s. cane refiners by more than 90,000 short tons , without changing the fy2010 raw sugar trq that limits the overall import quantity that can enter .

of the 40 countries with shares of this trq , 25 will be able to ship additional amounts .

governments of every sugar - producing nation intervene to protect their domestic industries from fluctuating world market prices .

such intervention is necessary , it is argued , because both sugar cane and sugar beets must be processed soon after harvest using costly processing machinery .

when farmers significantly reduce production because of low prices , a cane or beet processing plant typically shuts down , usually never to reopen .

this close link between production and capital - intensive processing makes price stability important to industry survival .

the united states has a long history of protection and support for its sugar industry .

the sugar acts of 1934 , 1937 , and 1948 required the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) to estimate domestic sugar consumption and divide this market by assigning quotas to u.s. growers and foreign countries .

these acts also authorized payments to growers when needed as an incentive to limit production and levied excise taxes on sugar processed and refined in the united states .

this type of sugar program expired in 1974 .

for the next seven years , the u.s. market was relatively open to foreign sugar imports , with mandatory price support provided only in 1977 and 1978 , and discretionary support in 1979 .

congress reinstated mandatory price support for sugar in the agriculture and food act of 1981 and the food security act of 1985 .

subsequently , the 1990 farm bill , the 1993 budget reconciliation bill , and the 1996 , 2002 , and 2008 farm bills extended sugar program authority with some changes .

current law authorizes the sugar program through the 2012 crops for sugar beets and sugarcane .

even with price protection available to producers , the united states historically has not produced enough sugar to satisfy domestic demand and thus continues to be a net sugar importer .

prior to the early 1980s , domestic sugar growers supplied roughly 55% of the u.s. sugar market .

this share has grown over the last 25 years , reflecting the price protection provided by the sugar program .

as high - fructose corn syrup ( hfcs ) displaced sugar in the united states during the early 1980s , and domestic sugar production increased later in that decade , foreign suppliers absorbed the entire adjustment and saw their share of the u.s. market decline significantly .

u.s. sugar policy maintains domestic sugar prices above the world market price , and is structured to protect the domestic sugar - producing sector ( sugar beet and sugarcane producers , and the processors of their crops ) and to ensure a sufficient supply .

during the last decade ( fy2000-fy2009 ) , the u.s. raw sugar domestic futures price averaged 21.0 cents per pound  ( ¢ / lb .

 ) , compared to the world raw sugar futures price of 10.8¢ / lb .

because of the price differential , u.s. consumers and manufacturers of foods and beverages pay more for sugar than they would if imports were allowed to enter without any restriction .

various studies show that over the last 15 years , u.s. sugar users paid between $400 million and $1.9 billion more for sugar annually .

these "cost to user" estimates vary widely , and largely reflect the extent of the difference between the higher u.s. price and the lower world price for sugar in the time period examined , and the differing assumptions and methodologies that analysts use to develop such estimates .

the sugar program differs from the grains , rice , peanut , and cotton programs in that usda makes no direct payments to beet and cane growers and processors .

with this structure , taxpayers do not directly support the program through federal government outlays .

this fact is highlighted as a positive feature by the sugar production sector and program supporters .

the program's support level and import protection , however , keep the u.s. sugar price above the price of sugar traded internationally , and constitute an indirect subsidy to the production sector by way of higher prices paid by u.s. sugar users ( food and beverage manufacturers ) and household consumers .

program opponents frequently refer to this subsidy component to argue for changes to u.s. sugar policy .

u.s. sugar policy uses three tools to ensure that domestic growers and sugar processors receive a minimum price for their sugar .

first , statutorily set loan rates determine the support level that processors , and in turn producers , are guaranteed to receive for raw cane and refined beet sugar .

second , "marketing allotments" limit the amount of domestically produced sugar that processors can sell , and now ensure that the domestic sugar production sector supplies at least 85% of u.s. food and beverage demand for sugar .

third , import quotas restrict the amount of foreign sugar allowed to enter the u.s. market .

usda decisions in administering allotments and quotas are intended to balance available sugar supply ( i.e. , domestic output plus imports ) with u.s. food demand for sugar so that market prices do not fall below effective support levels .

the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 , subtitle d of title i ) further requires usda to operate the sugar program on a "no - cost" basis ( i.e. , to result in no federal government outlays ) .

it is administered by the farm service agency .

each tool is described below , with a discussion of what the 2008 farm bill requires and what usda has announced in exercising its authorities for the fy2009 and fy2010 sugar programs .

the policy debate will continue to revolve around how usda should implement available authorities to either maintain sugar import quotas at already announced levels or raise them to increase available supplies .

because either alternative would affect market prices , the following reviews u.s. sugar use , supply , and prices in light of historical experience .

sugar users continue to press their case for usda to increase sugar imports , arguing that action is needed to restore supplies to more normal levels .

they also have proposed that usda and ustr administer the sugar import quota in ways that maximize the amount of foreign sugar that actually enters the u.s. market each year .

sugar processors maintain that the domestic market is adequately supplied now that the harvesting and processing of the 2009 crops is completed .

although these contrasting views focus more on the availability of sugar in the current year , the underlying issue driving the debate is more about the level of the price of sugar .

sugar processors seek to maintain their advantage in negotiating sales prices with users .

food and beverage firms want prices for refined sugar that are lower and closer to the historical average .

members of congress have weighed in with letters to usda in support of each side's position .

u.s. sweetener trade with mexico — now free in both directions — continues to be watched carefully because of its impact on u.s. sugar supplies and prices .

the uncertainty that usda faces in projecting how much sugar from mexico might enter the u.s. market has implications for how it manages u.s. sugar policy .

to address this , sugar processors advocate increased coordination between the u.s. and mexican governments on sugar policies .

one new provision prescribes usda's authority in administering the sugar trqs established to meet u.s. wto trade commitments .

it requires usda to set at the beginning of each marketing year ( october 1 ) the quotas for raw cane sugar and refined sugar at the minimum wto levels ( i.e. , 1,255,747 short tons ( st ) ) .

it also lays out the steps to be followed to increase imports in case there is a sugar shortage .

the details differ , depending upon when in the year the secretary of agriculture exercises this authority .

in the event of an "emergency shortage of sugar" caused by a war , flood , hurricane , or other natural disaster , or other similar event as determined by the secretary , during the first half of the marketing year ( october 1 to march 31 ) , usda must take action to increase the supply of sugar .

one action that can be taken is to increase the raw cane sugar trq to compensate for insufficient domestic cane and beet sugar output .

if this step still leaves a sugar shortage , and the sale of domestic sugar "has been maximized" and u.s. raw cane sugar refining capacity also "has been maximized," the secretary may increase the refined sugar trq .

in the second half of the marketing year ( april 1 to september 30 ) , if a sugar shortage still exists and the marketing of domestic sugar has been maximized , the secretary can only increase the raw cane sugar trq .

usda is required to ensure that any increase in imports under this authority "will not threaten to result in" a fall in domestic sugar prices below loan forfeiture levels .

in issuing the sugar program regulations to implement the 2008 farm bill changes , usda did not define this provision's key terms ( eg , "other similar event as determined by the secretary" ) or give any details indicating the circumstances under which an increase in sugar imports under this policy change would be implemented .

this provision removed considerable discretionary authority that usda previously exercised in making sugar trq decisions on import quantities and on the timing of entry by sugar type ( raw cane versus refined ) .

as now structured , usda is directed to ensure that most imports enter in the form of raw cane sugar rather than refined sugar .

the sugar industry sought this provision to reduce the considerable uncertainty associated with how much sugar actually enters from mexico under nafta , and what portion enters as refined sugar .

since most cane refineries are now a key part of vertically integrated firms owned by raw sugar processors and / or sugarcane producers , the 2008 farm bill's trq directive ensures that cane refineries ( which process raw sugar into refined sugar ) in an emergency situation can receive enough raw sugar in order to more fully utilize their operating capacity .

further , limiting the entry of refined sugar only when there is an emergency sugar shortage enhances the competitive position of domestic beet sugar refiners ( and by extension , cane refiners ) in securing the best possible price from purchasers .

when usda in late september 2009 set the fy2010 raw and refined sugar import quotas at the minimum wto - commitment levels , it acknowledged that the u.s. market "will require additional supplies of sugar. .

it stated plans to "closely monitor stocks , consumption , imports , and all sugar market and program variables on an ongoing basis. .

of these factors , the uncertainty surrounding how much sugar might be exported to the u.s. market by mexican mills is the most significant ( see " sugar imports from mexico " ) .

in the seven months since usda announced the fy2010 sugar trqs , usda has raised its supply projection for the year by almost 450,000 st ( or 4.0% ) .

lower beet sugar output due to harvesting problems in freezing conditions and lower sugar content is expected to be more than offset by increased raw cane sugar output in louisiana and additional imports under the sugar trq increase announced on april 23 , 2010 .

taking into account usda's revised estimate for fy2010 and fy2011 sugar food use , usda projects low ending stocks compared to historical experience for this year and next ( figure 5 ) .

a significant factor influencing negotiations between sugar processors and industrial sugar users on the sales price for product to be delivered over the next 6- to 18-month period was whether or not usda would increase the sugar trq , and in turn the timing of that decision .

if usda did intend to increase the import quota , a delay in making a decision ( because of the uncertainty raised ) strengthened the hand of processors as they negotiated prices for sugar that users sought to secure in the short term and beyond .

expecting that usda would not decide until april 2010 , some sellers raised price offers or contracted sales at higher prices from users seeking sugar to cover immediate needs .

to illustrate , spot prices for the near - term delivery of refined sugar stood at 48¢ / lb .

in mid - january 2010 , compared to 35¢ / lb .

one year earlier .

however , most buyers reportedly were reluctant to contract on a longer - term basis .

if usda does announce another trq increase , the impact of the additional imports on increased supply and prices in subsequent months will depend on the size of the increase .

the focus will be on how much the announced increase covers the difference between projected ending stocks and what supply would be needed to conclude fy2010 with a 13.5% to 14.5% stocks - to - use ratio — the range of an informal benchmark that usda appears to be working with ( see " significance of sugar ending stocks " for explanation ) .

at present , applying these ratios would imply additional imports ranging from about 200,000 st to 300,000 st .

this assumes there is no additional increase in imports from mexico beyond what usda already projects and that usda's may 2010 increase in its domestic food use estimate remains unchanged .

however , if higher estimates of sugar food use are considered , additional sugar supplies ( i.e. , imports ) would be required to meet the range of usda stocks - to - use ratios cited above .

with additional imports , prices could fall some , but the extent of the drop would depend on the amount that actually enters against the announced quota and on how quickly raw sugar is imported and refined .

sugar users , beginning in march 2009 , have made repeated requests for usda to increase import quotas for raw and refined sugar in order to head off a shortage in the domestic sugar supply .

pointing out that usda projections showed historically low ending - stock levels for fy2009 and an even lower level for fy2010 , the sweetener users association ( sua ) urged that quick action be taken to head off the potential for market disruptions , particularly should a hurricane occur .

it argued this was necessary because of the lead time required to purchase , ship , and refine raw sugar before refined sugar actually becomes available to users .

in late october 2009 , the sua called upon usda to "responsibly manage the sugar program by announcing a significant increase in raw and refined sugar import quotas in coming weeks. .

it argued that even with the 2008 farm bill trq provision , the secretary of agriculture "still has ample and clear cut authority to increase trqs at any time" by how he defines "emergency" and by using a sugar tariff headnote that gives him authority to increase imports if he concludes the u.s. sugar supply "may be inadequate to meet domestic demand at reasonable prices" ( see footnote 15 ) .

noting that the highest refined sugar prices in over 25 years do not represent "'reasonable prices' under any normal understanding of that term," the sua stated that the headnote's "condition for a trq increase would appear clearly to be met. .

further , it contended that "there would be ample scope within the farm bill language itself to consider" the outlook of record - low fy2010 ending stocks as constituting an "emergency shortage" and sufficient to announce an import quota increase .

referring to the stocks - to - use ratio as the best guide to follow to determine how much to increase the quota , the sua argues current market conditions warrant a 1.0 to 1.2 million st increase in the raw and refined sugar trqs ( for imports from countries eligible to export against their shares of the wto import quota commitment ) .

its report concludes that "[f]ailure to act in a timely manner risks locking in high sugar costs for consumers and for food and beverage manufacturers for another year. .

food manufacturers of sugar - containing products welcomed usda's april 23 , 2010 , announcement of a 200,000 st increase in this year's raw cane sugar import quota , and signaled that they will press usda to again quickly raise the quota to avoid a sugar shortage later this year .

in a letter to usda's undersecretary , sua's chairman recommended that usda "immediately increase raw and refined sugar trqs by up to 800,000 st" in light of "continuing strong deliveries and the need to increase stocks , not only for" the rest of fy2010 but also for next year ( see " food use " and " significance of sugar ending stocks " for background ) .

he argued , in contrast to usda's current assessment of demand , that the current strong refined sugar prices reflect the marketplace's belief that "sugar supplies are tight and demand is relatively strong. .

just before the fy2010 marketing year began , producers and processors maintained that there is plenty of sugar for sale and that with harvests underway , the domestic market "will remain adequately supplied for the foreseeable future. .

representing sugar crop farmers and processors , the american sugar alliance ( asa ) noted that "usda projects a sugar surplus again this crop year. .

it applauded the decision to set sugar import quotas at their minimum levels , stating that this follows the congressional intent of the trq provision included in the 2008 farm bill .

asa again noted that this authority serves the purpose of taking "the guesswork out of trq decisions" and ensures that usda makes them "with the best market information available. .

since the supply and demand outlook is more certain by the middle of the marketing year , asa continued to advocate that usda wait until april 1 , 2010 , or even later , before making any decision on whether to allow increased imports .

the sugar production sector acknowledges that adherence to this directive contributed to the strong prices that beet and cane refiners have received this year .

one beet refining executive commented that if this "recent price recovery can be sustained , producers might be able to improve [their] returns over past years , reinvest , continue to improve efficiency and stay in business. .

reacting to usda's april 23 import quota announcement , the asa stated that its decision "shows that the farm bill is operating as intended and gives usda the time and the tools it needs to ensure adequate supplies. .

unrestricted imports of sugar from mexico since january 1 , 2008 , have introduced considerable uncertainty into usda's efforts to manage the sugar program to ensure that market prices stay above effective support levels ( i.e. , that sugar processors have no incentive to forfeit on their loans if prices are lower ) .

since then , mexico's share of u.s. sugar imports has fluctuated widely — from 34% in fy2008 to 51% in fy2009 to an estimated 25% in fy2010 ( figure 11 ) .

while sugar imports under u.s. trade commitments to the wto and fta trading partners have been stable and predictable over the last few years , estimates of entries from mexico can change substantially during a year's time .

for example , as market conditions changed during fy2009 , usda increased its estimate of imports from mexico by 2½ times , from an initial 550,000 st projection early in the year to 1.4 million st at the end .

similarly , in fy2010 to date , usda import projections have ranged from an initial 165,000 st to a high of 760,000 st to its current 540,000 st estimate .

record sugar imports from mexico in fy2009 were prompted by two major factors .

faced with the need to generate cash to meet financial obligations to cane growers and suppliers , mexican sugar mills resorted to selling sugar in the u.s. market , even at times when u.s. prices were lower than in mexico .

more important , from late spring 2008 through early summer 2009 , mexican mills took advantage of the higher u.s. refined sugar price to significantly increase sales of refined sugar to the u.s. market .

as the price in both markets converged in late summer 2009 , mexican sales to the united states began to decline ( figure 12 ) .

for fy2010 , usda projects 540,000 st in sugar imports from mexico , about one - third of the previous year's level .

this represents 28% of expected total u.s. sugar imports for food use ( figure 11 ) .

while still a sizable amount , the expected lower import level is due to the significant drawdown in mexican sugar stocks during fy2009 ( when a large portion was exported to the u.s. market ) .

also , as mexico's sugarcane harvest season draws to a close , reports indicate that this year's sugar output could be up to 10% below last year's , meaning mexico will have less available to export to the u.s. market .

both developments are behind the february 9 , 2010 , announcement by mexico's government to allow imports of almost 300,000 st to rebuild low inventories and dampen prices .

even with this decision , usda projects that mexican stocks at the end of fy2010 will still be about half of recent historical experience .

four factors could alter the amount of mexican sugar that flows north .

they introduce elements of uncertainty into usda's efforts to project sugar imports from mexico .

first , the gap between mexican and u.s. refined sugar prices will continue to influence the volume of shipments .

if u.s. prices are above mexican levels , mexican mills have an incentive to ship sugar to the united states .

conversely , if mexican prices stay above the u.s. price level , mexican sellers can be expected to meet the demand found in the then - more - profitable mexican sugar market .

second , irrespective of the relationship between mexican and u.s. sugar prices , some mexican mills still may ship sugar north to maintain the commercial trading relationships they have already developed and to generate dollars needed to cover their financial obligations .

third , u.s. exports of high - fructose corn syrup ( hfcs ) — a competitive sweetener — to mexico , priced lower than mexican - produced sugar , could displace some of the mexican - produced sugar now used by that country's soft - drink manufacturing sector .

this substitution occurred in the united states in the early 1980s , when cheaper hfcs almost completely substituted for the more expensive sugar that the u.s. soft drink sector had historically used .

with the significant rise in the mexican sugar price during 2009 and its continued high level in 2010 , demand for hfcs is expected to nearly double in mexico .

much of this demand is being met by a substantial increase in hfcs imports from the united states , where sales of , and prices for , hfcs are reportedly noticeably weak .

to the extent that hfcs displaces sugar in mexico's soft drink sector , any resulting surplus of mexican sugar would have an incentive to move north to the u.s. market , particularly if u.s. refined sugar prices are higher than those in mexico .

fourth , the mexican government may take steps to rebuild domestic sugar stocks ( eg , license exports to the u.s. market , or announce another import quota ) .

u.s. policymakers and u.s. sugar industry officials claim that mexico is "substituting" lower - priced imported sugar to cover its domestic sugar needs .

they point out that during 2009 , mexican mills exported much more sugar than expected to the u.s. market — a development that contributed to a fall in mexican sugar stocks to below normal levels .

in turn , the mexican government substantially increased imports in order to avert shortages and to reduce the prices paid by users and consumers .

some members of congress have called for this "loophole" in nafta to be addressed .

this practice , they contend , makes it very difficult for usda to manage sugar policy , which in turn affects projections of u.s. sugar supply and the outlook for u.s. prices .

these statements were made against the backdrop of the mexican government's sudden recognition in early august 2009 that there would not be sufficient stocks of sugar on hand to cover the country's needs before sugar from the next sugarcane crop becomes available in december 2009 .

to rebuild very low stock levels , the government announced temporary sugar import quotas to allow for the entry of 550,000 metric tons ( mt ) by year - end 2009 .

the "loophole" refers to a provision negotiated in the more recent ftas ( eg , with chile , morocco , the dr - cafta countries , and peru ) but not included in the nafta text negotiated more than 15 years ago with mexico .

the newer provision limits the preferential ( i.e. , duty - free and quota ) access each fta partner has to the u.s. market only to its net sugar trade surplus .

this surplus is each country's volume of exports to the world , minus the volume of its imports from the world , of sugar and specified sugar - containing products , with adjustments for its sweetener trade with the united states , in the most recent year .

if exports are greater than imports , the fta partner's access to the u.s. market is limited to this surplus or to the u.s. quota commitment set in the fta for the year , whichever is lower .

acknowledging that formal efforts to address the "loophole" would reopen the controversial issue of renegotiating nafta , parts of the u.s. and mexican sugar production sectors late in 2009 presented to their respective governments a detailed framework for coordinating both countries' sugar policies to address the "substitution" issue .

the most significant recommendation would have both governments cooperate when they determine ( 1 ) that a sugar shortage exists in the combined u.s. - mexican sugar markets , and ( 2 ) the amount of "non - nafta" imports required to eliminate that shortage .

another would have both countries modify their sugar re - export programs so that sugar - containing products manufactured with lower - cost world ( i.e. , "non - nafta" ) sugar in the united states and mexico are exported only to outside the two - country region .

other recommendations call for both governments to consult at least every three months to review data on both countries' sugar markets ; to establish a permanent joint sugar commission to coordinate national sugar policies , monitor implementation of the framework's objectives , and handle any disputes that may arise under the framework ; to consult about the likely impact of future trade agreements on how their sugar programs work ; and to work together to improve the collection and publication of reliable data on each country's sugar supply and use , including mandatory and enforceable reporting requirements for sugar producers .

u.s. sugar producers state that these recommendations can be put into place without making any changes to nafta , do not require any legislation , and maintain "an open nafta market" by not restricting the flow of sugar between mexico and the united states .

they also note that this proposal was structured so as not to affect other u.s. commodities that view mexico as a major market , including corn sweeteners .

u.s. sugar users , however , argue that this proposal would change how nafta operates , since both governments "would not be able to independently operate their sugar programs. .

further , they characterize the recommendations as interfering with mexico's right under nafta to meet its needs with unlimited imports and for its sugar mills to ship all of their available sugar to the u.s. market .

in late february 2010 , a top usda official announced that the mexican government was drafting a response to this industry proposal .

once a draft is received , he said , usda will review it and present it to the sugar industry for comment .

the sugar trq that reflects the u.s. wto commitment to allow most raw cane imports to enter duty - free is allocated to 40 countries .

each country's allocation , or share , is based on its level of historical shipments to the u.s. market from 1975 to 1981 — a period when free access for foreign sugar existed ( i.e. , no import quota was in place ) .

since then , the sugar industry in some of these countries has either collapsed or contracted to the point that sugar is no longer produced , or is not produced in quantities sufficient to generate a surplus for export .

the amount of foreign raw sugar that is eligible to enter each year , but that has not done so ( referred to as the quota "shortfall" ) , has increased in recent years .

to illustrate , the fy2009 shortfall of 220,000 st represented 17.8% of the announced 1.231 million st trq , up considerably from the fy2005 shortfall of 30,000 st ( or 2.5% of the trq announced that year ) .

because of these shortfalls , the sweetener users association ( sua ) has proposed that the obama administration take steps to reduce their impact .

the sua argues that these measures can be put into place under existing statutory authority already available to the secretary of agriculture and / or the u.s. trade representative .

a paper submitted with sua's request proposes five options for how the sugar trq can be administered differently .

first , certificates of quota eligibility ( cqes ) would be tradable among country quota holders after july 1 .

this would allow a quota holder with unused quota to sell the right to fill it to another quota holder .

trading would be limited through september 30 in order to prevent price manipulation .

second , one year's quota shortfall would carry over to the next year , and be distributed among all quota holders in a way that each holder's share of the total quota is unchanged .

third , cqes would be tradable at the end of the fiscal year ( september 30 ) , with sugar required to enter the u.s. market before january 1 .

such sugar would not be considered part of the new year's quota .

fourth , quota holders would be allowed to permanently sell their share to other countries .

this would apply to those countries that have "completely or largely failed to fill their quotas during three of the past five fiscal years. .

fifth , refined sugar would be allowed to enter under the raw sugar trq when the price difference between the two is "unusually high. .

stating that a difference of 5¢ / lb .

is normal , the sua proposes that imports of refined sugar be allowed when "prices exceeded this normal spread by a certain margin for a predetermined period of time. .

a group of developing country sugar exporters — the international sugar trade coalition — opposes these proposals .

this group argues that the best way to address shortfalls that result in a u.s. sugar shortage would be to raise the global raw sugar trq and not change the way the quotas are administered .

further , it notes that moving away from how quota shortfalls have historically been reallocated "could invite a wto challenge from quota holders who may be left out. .

this method of reallocating quota shortfalls , though used infrequently , was last exercised in march 2010 , when ustr reallocated 90,000 short tons to 25 countries that usda determined were able to ship more sugar to the u.s. market .

