there have been three different versions of the homebuyer tax credits enacted since the summer of 2008 .

in july 2008 , congress enacted a first - time homebuyer tax credit as part of the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( hera ; p.l .

110-289 ) .

the tax credit was originally set to expire on july 1 , 2009 .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) increased the tax credit's value and extended its expiration date to december 1 , 2009 .

most recently , the worker , homeownership , and business assistance act of 2009 ( whbaa ; p.l .

111-92 ) extended the tax credit through the first half of 2010 and expanded it to repeat homebuyers .

the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) has estimated the 10-year cost of the most recent version of the tax credit to be $10.8 billion .

in comparison , the original hera version of the first - time homebuyer tax credit was estimated to cost $4.9 billion over 10 years , while the 10-year cost of the modifications made by arra was estimated to be $6.5 billion .

originally , the first - time homebuyer tax credit was intended to reduce the excess inventory of homes and stabilize falling home prices .

the most recently available data suggest that home prices in general may be stabilizing , at least temporarily .

in addition , the home inventory appears to be returning to a more normal level .

given the close proximity of these improvements to when the homebuyer tax credit was enacted by hera and first modified arra , one could argue that the tax credit was the cause of these improvements .

a correlation , however , does not imply causation .

around the same time the homebuyer tax credit was enacted , home prices were falling and mortgage rates were approaching recent historic lows , which may have led more homebuyers to enter the market .

this report provides an economic analysis of the homebuyer tax credit .

it begins by providing an overview of the tax credit and presenting data on the number of credits claimed thus far .

a review of current market conditions is then presented .

this is followed by an analysis of the effect that the hera and arra versions of the tax credit had on a typical buyer's mortgage payment compared to home prices and mortgage rates .

estimates of the number of home purchases that may be attributable to the arra and whbaa versions of the tax credit are reported and compared to private industry estimates .

the analysis concludes by investigating the ability of the tax credit to provide support to the housing market moving forward .

this section provides a brief summary of current housing market conditions and identifies risks to the housing market moving forward .

the original intent of the first - time homebuyer tax credit was to address falling home prices and an elevated home inventory .

the tax credit was extended and expanded to repeat buyers to provide continued support to the housing market and to provide stimulus to the broader economy .

reviewing current conditions is useful for understanding how effective the first - time homebuyer may have been achieving its intended objective .

discussing conditions moving forward is useful for understanding the impact that extending and expanding the tax credit may have .

the previous section presented evidence that suggests home prices and the home inventory are , at least temporarily , beginning to stabilize .

given the close proximity of these improvements to when the first - time homebuyer tax credit was enacted and modified one may be tempted to conclude that the tax credit was the cause of the housing market improving .

a correlation , however , does not imply causation .

around the same time that the homebuyer tax credit was enacted , home prices were falling and mortgage rates were approaching recent historic lows , which may have led more homebuyers to enter the market .

this section analyzes the homebuyer tax credit .

it begins by estimating the effects that home prices and mortgage rates had on the mortgage payment of a typical buyer , and comparing them to the effects of the hera ( original ) and arra ( second ) versions of the tax credit .

the results suggest that home prices , and to a lesser degree mortgage rates , may have been quantitatively more important in reducing the cost of becoming a homeowner than the first - time homebuyer tax credit .

next , estimates of the number of additional first - time purchases that can be attributed to the arra and whbaa versions of tax credit are then presented and compared to private industry estimates .

the estimates presented here raise questions about those reported by industry analysts and the role of the tax credit in stabilizing the housing market .

the analysis concludes by examining how effective the extended first - time homebuyer tax credit and new repeat buyer tax credit may be at providing continued support to the housing market .

to quantify the potential effect of the hera and arra versions of the first - time homebuyer tax credit and compare it to the effect of falling prices and mortgage rates , an estimate was made of how much each reduced the typical buyer's mortgage payment .

this was accomplished by first estimating the mortgage payment for a median priced home at the peak of the housing market assuming a 30-year fixed rate mortgage .

the mortgage payment was then recomputed three times after accounting for the fall in home prices ( price effect ) ; the fall in mortgage rates ( mortgage rate effect ) ; and the homebuyer tax credit ( tax credit effect ) .

the effect of each factor was then measured as the difference between the mortgage payment at the peak of the housing market and the mortgage payment after each factor changed .

several assumptions were made to carry out the estimation .

the first assumption relates to the peak of the housing market .

as figure 1 shows , the two most popular measures of home prices , the case - shiller and fhfa indices , disagree as to exactly when this occurred .

the case - shiller index peaked in may 2006 , while the ofheo index peaked in april 2007 .

in addition , regional markets tended to peak at different times .

as a compromise , the peak of the housing market was chosen as january 2007 .

the median existing home sales price ( $210,600 ) was then chosen as the median home price at the peak of the housing market , and the mortgage rate was assumed to be the rate that prevailed at the time .

the next assumption concerns the decrease in home prices .

since the case - shiller and the fhfa indices provide different estimates , the decrease in home prices was calculated three times using the case - shiller index , the fhfa index , and the average of the two .

each time , the percentage decrease in the index was used to compute how much the median home price fell from the peak of the market to when the tax credit was enacted .

lastly , the tax credit was assumed to effectively lower the purchase price of a home .

for the $8,000 arra tax credit which was available to 2009 homebuyers this is straightforward .

but the original $7,500 tax credit available in 2008 must be repaid , which lowers its effect on a home's purchase price .

after accounting for repayment , the $7,500 tax credit was estimated to have a reduced a home's purchase price by $2,104 or 1.0% .

table 2 presents the estimation results separately for the $7,500 hera tax credit for 2008 homebuyers and the $8,000 arra tax credit for 2009 homebuyers .

consider the results for the 2008 tax credit first ( top half of table ) .

at the peak of the housing market , a potential buyer of a median price home would have been required to make a monthly mortgage payment of $1,293 .

between the peak of the housing market and when the tax credit was enacted , home price decreased from $210,600 to $187,595 , or an average of 11% .

the column labeled "price effect" shows that this decrease in home prices is estimated to have reduced a potential buyer's mortgage payment by $141 a month , or $1,694 annually .

over the same time period , mortgage interest rates actually increased slightly from 6.22% to 6.43% .

the column labeled "mortgage rate effect" indicates that this rise in mortgage rates increased a buyer's monthly mortgage payment by an estimated $29 and annual monthly payment by $346 .

the top half of table 2 also shows that the hera homebuyer tax credit is estimated to have reduced a typical first - time homebuyer's mortgage payment by about $13 a month or $156 annually .

to understand the impact of the $7,500 tax credit , consider that the reduction in a typical buyer's mortgage payment that can be attributed to the credit is less than one - tenth the reduction that can be attributed to falling home prices .

that is , the benefit to potential home buyers from falling home prices was more than 10 times the benefit received from the tax credit .

the last column of table 2 shows that the total effect of home prices , mortgage rates , and the 2008 tax credit resulted in the typical homebuyer's mortgage payment falling $129 a month or $1,544 a year compared to the peak of the housing market .

the bottom half of table 2 reports the estimation results for the arra version of the homebuyer tax credit .

by the time the arra tax credit became available in february 2009 home prices had fallen an average of 19% from the peak of the market .

the home price decline alone is estimated to have decreased a typical homebuyer's monthly mortgage payment by $247 and annual mortgage payment by $2,970 .

the decrease in mortgage rates that began in mid - 2008 and continued until after the 2009 credit was enacted is estimated to have reduced the median mortgage payment by $145 a month or $1,743 annually .

due to the removal of the repayment requirement and the increased credit amount , the arra version of the homebuyer tax credit had a larger effect on the cost of owning a home than the hera version of the credit .

specifically , table 2 presents estimates that suggest the arra tax credit reduced the median monthly mortgage payment by $49 and the annual mortgage payment by $589 .

the results imply that the arra tax credit had about one - fifth the impact that falling home prices did , and one - third the effect of lower mortgage rates .

combined , home prices and mortgages rates were estimated to be eight times more powerful at lowering the cost of homeownership than the tax credit .

that low home prices , together with low mortgage rates , appear to have provided the largest incentive to purchase a home is important .

unlike the tax credit , which only benefited first - time buyers , lower prices and mortgages rates benefited all buyers ( first - time and repeat ) .

as a result , lower home prices and mortgage rates may have played a larger role in stabilizing the housing market than the tax credit since the incentive that they provided was larger and more widespread than the incentive provided by the homebuyer tax credit .

at the same time , the price effects reported in table 2 may understate the influence falling prices had in some markets .

the results reported above were based on the average change in home prices as computed from the average of the case - shiller and fhfa price indices .

but the case - shiller index , which captures price changes in some of the larger bubble - prone markets , fell an average of 18% and 29% , respectively , leading up to the tax credit's enactment and modification .

prices in some harder hit markets such as las vegas , miami , phoenix , san diego , and san francisco fell by as much as 30% prior to the tax credit , and by as much as 50% prior to its modification .

estimating the effect of falling home prices for these markets , which is presumably larger than the analysis above , would greatly reduce the relative effect of the tax credit effect .

along the same lines , the price effects reported in table 2 may overstate the influence falling prices had in some markets .

there are smaller housing markets , particularly in the midwest , where the decline in home prices was relatively small when compared to some larger "bubble" markets .

in addition , before the housing crisis , home prices in these markets were usually lower than the national average .

as a result , the effect of falling home prices may have been smaller than the effect of the tax credit in some areas of the country .

understanding regional difference in falling prices is important to understanding the effectiveness of the homebuyer tax credit .

markets that had the largest home inventories also experienced some of the largest declines in prices .

and it was the decline in home prices that appears to be what may have provided the majority of the incentive to purchase a home .

so in markets that were hardest hit by the housing downturn the homebuyer tax credit may have had a minor effect when compared to the effect of lower home prices .

in addition , the estimates presented in table 2 were derived using the national median purchase price at the peak of the market , rather than when the tax credit was enacted or modified .

table d - 1 in appendix d reports the estimates assuming the median purchase price at the time the tax credit was modified in february 2009 .

the dollar amounts are essentially the same and the effects of home prices and mortgage rates relative to the tax credit are also quite close to the results presented in table 2 .

it is possible to estimate how many additional home sales may be attributable to the tax credit given a measure of how responsive home purchases are to price changes .

recall that the tax credit effectively lowers the purchase price of a home .

generally , economists measure how sensitive consumers are to price changes by using a "price elasticity. .

price elasticity is defined as the percent change in a quantity purchased , in this case homes , in response to a given percent price change .

estimates for the price elasticity of home purchases vary but generally fall in the - 0.5 to - 1.0 range .

this range implies that the number of home purchases increases between 0.5% to 1.0% for every 1.0% decrease in home prices .

combining home purchase data with estimates of price elasticity allows for the number of additional home sales attributable to the tax credit to be computed .

the top half of table 3 reports the crs estimated number of additional home purchases that could be expected to be attributable to the arra and whbaa versions of the tax credit .

the estimates should be interpreted as the number of additional home purchases that the tax credit could have originally been expected to elicit at the time of enactment if the credit was left unaltered until it expired .

this approach allows for a comparison to estimates made by industry analysts around the time the arra and whbaa versions of the credit were being debated .

because estimates of the price elasticity vary , three different values were used ; - 0.5 , - 1.0 , and - 1.5 .

the last price elasticity was included because a buyer's response to a temporary tax credit may be higher than a typical price change .

depending on the assumed responsiveness of buyers to price changes , it was estimated that the arra tax credit could have been expected to result in between 42,790 and 128,371 additional home purchases , while it was estimated that the whbaa tax credit could be expected to result in between 51,523 and 153,760 additional purchases .

the bottom half of table 3 reports estimates by private industry analysts of the number of additional home purchases that each version of the tax credit was originally expected to generate .

only the nahb provided a publicly available estimate of the whbaa version of the credit .

it is immediately apparent that private industry analysts' estimates are higher than those reported in the top half of the table .

one explanation , which is important for the estimates of arra first - time homebuyer tax credit , is that industry estimates likely attempt to account for a "trade - up" effect ; existing homeowners , who were not eligible for the first - time buyer tax credit , moving up in the market due to the increased demand for their own entry - level homes .

but still , the estimates appear to be assuming either a rather large trade - up effect , or that buyers are particularly sensitive to price changes , or both .

in the end , however , it is difficult to understand exactly how industry analysts arrived at their estimates .

information about assumptions , data , and the exact methodology used are unknown .

the additional purchases generated by the credit should have had a significant impact on the inventory of unsold homes if the tax credit had been a driving force in the stabilization of home prices .

when arra enhanced the homebuyer tax credit by removing the repayment requirement and increasing the credit amount to $8,000 the total home inventory ( new and existing ) was at a 9.7 months supply .

the industry estimates reported in table 3 imply that the arra version of the homebuyer tax credit could have been expected to reduce the total home inventory from a 9.7 months supply to between an 8.9 to 9.3 months supply , or by 4% to 8% .

one could question how big an impact a 4% to 8% reduction in the home inventory may have had on stabilizing the housing market given that the inventory was at times more than double what is considered normal .

it could also be argued that the tax credit's impact on the home inventory may have been even smaller if the estimates made by industry analysts about the number of additional purchases are believed to be too generous .

the number of additional home purchases attributable to either version of the tax credit may be significantly less than those attributable to lower home prices and mortgage rates .

recall that the previous section estimated that the combined effect of falling home prices and mortgage rates on a typical buyer's mortgage payment was around eight times that of the arra version of the homebuyer tax credit .

in addition , lower home prices and mortgage rates benefited homebuyers across the board ( repeat and first - time ) as opposed to just first - time buyers .

thus , the improvements in the housing market ( stabilized home prices and falling inventory ) that occurred around the time of the hera and arra versions of the credit may have been more the result of lower home prices and mortgage interest rates .

two common rationales that have been offered for the extended and expanded whbaa version of the tax credit are that it will continue to support the housing market and may also have a stimulative effect on the broader economy .

this section focuses exclusively on analyzing the credit as a tool for supporting the housing market moving forward .

the wide range of policy tools and options for stimulating the economy place such an analysis beyond the scope of this report .

the expansion of the tax credit to repeat buyers allows the credit to be taken advantage of by a larger pool of potential homebuyers , and may increase the credit's ability to stimulate aggregate home buying .

as a result , the modified homebuyer credit may increase the rate at which the home inventory is drawn down , leading the housing market to fully stabilize sooner rather than later .

the stimulative effect of the tax credit would likely be greatest if the modifications are viewed as temporary .

if potential buyers come to expect that the credit will be available in the future then the incentive to purchase a home now is reduced .

in addition , the temporary nature of the tax credit reduces the potential that its value is built into home prices as sellers respond by raising prices .

the simulative effect on home buying activity from expanding the credit to repeat buyers , however , may be limited .

repeat buyers typically purchase higher priced homes than first - time buyers .

but the incentive provided by the tax credit to purchase a home falls as home prices increase .

the tax credit amount is also reduced for repeat buyers , which may limit the potential of the credit to stimulate home buying further .

for example , the $8,000 first - time homebuyer tax credit reduces the purchase price of a $200,000 by 4.0% , while the $6,500 repeat buyers tax credit only reduces the purchase price of a $400,000 house by 1.6% .

in addition , to take a advantage of the tax credit a repeat buyer will typically have to sell a home , which will often require paying a real estate agen and incurring other costs , possibly reducing the credit's incentive more .

as a result , extending the tax credit to repeat buyers may increase the likelihood that the credit is simply claimed by those that would have purchased a home regardless .

this may be particularly true if it is believed that the overriding determinants of home buying activity are currently low home prices and mortgage rates .

the tax credit may also be of limited use if conditions in the housing market begin to deteriorate .

one of the biggest threats to the housing market moving forward is rising foreclosure rates , which , at this point in the housing downturn , are being driving primarily by rising unemployment .

and although the tax credit has been expanded to repeat homebuyers partly to address foreclosures in the mid - to high - priced markets , the tax credit has little direct effect on the employment status of unemployed homeowners .

as a result , the tax credit may not be effective at preventing foreclosure rates from rising .

the expanded tax credit , however , may reduce the time foreclosed homes remain on the market .

at the same time , lower home prices may still be the primary determinant for a potential buyer .

appendix a .

tax credits claimed on a state - by - state basis appendix b .

regional home prices appendix c. home prices by price tier appendix d. estimated reduction in mortgage payment assuming lower initial price appendix e. method for estimating additional home purchases this appendix outlines the assumptions , data , and methods used to estimate the number of additional home purchases attributable to the arra and whbaa homebuyer tax credits .

the first step in the estimation was to determine the number of home purchases that would have occurred without the homebuyer tax credit .

this number was then adjusted upward to account for the increase in first - time home buying activity .

it was assumed that the number of home purchases that would have occurred absent the tax credit was simply equal to the total number of home purchases in 2008 .

the nar reports that there were 4,913,000 existing home purchases in 2008 , while the census bureau reports that there were 485,000 new home purchases in 2008 .

thus , the total number of home purchases in 2008 was 5,398,000 .

historically , first - time buyers have represented about 40% of annual home purchases .

therefore , in 2008 it was estimated that there were 2,159,200 first - time home purchases ( 40% × 5,398,000 ) , and 3,238,800 repeat home purchases .

next , the price reduction induced by the homebuyer tax credit was calculated .

the arra homebuyer tax credit was enacted in february 2009 .

according to the nar , the median existing home price at this time was $168,200 .

this implies that the arra homebuyer tax credit effectively reduced the purchase price of a home by 4.76% ( $8,000 / $168,200 ) .

the whbaa homebuyer tax credit was enacted in november 2009 .

home price data had not been released at the time this report was originally authored .

using the median home price in october ( $218,000 ) , however , the whbaa tax credit was estimated to reduce the purchase price for a first - time buyer by 3.67% ( $8,000 / $218,000 ) and by 2.98% ( $6,500 / $218,000 ) for repeat buyers .

note , for simplicity it was assumed that the median first - time and median repeat buyer purchased homes worth identical prices given an assumption about how responsive buyers were to these price reductions , an estimate can be formed about the annual increase in home purchases .

a buyer's responsiveness to price changes is captured by the price elasticity of demand .

the estimates in the body of the report assumed a range - 0.5 to - 1.5 for the price elasticity of demand .

the elasticity multiplied by the tax credit induced price reduction indicates the percentage increase in home purchases that can be attributable to the tax credit , which can then be used to adjust annual homes purchases upward .

as a result , the increase in annual first - time purchases attributable to the arra tax credit was estimated to be between 51,348 and 154,045 ( elasticity × - 4.76% × 2,159,200 ) .

the increase in annual first - time purchases attributable to the whbaa tax credit was estimated to be between 39,600 and 118,801 ( elasticity × - 3.67% × 2,159,200 ) , while the increase in annual repeat home purchases attributable to the whbaa credit was estimated to between 48,263 and 144,788 ( elasticity × - 3.67% × 3,238,800 ) .

thus , the whbaa tax credit was estimated to result in 87,863 to 263,589 additional home purchases .

lastly , these annual increases in home purchases were adjusted for the fact that the tax credits were or are not available for a full year .

the arra tax credit was enacted in february and was set to expire december 1 , 2009 .

so the annual increase in first - time purchases attributable to the arra tax credit was multiplied by 10 / 12 .

likewise , the whbaa tax credit was enacted in november 2009 and is set to expire july 1 , 2010 .

thus , the annual increase in home purchases attributable to the whbaa tax credit was multiplied by 7 / 12 .

doing so produces the results reported in table 3 .

