in the 111 th congress , members have introduced several proposals to establish a commission that would make potentially far - reaching recommendations on how to address the federal government's long - term fiscal situation .

the proposed commissions might as a group be called "fiscal commissions. .

generally speaking , the measures would include members of congress as some or most of a commission's membership , provide for a majority of commission members to be appointed by congressional leaders , have varying degrees of partisan balance in membership , and require supermajority votes of commission members to approve recommendations .

each of the bills also would provide special legislative procedures to encourage expedited consideration of a commission's recommendations .

this report provides an overview of four of these proposals — s. 2853 , s. 1056 , h.r .

1557 , and s. 276 ( listed in order of most recent introduction ) — and discusses potential , related issues for congress .

potential issues for congress include , among others , whether the use of a commission , coupled with expedited consideration of the commission's proposals , may be appropriate for addressing the federal government's long - term fiscal situation ; and , if a commission proposal were considered , how a commission proposal might be structured .

the report begins with recent history related to the legislative proposals and brief summaries of the four bills .

next , the report discusses legislative precursors that may help inform assessments of the proposals .

experience with these precursors , which include past commissions and proposals for commissions , appears to have informed how some of the current fiscal commission proposals were designed .

analyses of potential issues for congress follow thereafter , including discussion of some advantages and disadvantages of using a commission , potential implications of expedited legislative procedures , and matters related to the structure of proposed commissions .

finally , appendix a provides a more detailed side - by - side comparison of provisions of each bill .

appendix b discusses the long - term fiscal situation and three major entitlement programs — social security , medicare , and medicaid — that are widely perceived as important for understanding the federal government's long - term fiscal situation .

at the end of the report , a table provides a list of crs subject matter experts who are available to answer questions related to many aspects of these legislative proposals .

in the past , congress has sometimes chosen to establish advisory commissions to study policy problems and report back with advice and legislative recommendations .

over 80 such congressional advisory commissions have been established in the past 20 years .

in the realm of commissions that focus on reviewing and restructuring multiple agencies and policies , some previous commissions ( and proposals to establish commissions ) appear to have informed how some of the fiscal commission proposals that are the subject of this report were designed .

the following sections discuss past commissions and proposals that may have informed the design of fiscal commissions that are the subject of this report .

where commissions are perceived to have succeeded ( i.e. , accomplished desired goals ) , congress might explore the extent to which the reasons for that success could apply to the creation of a commission addressing the federal government's long - term fiscal situation .

where such commissions or proposals are perceived to have failed , congress might consider whether there are "lessons learned" that might be applied .

in addition , perspectives on the long - term fiscal situation and three major entitlement programs — social security , medicare , and medicaid — and previous efforts to address entitlement - related issues through commissions may help inform assessments of fiscal commission proposals .

the long - term fiscal situation and major entitlement programs are discussed in appendix b .

decisions about whether to establish and how to structure a commission may have impacts on both policy outcomes and the public choice process in congress .

the following section surveys three general issues that arise from the proposed fiscal commission legislation .

first , what are the strengths and weaknesses of using a commission to address long - term fiscal issues , as opposed to the regular legislative process and the existing legislative committee system ? .

second , what are some implications of using fast - track procedures in conjunction with commission recommendations ? .

finally , what issues arise from the structural design of the commissions themselves ? .

throughout american history , congress has occasionally found congressional advisory commissions to be useful tools in the legislative process .

commissions may be established , among other things , to cope with increases in the scope and complexity of legislation , to forge consensus , to draft bills , to promote inter - party communication , to address issues that do not fall neatly within the jurisdictional boundaries of congressional committees , and to bring together recommendations .

these potential advantages may be grouped into five categories: expertise , issue and political complexity , consensus building and reducing partisanship , solving collective action problems , and visibility .

congress may choose to establish a commission when legislators and their staffs do not currently have sufficient knowledge or expertise in a complex policy area .

by assembling experts with backgrounds in particular policy areas to focus on a specific mission , legislators can efficiently obtain insight into complex public policy problems .

complex policy issues may cause time management challenges for congress .

legislators often keep busy schedules and may not have time to deal with intricate or technical policy problems , particularly if the issues require consistent attention over a period of time .

a commission can devote itself to a particular issue full - time , and can focus on an individual problem without distraction .

complex policy issues may also create institutional problems , because they do not fall neatly within the jurisdiction of any particular committee in congress .

by virtue of their ad hoc status , commissions may be able to circumvent such issues .

similarly , a commission may allow particular legislation or policy solutions to bypass the traditional development process in congress , potentially avoiding some of the impediments inherent in a decentralized legislature .

legislators seeking policy changes may be confronted by an array of interests , some in favor of proposed changes and some opposed .

when these interests clash , it may become more challenging to reach consensus in the highly structured political institution of the modern congress .

by creating a commission , congress may be able to place policy debates in a more flexible environment , where congressional and public attention can be developed over time .

solutions to policy problems produced within the normal legislative process may be subject to charges of partisanship .

similar charges may be made against investigations conducted by congress .

commissions are not necessarily immune from such criticisms .

however , the potential for a congressional advisory commission to take on a nonpartisan or bipartisan character may make its findings and recommendations less susceptible to such charges and more politically acceptable to diverse viewpoints .

a perception of bipartisanship or nonpartisanship may give a commission's recommendations some credibility , both in congress and among the public , even when dealing with divisive issues of public policy .

commissions may also give factions space to negotiate compromises in good faith , bypassing maneuvers that may accompany more public negotiations .

similarly , because commission members typically are not elected officials , in some circumstances they may be suited to suggesting unpopular policy solutions .

a commission may allow legislators to address collective action problems , situations in which some legislators individually seek to protect the interests of their own district , despite widespread agreement that the collective result of such interests is something none may prefer .

legislators can use a commission to jointly "tie their hands" in such circumstances , allowing general consensus about a particular policy solution to avoid being impeded by individual concerns about the effect or implementation of the solution .

the brac commissions typically are cited as examples of politically and geographically neutral bodies that made independent decisions about closures of military bases .

the list of bases slated for closure by the commission was required to be either accepted or rejected as a whole by congress , bypassing the potential for amendments to prevent individual bases from being closed , and potentially protecting individual members from charges that they didn't "save" their district's base .

nonetheless , such "protection" did not necessarily prevent such charges from being made .

by establishing a commission , congress can often provide a highly visible forum for important issues that might otherwise receive less attention from the public .

commissions often are composed of notable public figures , allowing personal prestige to be transferred to policy solutions .

meetings and press releases from a commission may receive significantly more attention in the media than corresponding information coming directly from members of congressional committees .

upon completion of a commission's work product , public attention may be temporarily focused on a topic that otherwise would receive little attention , thus potentially increasing the probability of congressional action within the policy area .

congressional advisory commissions have been criticized by both political and scholarly observers .

in addition to criticisms outlined above ( where one person's perception of an advantage may be another person's perception of a disadvantage ) , these criticisms chiefly fall into three groups .

first , critics often charge that commissions are an "abdication of responsibility" on the part of legislators .

second , they argue that commissions are undemocratic , often replacing elected legislators with appointed decision - makers who may not have interests that represent public constituencies .

third , critics also argue that commissions are financially inefficient ; they are expensive , and their findings often ignored by congress .

some critics of commissions argue that commissions are primarily created by legislators specifically for "blame avoidance. .

in this view , congress uses commissions to distance itself from risky decisions when confronted with controversial issues .

by creating a commission , legislators may be able to take credit for addressing a topic of controversy without having to take a substantive position on the topic .

if the commission's work is ultimately popular , legislators can take credit for the work .

if the commission's work product is unpopular , legislators can shift responsibility to the commission itself .

critics often charge that commissions are undemocratic .

this criticism takes three forms .

first , commissions may be unrepresentative of the general population ; the members of most commissions are not elected and may not reflect all of the public's diverse interests on an issue .

even if commission members are elected officials , they may represent only a subset of the public and may pursue a correspondingly narrower set of goals than might occur through the regular legislative process .

second , commissions lack popular accountability .

unlike members of congress , commission members are often insulated from the pressures of elections and public opinion .

finally , commissions may not operate in public ; unlike congress , their meetings , hearings , and investigations may be held in private .

a lack of openness or a perception of narrow representation may undermine the legitimacy of a commission's recommendations .

a third potential criticism of commissions is that they have high costs and low returns .

congressional commission costs vary widely , ranging from several hundred thousand dollars to over $10 million .

coupled with this objection is the problem of congressional response to the work of a commission .

in most cases , congress is under no obligation to act , or even respond to the work of a commission .

if legislators disagree with the results or recommendations of a commission's work , they may simply ignore it .

in addition , there is no guarantee that any commission will produce a balanced product .

commission members may have their own agendas , biases , and pressures .

or they may simply produce a mediocre work product .

finally , some commentators argue that advisory boards may create economic and legislative inefficiency if they function as patronage devices , with members of congress using commission positions to pay off political debts .

it is difficult to estimate the overall cost of any commission .

annual budgets for congressional advisory entities and executive branch federal advisory committees range from tens of thousands of dollars to millions of dollars annually .

overall expenses for any individual advisory entity are dependent on a variety of factors , the most important of which are the number of paid staff and the duration and scope of the commission .

many commissions have few or no full - time staff ; others employ large numbers , such as the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( hereafter 9 / 11 commission ) , which had a full - time paid staff of nearly 80 .

secondary factors that may affect commission costs include the number of commissioners , how often the commission meets or holds hearings , whether the commission travels or holds field hearings , and the number and size of publications the commission produces .

expedited or "fast - track" legislative procedures are special procedures that congress adopts to promote timely committee and floor action on a specifically defined type of bill or resolution .

the use of expedited legislative procedures may bring advantages and disadvantages .

an observer's policy and procedural objectives may determine whether expedited procedures are advantageous or not .

perceived advantages and disadvantages , therefore , are often in the eye of the beholder .

congress has very rarely provided for the recommendations of a commission to be considered under expedited legislative procedures ( eg , prohibitions on floor amendments ) .

in the case of the brac commissions , these instances appear to have been pursued to facilitate action on potentially controversial matters where , nevertheless , there was widespread ( 1 ) agreement on the specific nature of needed changes ( eg , closing unneeded military bases ) ; ( 2 ) confidence that expert , impartial , and nonpartisan expertise would drive the recommendations ; and ( 3 ) concern that without expedited procedures , filibusters or vote - trading might undermine the achievement of widely shared congressional goals .

such processes and discrete "decision packages" also may help elected officials to communicate with constituents about difficult trade - offs in a tangible way .

procedural changes also may result in changes to power relationships among congress , the president , agencies , and other participants in high - stakes legislative , budget , and policy processes .

use of expedited procedures may affect relationships and opportunities for influence within congress , as well .

as noted in another crs report , "there are a number of characteristics that typify the legislative process — more or less , and more often than not. .

in general , expedited procedures are , to greater or lesser degrees , inconsistent with five of these characteristics , including the following: ( 1 ) committees generally control their agendas , schedules , and workloads ; ( 2 ) the house and senate generally consider only measures that have been approved by their committees ; ( 3 ) a voting majority of representatives or senators generally can determine whether a measure will be considered on the floor ; ( 4 ) setting the floor agenda and the daily schedule generally is a prerogative of the majority party , acting through its leadership ; and ( 5 ) the house and senate generally can set conditions for floor debate and amendment that are appropriate for each measure that they consider .

special procedures contained in the fiscal commission bills may be inconsistent with several or all of these characteristics .

all of the bills that are the focus of this report would require the commission or task force to submit proposed legislative language for congressional consideration .

each also would create special procedures to encourage expedited consideration of a commission's proposed legislative language .

by including expedited procedures , the commission proposals begin to resemble aspects of the brac process for department of defense installations , insofar as amendments and floor debate would , for the most part , be prohibited .

s. 276 stands out from the other proposals , however , in allowing "relevant" amendments .

s. 2853 and s. 276 would require three - fifths votes of members of congress , duly chosen and sworn , for final passage or to proceed to a vote on initial passage , respectively .

the other two proposals , s. 1056 and h.r .

1557 , by contrast , do not include requirements for supermajorities for initial or final chamber passage .

the overall structures of each of the proposed commissions are similar in many respects , both to each other and to previous independent advisory entities established by congress .

specifically , the proposed commissions would all study a particular policy problem , serve in an advisory capacity , and report a work product detailing the findings , conclusions , and recommendations of the commission .

that said , each particular proposed commission has unique elements .

this section discusses and compares three aspects of the proposed commissions' structures: ( 1 ) their membership and appointment structure , ( 2 ) the partisan balance of appointments , and ( 3 ) supermajority requirements .

a more detailed comparison of the provisions of each commission is in appendix a .

congressionally created commissions use a wide variety of appointment structures .

the statutory scheme may designate members of the commission , such as a specific cabinet official or congressional leader .

in other cases , selected leaders , often with balance between the parties , appoint commission members .

a third common statutory scheme is to have selected leaders , such as committee chairs and ranking members , recommend candidates for appointment to a commission .

these leaders may act either in parallel or jointly , and the recommendation may be made either to other congressional leaders , such as the speaker of the house and president pro tempore of the senate , or to the president .

the decisions made when devising a commission's appointment structure may be significant , particularly concerning member participation as commissioners .

inclusion of legislators on such panels ensures that congress will be able to exercise a certain degree of control over the operations or outcome of the entity concerned .

at the same time , service by members on commissions is arguably antithetical to two of the typical rationales for creating a commission in the first place: to reduce the workload of congress by delegating certain functions to temporary bodies and to produce independent advice .

even in the absence of direct membership on a commission , in drafting the particulars of an appointment scheme , legislators can dictate , to some degree , the measure of autonomy a commission enjoys .

for example , although the legislation creating the 9 / 11 commission did not stipulate that members of congress must be included in the commission's membership , it did call for nine of the 10 members of the commission to be selected by congressional leaders , so that congress would remain influential in shaping the commission .

attention to the proper balance between the number of members appointed by congressional leaders and by other individuals , or to the number of members of congress required to be among the appointees , or to the qualifications of appointees , can be significant factors in enabling a commission to fulfill its congressional mandate .

a commission's appointment scheme may affect both the ability of the commission to fulfill its statutory duties and the final work product it produces .

for instance , if the appointment scheme includes qualifying provisos so specific that only a small set of private citizens could serve on the panel , the final work product of the commission may represent a narrow range of viewpoints .

in general , each fiscal commission proposal provides for similar appointment structures .

each proposal involves "hybrid" appointments by both members of congress and the president instead of just one or the other branch making appointments .

in each case , the majority of appointments would be made by members of congress , rather than executive branch representatives .

however , the relative weight of congressional appointments varies from a bare majority of eight out of 15 ( s. 276 ) to strong majorities of 14 out of 16 ( h.r .

1557 ) and 16 out of 18 ( s. 2853 and s. 1056 ) .

each proposal would provide for a portion of the commission's membership to be drawn from members of congress .

this is somewhat unusual .

between the 101 st ( 1989-1991 ) and the 110 th congress ( 2007-2009 ) , 12 out of approximately 80 congressional advisory commissions have either explicitly required , or otherwise contained language that could allow , members to serve as commissioners .

using members of congress as commission members may complicate one of the potential advantages of the typical commission structure — the use of unelected experts one step removed from the political process .

on the other hand , if a commission has the ability to construct legislative packages that would be subject to expedited congressional consideration , appointment of non - members to a commission might be viewed as a delegation of legislative power away from congress .

in addition , some proposals for commissions in previous congresses arguably would have transferred some power to the president .

from either perspective , appointment of commissioners who are not members of congress might raise questions about congress delegating power and authority to the president or unelected , nongovernmental interests .

as described previously , each of the proposals employs a structure that provides for appointments by both the majority and minority parties in congress , as well as by the executive branch .

one of the proposals , s. 276 , would provide for an even partisan balance of appointments , with an equal number of appointments from majority and minority congressional leaders , as well as a requirement that the seven presidential appointments be three democrats , three republicans , and one person who "shall not be affiliated with any political party. .

s. 2853 and s. 1056 would both provide for an even partisan balance of congressional appointments , but also include two partisan executive branch appointments ( the secretary of the treasury and one discretionary presidential appointment in s. 2853 ; the secretary of the treasury and the director of omb in s. 1056 ) .

h.r .

1557 would provide for a majority advantage in congressional appointments and two partisan executive branch appointments ( the director of omb and the secretary of the treasury ) .

both h.r .

1557 and s. 1056 would include two non - voting members , the comptroller general and the director of the congressional budget office .

most past congressional commissions have been structured to be bipartisan , with either an even split of appointments between majority and minority or with a one - or two - member advantage for the majority .

for example , the 9 / 11 commission had an even partisan split of appointments .

by achieving a nonpartisan or bipartisan character , congressional commissions may make their findings and recommendations more politically acceptable to diverse viewpoints .

the bipartisan or nonpartisan arrangement can give recommendations strong credibility , both in congress and among the public , even when dealing with divisive issues of public policy .

similarly , a commission bill that is perceived as partisan may have difficulty gathering the necessary support in congress .

in some cases , however , seeking bipartisanship may reduce the potential legislative coalition for the bill , if supporters believe that the commission's work would be compromised by creating a bipartisan commission .

bipartisanship also can arguably impede a commission's ability to complete its mandate , because consensus among commission members may be more difficult to achieve .

in situations where a commission is tasked with studying sensitive issues that are often viewed through a partisan lens — such as oversight of executive branch activities — the appointment of an equal number of majority and minority commissioners may serve to promote partisanship within the commission rather than suppress it .

each proposed commission would be tasked with issuing a final report detailing its findings , conclusions , and recommendations .

as a permanent entity , s. 276 would also require reports every five years after its initial report .

in addition , each of the proposals requires that the commission achieve supermajority support in order to approve recommendations .

s. 1056 would require that 13 of 18 members vote in favor of submitting legislative proposals to congress .

h.r .

1557 would require a three - fourths vote .

s. 276 would require 10 of 15 commissioners to approve its reports .

s. 2853 would require 14 of 18 commissioners to approve a report .

the use of supermajority voting requirements may have a significant effect on the final work product produced by the commission .

commissions with significant supermajority thresholds for approval of final reports may produce work products with fewer specific , concrete findings and more general statements that are unlikely to produce wide dissent .

such requirements also may enhance the ability of minority coalitions of commission members ( which would not necessarily be of the same political party ) to extract concessions in negotiations .

however , while supermajority voting requirements typically require considerable consensus - building in order to advance recommendations , a lack of supermajority procedures does not preclude the achievement of a bipartisan or non - partisan work product from the commission .

it is not uncommon for a congressional commission to deliver a work product that is unanimously agreed to by all members .

for example , the final reports of both the 9 / 11 commission and commission on the prevention of weapons of mass destruction proliferation and terrorism were unanimously agreed to by all members .

appendix a. side - by - side comparison of proposals appendix b .

long - term fiscal situation and major entitlements this appendix discusses the long - term fiscal situation of the federal government and three major entitlement programs: social security , medicare , and medicaid .

although the three programs relate to only some of the federal government's current revenue and spending policies , cbo and many observers focus on projections for these entitlement programs , and particularly medicare and medicaid , when assessing the federal government's long - term fiscal situation .

issues related to these topics may inform assessments whether the use of a commission , coupled with expedited consideration of a commissions' proposals , may be appropriate for addressing the federal government's long - term fiscal situation ; and , if a commission proposal were considered , how a commission proposal might be structured .

long - term fiscal situation and major entitlements long - term outlook in its august 2009 budget report , cbo identified fiscal challenges related to future health care costs as a major issue affecting the country's long - term budget outlook .

overall , rising health care costs per beneficiary and the nation's aging population seem likely to keep combined medicare , medicaid , and social security costs rising faster than per capita gdp .

for medicare and medicaid , "excess cost growth" — the extent to which the increase in health care spending for an average individual exceeds the growth in per capita gross domestic product ( gdp ) — is the main factor contributing to large projected increases in the two health care programs .

medicare and social security provide benefits to individuals who are mostly elderly .

medicaid provides benefits to individuals who are mostly non - elderly low - income people , but the elderly and disabled account for two - thirds of the program's spending .

in a june 2009 report , cbo wrote that "under any plausible scenario," increasing health care costs and the aging of the u.s. population will cause federal spending to rise rapidly under current law .

more specifically , "almost all of the projected growth in federal spending other than interest payments on the debt comes from growth in spending on the three largest entitlement programs — medicare , medicaid , and social security. .

according to cbo estimates , medicare and medicaid will account for 80% of this growth between now and 2035 , and 90% between now and 2080 .

in 2003 , cbo's then director donald marron testified that "[l]ittle disagreement exists about the cause of [the fiscal] situation... .

it stems primarily from federal policies aimed at improving the well - being of retirees , the disabled , and the chronically ill." cbo concluded that the current mix of federal fiscal policies is unsustainable in the long term and that "[s]lowing the growth rate of outlays for medicare and medicaid is the central long - term challenge for federal fiscal policy. .

nevertheless , cbo separately observed an additional , complicating factor in addressing the long - term fiscal situation .

"at this point," according to cbo , "experts do not know exactly how to structure such reforms so as to reduce federal spending on health care significantly in the long run without harming people's health," and furthermore , "many of the specific changes that might ultimately prove most important cannot be foreseen today and could be developed only over time through experimentation and learning. .

for purposes of illustrating the issue of sustainability , keeping future federal outlays at 20% of gdp , approximately its current share , and leaving revenue policies unchanged , according to cbo current - law projections , could require either drastic reductions for all spending other than that for social security , medicare , and medicaid , or reining in the projected cost growth of these three programs .

in 2006 , the then - acting director of cbo stated that , "by 2030 ... spending for those programs [social security , medicare , and medicaid] is projected to reach roughly 15 percent of gdp... .

if that increase happened ... the rest of the budget would have to be cut by more than half" to keep overall spending close to its current level. .

these programs present differing challenges to the long - term fiscal position of the federal government .

estimates of the long - term fiscal gap between social security ( old - age , survivors and disability insurance ) outlays and social security revenues as a proportion of long - term gdp are generally much smaller than estimates of the long - term fiscal gap between medicare ( part a , part b , and part d ) outlays and revenues as a portion of long - term gdp .

these long - term estimates of fiscal imbalances are sensitive to changes in assumptions regarding productivity growth and interest rates .

spending projections for medicare and medicaid are sensitive to medical inflation .

past projections that medical inflation would slow have proved to be overly optimistic .

long - term fiscal challenges facing the federal government are complicated by the current state of the u.s. economy .

as the economy recovers strength , some may call for stabilizing the government's annual deficit as a percentage of gdp .

this would require some combination of lower spending and higher revenues than currently projected and faster economic growth .

on the other hand , labor and real estate markets may remain weak for the medium term , and some state and local governments are likely to face severe budgetary challenges in coming years .

some , therefore , may call for additional economic stimulus or a delay before the imposition of more austere fiscal policies .

views differ about the timing when action is necessary to address the long - term fiscal situation .

significantly postponing spending and revenue adjustments may nevertheless have serious economic consequences .

debt is not free and requires interest payments that strain budgets .

high debt levels also could limit the government's flexibility in meeting its obligations or in responding to emerging needs of its citizens .

major entitlement programs concerns about entitlement programs , including long - term trends for revenues and spending related to entitlement programs , are not new .

numerous efforts have been pursued to study and address such concerns .

some were pursued through commissions established by congress or the president , where the commissions were used to tap expertise and facilitate bargaining that involved significant trade - offs and high political risks .

some commissions have focused on entitlements or health care , generally .

however , other efforts to study and address policy concerns about entitlements have been pursued by congress through the regular legislative process , without the involvement of a special commission .

for example , in the 111 th congress , considerable effort has been undertaken to address health care and health insurance reform through the legislative process without the central involvement of a commission .

several of the fiscal commission proposals that are the subject of this report expressly highlight major entitlement programs .

three programs in particular are the federal government's largest: social security , medicare , and medicaid .

the sections below describe the programs and how commissions have been involved in some past efforts to address entitlement financing , among other issues , generally without the use of expedited legislative procedures .

social security social security is one of the largest federal programs , with 159 million covered workers ( and their employers ) paying into the system and 52 million beneficiaries receiving monthly cash benefits .

the program , which began in the 1930s as a social insurance program aimed at improving the economic circumstances of the elderly following the depression , has been modified by congress many times over its history .

today , social security provides workers and their families protections against the loss of income due to retirement , disability , and death .

social security's trust funds , the combined federal old - age , survivors and disability insurance ( oasdi ) trust funds , currently take in more revenue than they pay in benefits .

the trust funds' income comes primarily through a 6.2.% payroll tax that is levied separately on employers and employees ( for a total payroll tax of 12.4% ) , with additional income from interest on the trust funds' investments and income taxes paid by some beneficiaries on their benefits .

the excess monies are invested in non - marketable obligations of the u.s. government that are held in the trust funds .

starting in 2016 , social security's annual expenditures on benefits are projected to exceed tax revenue .

at that time , social security will start to redeem its public debt obligations in order to pay full benefits until the trust fund assets are exhausted , which is projected to occur in 2037 .

after the trust funds are exhausted , current payroll tax rates are projected to be sufficient to pay 76% of scheduled benefits in 2038 , declining to 74% of scheduled benefits by 2083 .

for the 75-year projection period , the actuarial deficit is projected to be equivalent to about 2 percentage points of social security's taxable payroll ; in other words , an increase in the payroll tax of roughly 2% , from 12.4% to 14.4% , would close the system's financial shortfall .

social security's shortfall represents about 0.72% of gdp , on average , over the period from 2009 to 2083 .

a number of bipartisan commissions have addressed social security's financial and benefit structure , including two commissions within the last 28 years .

the national commission on social security reform was established in 1981 through president ronald reagan's executive order ( e.o. ) .

12335 , in response to projections that the system would run short of funds by mid - 1983 .

a majority of members of the commission , also known as the "greenspan commission," agreed on a consensus package of proposals to meet the short - range deficit and about two - thirds of long - range financial requirements .

in accordance with the executive order , the commission transmitted its recommendations to the president , the secretary of health and human services , and both houses of congress on january 20 , 1983 .

congress held hearings on the commission's report during early 1983 and incorporated most of the commission's recommendations into p.l .

98-21 , "the social security amendments of 1983," which was signed by president reagan in april 1983 .

a provision of the social security act required that an advisory council on social security meet every four years beginning in 1969 .

the last advisory council was appointed in late 1994 and released their final report in 1997 , which included three different options to address system financing and the adequacy and equity of benefits .

the social security administrative reform act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-296 ) , which created the social security administration as an independent agency , also replaced the advisory councils with the social security advisory board .

the president's commission to strengthen social security was established in 2001 by president george w. bush through e.o .

13210 .

the president directed the commission to meet several principles , including a mandate to include voluntary personal retirement accounts and prohibitions against increasing the payroll tax or changing the benefits of retirees and near - retirees .

chaired by senator daniel patrick moynihan and richard parsons , the commission submitted its findings and recommendations to the president in a final report issued on december 21 , 2001 .

the report put forward three model reform plans , each of which included voluntary personal retirement accounts .

the three models differed in how they addressed financing shortfalls and benefit structure .

health care programs: medicare and medicaid health care costs have increased significantly as a proportion of the u.s. economy over the past decades , from 7.2% of gdp in 1970 to likely more than 17% in 2009 .

within the federal government , the costs of federal health insurance programs , and especially the two largest programs medicare and medicaid , have grown as well .

according to cbo , between fy1975 and fy2008 , federal spending for medicare rose from 0.8% of gdp to 2.7% , in part because of increased enrollment , which climbed from 25 million in 1975 to 45 million in 2008 .

over the same period , total spending for medicaid , including spending by the states , increased from 0.8% of gdp to 2.5% .

medicare provides federal health insurance for 45 million people who are elderly or disabled ( the elderly make up about 85% of enrollees ) or who have end - stage renal disease or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( also known as lou gehrig's disease ) .

people become eligible for medicare on the basis of age when they reach 65 ; disabled individuals become eligible for medicare 24 months after they become eligible for benefits under social security's disability insurance program .

medicare consists of four distinct parts: part a ( hospital insurance [hi] ) ; part b ( supplementary medical insurance [smi] ) ; part c ( medicare advantage [ma] ) ; and part d ( prescription drug benefit ) .

the part a program , which covers inpatient services provided by hospitals as well as skilled nursing and hospice care , is financed primarily through payroll taxes levied on current workers and their employers , which are credited to the hi trust fund .

the hi trust fund has faced a projected shortfall almost from its inception .

when observers refer to the pending insolvency of medicare , they actually are referring to the pending insolvency of the hi trust fund .

the hi and smi trust funds are overseen by a board of trustees that makes annual reports to congress .

the 2009 report projects that under intermediate assumptions , the hi trust fund will become insolvent in 2017 , two years earlier than projected in 2008 .

the national bipartisan commission on the future of medicare was established in 1997 and was required to review the long - term financial condition of medicare , identify problems that threaten the financial integrity of the program's trust funds , and analyze potential solutions .

former senator john breaux and former representative bill thomas jointly chaired the commission .

on march 16 , 1999 , the commission held its final meeting to consider and vote on a medicare reform proposal by the commission's co - chairs .

on a motion to report to congress and the president , the commission voted with 10 ayes and 7 nays .

eleven votes were required to make formal recommendations to the congress and the president .

other proposals for medicare - related commissions recently have been proposed , including for elevation of the medicare payment advisory commission ( medpac ) into an executive agency with the authority to set medicare provider payment rates and make other policy decisions ( eg , s. 1380 ) .

medicaid is a joint , federal - state means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute care medical services and long - term care for certain low - income populations including children , pregnant women , individuals with serious disabilities and / or multiple chronic conditions , other special needs populations , and the elderly .

medicaid is the largest or second - largest item in most state budgets and is second only to medicare in terms of federal spending on health care .

the federal government's share of medicaid's spending for benefits varies among the states but averages about 57% .

the medicaid and chip programs act as an health safety net for the low - income population .

however , the programs face many challenges .

even prior to the recent economic downturn , the medicaid program's financing represented a growing share of federal and state budgets .

high unemployment levels and financial challenges facing many state governments are likely to exacerbate the issue .

a poor economy affects how much money states can dedicate to the programs while at the same time has the potential to vastly increase the number of individuals eligible for coverage .

yet , the programs are targeted at populations that have special health needs , or are at higher risk of being uninsured .

the policy debate will likely focus on how to balance medicaid's and chip's rising health costs , both in the short - term with the current economic state and in the long - term , against the health insurance needs of vulnerable populations .

in may 2005 , the secretary of the department of health and human services , michael o. leavitt , established a medicaid commission under p.l .

92-463 and the federal advisory committee act , to advise the secretary on "ways to modernize the medicaid program so that it can provide high - quality health care to its beneficiaries in a financially sustainable way. .

the commission transmitted its reports on september 1 , 2005 , and december 29 , 2006 .

in the latter report , the commission recorded support of the report's recommendations by a vote of 11 ayes , one nay , and two abstentions , with two commissioners not present .

