on march 23 , 2010 , president obama signed into law a comprehensive health care reform bill , the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ; p.l .

111-148 ) .

health care reform is at the top of the obama administration's domestic policy agenda , driven by concerns about the growing ranks of the uninsured and the unsustainable growth in spending on health care and health insurance .

improving access to care and controlling rising costs are seen to require changes to both the financing and delivery of health care .

experts point to a growing body of evidence of the health care system's failure to consistently provide high - quality care to all americans .

among its many provisions , ppaca creates a mandate for most u.s. residents to obtain health insurance and provides for the establishment of insurance exchanges through which certain individuals and families will be able to receive federal subsidies to reduce the cost of purchasing that coverage .

in addition , ppaca significantly expands eligibility for medicaid ; substantially reduces the growth in medicare spending that had been projected under preexisting law ; imposes an excise tax on insurance plans with relatively high premiums ; and makes other changes to the federal tax code , medicare , medicaid , and numerous other programs .

this report , one of a series of crs products on ppaca , summarizes the new law's workforce , prevention , quality , and related provisions .

it begins with some background on health care delivery reform , followed by an overview of the report's content and organization .

during the past year's legislative debate on health care reform , both the house and the senate passed comprehensive bills .

on november 7 , 2009 , by a vote of 220-215 , the house approved the affordable health care for america act ( h.r .

3962 ) .

the senate passed its own health reform legislation , the patient protection and affordable care act ( h.r .

3590 , as amended ) , on december 24 , 2009 , by a vote of 60-39 .

on march 21 , 2010 , the house approved the senate - passed bill by a vote of 219-212 .

the house also approved an accompanying reconciliation bill , the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( h.r .

4872 ) , by a vote of 220-211 .

the reconciliation bill would change several controversial elements in ppaca and otherwise amend the new law so that its budgetary impact meets the reconciliation instructions in last year's budget resolution .

h.r .

4872 is now under consideration by the full senate .

in a november 2008 report outlining its goals for health reform , the national priorities partnership , representing 32 key stakeholder groups in the health sector , identified four major challenges to the delivery of high - quality care .

according to the partnership , the first is to improve patient safety by eliminating medical errors and other adverse events .

these errors mostly result from faulty systems , processes , and conditions that lead to mistakes .

the second challenge is to eradicate disparities in care .

racial and ethnic minorities and low - income groups face disproportionately higher rates of disease , disability , and mortality , largely because of variations in access to care , and quality of care .

the third challenge is to reduce the burden of chronic disease , which affects almost half of all americans and accounts for three - quarters of health care spending .

the final challenge is to eliminate unnecessary and ineffective care that compromises quality , drives up costs , and neglects the needs of patients .

according to the institute of medicine , an estimated 30% - 40% of health care spending is wasted on unnecessary and even unsafe care .

while primarily focused on health care financing issues , the health reform debate has encompassed a number of proposals to address these challenges and improve the delivery of health care services .

they include initiatives to encourage individuals to adopt healthier lifestyles , and to change the way that physicians and other providers treat and manage disease .

delivery reform proposals focus on ( 1 ) expanding the primary care workforce , ( 2 ) encouraging the use of clinical preventive services , and ( 3 ) strengthening the role of chronic care management .

the current system places a high value on specialty care , rather than primary care .

patients with multiple chronic conditions often receive care from several providers in different settings .

among other things , this can compromise patients' understanding of their conditions and ways to manage them .

and the incomplete or inaccurate transfer of information among providers can lead to poor outcomes .

care coordination is seen as an important aspect of health care that helps avoid waste , and the over - and underuse of medications , diagnostic tests , and therapies .

health workforce policy has emerged as an important component of the health reform debate .

transforming the nation's health care delivery system — from one that is focused on fragmented specialty care for acute illness to one that places a greater emphasis on primary care , disease prevention , and the coordination and management of care for chronic illness across settings — would require significant changes in health professions education and training .

while some advisory groups have warned of a future physician shortage , based on the growing patient demand for services , others caution that simply adding more physicians to the current health care system will increase costs and not improve accessibility or quality .

currently , the number of physicians per capita varies significantly across the country .

but that variation is largely driven by where physicians like to live and practice , rather than by patient need .

moreover , higher physician supply is not associated with better patient outcomes or satisfaction , or improved quality of care .

instead of focusing on overall physician supply , many health policy analysts recommend a workforce policy that couples the training of more primary care physicians ( and other primary care providers ) with the promotion and development of integrated systems of care .

expanding the use of clinical preventive services is a key goal of delivery reform and often touted as having the potential to reduce health care costs .

such services include immunizations and other interventions that prevent the onset of disease ( known as primary prevention ) , and screening tests that detect the presence of an incipient disease ( known as secondary prevention ) .

while there is clear evidence that clinical preventive services can improve health and may be cost - effective ( i.e. , providing good value for their cost ) , few of these interventions are cost - saving .

proponents of delivery reform have also embraced the concept of a medical home , intended to improve the quality of care through partnerships between patients and specially trained primary care physicians .

in this model , the physician helps the patient manage his or her own care and coordinates services across settings ( specialists' offices , hospitals , and laboratories ) and types of care ( acute , chronic , and preventive ) .

concern about the rising costs of treating chronic disease and the lack of coordination of care also has generated keen interest in disease management programs .

these programs , typically focused on a specific disease such as diabetes , can help patients manage their own care .

program elements include patient education , symptom monitoring , and adherence to treatment plans .

disease management programs share similarities with the medical home concept .

but whereas the medical home is built around a physician - patient partnership , disease management programs typically are run by health plans or specialized vendors .

ppaca is composed of 10 titles .

the first nine titles cover the following general topics: title i – health insurance ; title ii – medicaid , maternal and child health ; title iii – medicare , quality of care ; title iv – prevention and wellness ; title v – health workforce ; title vi – transparency , fraud and abuse , comparative effectiveness research , elder justice ; title vii – drugs and biologics ; title viii – long - term care insurance ; and title ix – revenues .

title x was added as a manager's amendment to the underlying senate bill .

it amended numerous existing provisions in titles i through ix and added several new provisions .

this report summarizes the workforce , prevention , quality , and related provisions in ppaca .

the provisions are grouped and discussed under the following headings: ( 1 ) community health center fund ; ( 2 ) health centers ; ( 3 ) health workforce ( including programs authorized under the public health service act , or phsa , and under other statutes ) ; ( 4 ) prevention and wellness ; ( 5 ) maternal and child health ; ( 6 ) behavioral health ; ( 7 ) quality ; ( 8 ) health disparities ; ( 9 ) health information technology ; ( 10 ) emergency care ; ( 11 ) pain care and management ; ( 12 ) elder justice ; ( 13 ) food and drug administration ( including provisions relating to medical devices , biological drugs , and food labeling ) ; ( 14 ) 340b drug pricing ; ( 15 ) veterans health care ; and ( 16 ) miscellaneous .

in most instances , each section of the report begins with some background on existing law and practice so as to provide context for the subsequent descriptions of the ppaca provisions .

several of the provisions discussed in this report would affect federal direct spending and revenue , as scored by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) .

in addition , four sets of provisions would be amended by the reconciliation bill ( h.r .

4872 , as passed by the house ) .

each of those reconciliation amendments is described following the summary of the underlying provision .

table 1 , at the end of this report , provides a roadmap of the public health , workforce , quality , and related provisions in ppaca by showing the location ( section number ) of all the provisions organized by topic .

unless otherwise stated , references to "the secretary" refer to the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) .

a list of all the acronyms used in the report is in the appendix .

ppaca amends numerous phsa programs .

while authorizations of appropriations for many of these programs have expired , in most cases programs continue to receive an annual appropriation .

ppaca includes new authorizations of appropriations to fund most of these programs , typically through fy2014 or fy2015 .

it also creates a multi - billion dollar community health center fund to which is appropriated a total of $8.5 billion over the five - year period fy2011 through fy2015 .

as discussed below , those funds are to be used to provide supplementary funding for the federal health center program and the national health service corps .

an additional $1.5 billion is appropriated for the construction and renovation of community health centers .

the reconciliation bill would increase the community health center fund appropriation by $2.5 billion , providing a total of $11 billion over the five - year period fy2011 through fy2015 .

all of the additional funds would be for the health center program .

under general authorities in phsa title iii and title iv , nih established the pain consortium to enhance pain research and promote collaboration among researchers across various nih institutes and centers that have programs and activities addressing pain .

in addition , phsa sec .

403 requires the nih director to submit to the president and congress a biennial report that includes , among other things , a summary of the research activities throughout the agency organized by category ; the chronic disease category includes pain and palliative care .

ppaca includes the following section that would address pain research and education for the purposes of recognizing pain as a national public health problem and would establish a health professionals training program in pain care .

this section would create a new phsa sec .

229 , establishing in the office of the secretary an office on women's health , for the establishment of goals and objectives , expert consultation , and other specified duties .

among them , the secretary would be required to establish a national women's health information center and an hhs coordinating committee on women's health .

the secretary would be authorized to provide funding and make interagency agreements as necessary to carry out these duties , and would be required to conduct evaluations of such activities and provide periodic reports to congress .

there would be authorized to be appropriated ssan for fy2010 through fy2014 .

the section would transfer to this new office all functions of the existing office on women's health of the public health service .

in addition , the section would establish new offices of women's health , with specified duties , in cdc ( new phsa sec .

310a ) , ahrq ( redesignated phsa sec .

925 ) , hrsa ( new phsa sec .

713 ) , and the fda ( new ffdca sec .

1011 ) .

for each of these offices there would be authorized to be appropriated ssan for fy2010 through fy2014 .

the section would also amend current authority for offices of women's health in the nih and samhsa , to establish that the director of each office would report to the senior official of the respective agency .

sec .

3511 of ppaca would authorize the appropriation of ssan for the nih and samhsa offices .

this section and amendments made by it would not alter existing regulatory authority ; terminate , reorganize , or transfer authority away from women's health offices in existence as of enactment without the approval of congress ; or change existing administrative activities at hhs regarding women's health .

this section would add a new sec .

510 of the rehabilitation act requiring the architectural and transportation barriers compliance board , in consultation with fda , to issue regulatory standards for minimal technical criteria for medical diagnostic equipment ( as specified ) used in medical settings .

the standards must ensure that individuals with disabilities can use , enter , and exit such equipment independently , to the maximum extent possible .

the board would be required periodically to review the standards and amend them as necessary .

this section would amend sec .

7 of the fair labor standards act of 1938 , to require employers to provide a reasonable break time for an employee to express breast milk for her nursing child for one year after the child's birth each time such employee has need to express the milk , and a place to do so , other than a bathroom , that is shielded from view and free from intrusion from coworkers and the public .

an employer would not be required to compensate an employee for such break time .

employers of fewer than 50 employees would not be subject to these requirements if they would impose an undue hardship by causing the employer significant difficulty or expense when considered in relation to the size , financial resources , nature , or structure of the employer's business .

this provision would not preempt a state law that provides greater protections to employees .

sec .

6801 expresses the sense of the senate that ( 1 ) health care reform presents an opportunity to address issues related to medical malpractice and medical liability insurance ; ( 2 ) states should be encouraged to develop and test litigation alternatives while preserving an individual's right to seek redress in court ; and ( 3 ) congress should consider establishing a state demonstration program to evaluate alternatives to the existing civil litigation system with respect to medical malpractice claims .

sec .

10607 would create a new phsa sec .

933v - 4 , authorizing the secretary to award demonstration grants to states for the development , implementation , and evaluation of alternatives to current tort litigation for resolving disputes over injuries allegedly caused by health care providers or organizations .

these grants would exist for no more than five years .

state grantees would be required to develop an alternative that ( 1 ) allows for the resolution of disputes caused by health care providers or organizations ; and ( 2 ) promotes a reduction of health care errors by encouraging the collection and analysis of patient safety data .

each state would have to identify the sources from and methods by which compensation would be paid , and demonstrate that its proposed alternative to tort litigation meets certain goals and criteria .

the secretary would have to provide to the states that are applying for the grants technical assistance , including guidance on common definitions , non - economic damages , avoidable injuries , and disclosure to patients of health care errors and adverse events .

the secretary would be required to consult with a review panel composed of relevant experts appointed by the comptroller general when reviewing states' applications .

furthermore , each state receiving a grant would be required to submit a report to the secretary covering the impact of the activities funded on patient safety and on the availability and price of medical liability insurance .

the secretary would be required to submit a report to congress that examines any differences that may result in the areas of quality of care , number and nature of medical errors , medical resources used , length of time for dispute resolution , and the availability and price of liability insurance .

additionally , the secretary , in consultation with the review panel , would be required to conduct an overall evaluation of the effectiveness of grants awarded , and to submit the findings of such evaluation to congress .

the medicare payment advisory commission would be required to conduct an independent review of the impact of state - implemented alternatives to tort litigation on the medicare program and its beneficiaries .

the medicaid and chip payment and access commission would be required to conduct a similar evaluation with respect to the medicaid and chip programs and their beneficiaries .

the section would not limit any prior , current , or future efforts of any state to establish any alternative to tort litigation .

it would appropriate $50 million for the five - fiscal year period beginning fy2011 to carry out this section .

this section would add a new irc sec .

5000b ( in a new chapter 49 ) .

it would impose a 5% tax on amounts paid for certain cosmetic surgeries and medical procedures performed by licensed medical professionals .

not included would be surgeries and procedures necessary to ameliorate deformities from congenital abnormalities , personal injury , or disfiguring diseases .

the person receiving payment for the service would collect the amount of the tax from the individual on whom the procedure is performed , and would be responsible for the tax amount if the patient did not submit the payment .

the provider would submit the tax to the treasury secretary quarterly .

note: sec .

10907 of ppaca , described below , would nullify this provision .

this subsection would require the secretary , acting through the cdc director , to promote the education and training of physicians on the importance of birth and death certificate data , encourage state adoption of the latest standard revisions of birth and death certificates , and work with states to re - engineer their vital statistics systems .

this section also would authorize the secretary to promote improvements to the collection of diabetes mortality data .

 ( note: sec .

10407 in its entirety is discussed earlier in this report under " community prevention grants and related activities ." ) .

this section would amend phsa sec .

402 ( b ) to require the nih director to implement the new cures acceleration network ( can ) , described below .

it also would amend phsa sec .

499 ( c ) ( 1 ) to enable the foundation for the national institutes of health to accept charitable gifts to support the can .

the section would add a new phsa sec .

402c , cures acceleration network , containing definitions , establishing can within the office of the director , specifying can's functions , establishing can's board , and requiring the director to award grants , contracts , or cooperative agreements to carry out the purposes of the section .

the nih director would determine which medical products ( drugs , devices , biological products , or combinations thereof ) were "high need cures," based upon ( 1 ) their ability to diagnose , prevent , or treat harm from a disease or condition ; and ( 2 ) the lack of market incentives for their adequate or timely development .

the director would award , as specified , grants , contracts , or cooperative agreements to accelerate the development of high need cures .

the cures acceleration partnership awards would , among other things , provide up to $15 million for the first year , payable in a lump sum , with a matching requirement .

the cures acceleration grant awards would be similar but have no matching requirement .

the cures acceleration flexible research awards would be available if the director determined that the goals of the section could not be met otherwise , and would consist of awards not to exceed 20% of the total funds appropriated under this section ( see below ) .

the can would seek to support revolutionary advances in basic research , facilitate fda review for can - funded cures , as specified , and carry out other specified functions .

a can review board would be established to advise the director on the activities of can .

the board also would advise the director on significant barriers to the translation of basic science into clinical applications , among other things , and would submit to the secretary reports regarding any barrier identified .

the director would be required to respond to such recommendations in writing .

there would be authorized to be appropriated $500 million for fy2010 , and ssan for subsequent fiscal years .

a limitation would prohibit other funds appropriated under the phsa from being allocated to the can .

phsa sec .

312 ( a ) requires the secretary to award grants to states , political subdivisions of states , and others to develop and implement public access defibrillation programs .

sec .

312 ( c ) ( 6 ) authorizes grant recipients to use the funds received through such grants to establish an information clearinghouse that provides information to increase public access to defibrillation in schools .

sec .

312 ( e ) authorizes $25,000,000 for fy2003 , and ssan for each of the fy2004 through fy2006 .

this section would amend phsa sec .

312 so that the information clearinghouses that grant recipients are authorized to establish with grant funds would be required to be administered by an organization that has substantial expertise in pediatric education , pediatric medicine , and electrophysiology and sudden death .

the section also would authorize the appropriation of $25 million for each of fy2003 through fy2014 .

this section would add a new irc sec .

5000b ( in a new chapter 49 ) , imposing a 10% tax on amounts paid for indoor tanning services .

not included would be phototherapy services performed by licensed medical professionals .

the person receiving payment for the service would collect the amount of the tax from the individual on whom the procedure is performed , and would be responsible for the tax amount if the client did not submit the payment .

the provider would submit the tax to the treasury secretary quarterly .

this section also would nullify sec .

9017 of ppaca ( excise tax on elective cosmetic medical procedures ) .

this section would increase the qualified expense limitation for the adoption tax credit and the income exclusion for qualified employer - provided adoption expense programs to $13,170 for tax year 2010 ( for tax year 2009 , the qualified expense limitation is $12,150 ) .

it also would index this new qualified expense limitation amount to inflation for tax year 2011 .

the adoption tax credit would be made refundable for tax years 2010 and 2011 .

in addition , the expiration of the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act ( egtrra , p.l .

107-16 ) changes to the adoption tax credit and the income exclusion for employer - provided adoption expense programs would be delayed by one year ( from december 31 , 2010 , to december 31 , 2011 ) .

