the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) is southeast asia's primary multilateral organization , a 10-member grouping of nations with a combined population of 580 million and an annual gross domestic product ( gdp ) of around $1.5 trillion .

established in 1967 to foster regional dialogue during the turbulent post - colonial , cold war period , it has grown into one of the world's largest regional fora , representing a strategically and economically important region that spans some of the world's most critical sea lanes and accounted for around 5% of the united states' total trade in 2008 .

the obama administration is pursuing a policy of expanding and upgrading u.s. relations with southeast asia , and with asean itself .

although the bush administration took steps to develop ties with the region , it was widely perceived among members of asean as narrowly focused on terrorism , neglectful of other issues , and not sufficiently committed to multilateral dialogue .

by contrast , the obama administration has explicitly expressed an intent to pay greater attention to southeast asia , listen more carefully to regional concerns , and work with multilateral organizations , particularly asean , to cooperate on issues of mutual interest .

the united states has deep - seated interests in southeast asia , such as maritime security , the promotion of democracy and human rights , the encouragement of liberal trade and investment regimes , counterterrorism , the combating of illegal trafficking of narcotics and human trafficking , and many others .

as china has deepened its economic and cultural ties in southeast asia , and even taken some steps to build security ties , some analysts believe the region has also become an important site of "soft power" rivalry , in which the long - standing leadership role of the united states could be challenged by a rising china .

other external powers also have shown renewed or greater interest in the region , including japan , the eu , and india .

engagement with asean has presented the united states with an important foreign policy dilemma .

despite considerable u.s. security , economic , and foreign assistance initiatives in the region , particularly at the bilateral level , in recent years a perception has developed among southeast asian elites that the united states has placed relatively little priority on asean itself and has , thereby , demonstrated a lack of commitment to southeast asia as a whole .

southeast asian diplomats frequently note that other nations , including china and japan , have given asean meetings a considerably higher diplomatic commitment than has the united states .

indeed , in some asean countries , one of the largest irritants to bilateral relations with the united states is the fact that it is perceived as insufficiently engaged with the multilateral body of asean .

the united states has long had close bilateral relations with many of southeast asia's nations .

two asean members , thailand and the philippines , are u.s. treaty allies , and a third , singapore , is a close security partner .

indonesia and malaysia have long had strong ties with washington , and both are seen as important models of progressive governance and economic development in majority muslim nations .

in recent years , vietnam has also become an increasingly important voice in regional affairs , and the united states has moved to normalize and deepen ties with its one - time adversary .

some feel that these strong sets of bilateral ties are sufficient to anchor the u.s. role in the region , arguing moreover that asean's consensus - based decision - making makes it difficult for the organization to accomplish much , given its broad membership , which includes highly developed financial centers , vibrant developing - nation democracies , and impoverished military dictatorships .

still , symbolic commitment is particularly important in a region that places a heavy emphasis on process and informal networking .

many observers argue that the united states needs to "show up" more frequently and at higher official levels , lest it lose influence in the region and risk being cut out of emerging asian diplomatic and economic architectures .

recent actions by the obama administration suggest that it accepts this argument , at least on a symbolic level .

the united states has been steadily expanding and deepening its relations with asean since the middle of the decade .

a common goal of both the bush and the obama administrations appears to be to increase the multilateral dimension of u.s. policy in southeast asia , which traditionally has been organized along bilateral lines .

however , many of the bush administration's initiatives — which included becoming the first country to appoint an ambassador to asean , providing assistance to the asean secretariat to upgrade its capabilities , and launching the us - asean trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) — were undermined by a belief among southeast asian elites that the united states lacked a strong commitment to asean and southeast asia .

the piece of evidence cited most often by critics was former secretary of state condoleezza rice's decision to not attend two of the four asean regional forum ( arf ) foreign ministerial meetings during her tenure .

considerable attention was focused on president bush's decision to cancel the scheduled us - asean summit in september 2007 to focus on the security situation in iraq .

a number of countries have regular summits with asean leaders , including china , japan , south korea , and india .

the obama administration has taken steps with asean that some see as explicitly designed with symbolic diplomacy in mind .

in february 2009 , secretary of state hillary clinton visited the asean secretariat in jakarta , a first for a u.s. secretary of state .

in july 2009 , during clinton's second visit to southeast asia to participate in the arf foreign ministerial in thailand , the united states acceded to asean's treaty of amity and cooperation ( tac ) , which promotes the settlement of regional differences or disputes by peaceful means and is one of the organization's core documents .

president obama attended a first - ever u.s. - asean leaders meeting on the sidelines of the november 2009 asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) forum summit in singapore .

in a joint statement , the leaders pledged continued or enhanced dialogue and cooperation in many areas , including engagement with the government of burma ( myanmar ) , human rights , trade , regional security , nuclear non - proliferation and disarmament , counterterrorism , energy , climate change , educational exchanges , and support for the lower mekong basin countries ( cambodia , laos , and vietnam ) .

they agreed to hold a second meeting in 2010 .

the obama administration has taken other potentially noteworthy steps .

divergent u.s. and asean approaches to burma have also been an irritant to u.s. - asean relations since burma became a member of the organization in 1997 .

the united states has pursued a policy of diplomatically shunning the burmese military regime and imposing stringent economic sanctions against the country — creating difficulties in engaging both politically and economically with a grouping that includes it .

in the fall of 2009 , the state department announced a new burma policy , in which the united states would hold dialogues with the burmese leadership while still maintaining u.s. sanctions .

this move , which brings washington closer to asean policy , could help to improve u.s. - asean ties .

additionally , on the sidelines of the july 2009 arf meeting , secretary clinton met with the foreign ministers of the lower mekong countries , excluding burma ( i.e. , vietnam , cambodia , laos , and thailand ) , in the first - ever u.s. - lower mekong ministerial meeting .

the ministers issued a joint statement outlining the wide - ranging areas of discussion , which included responses to climate change , fighting infectious disease , and education policy .

president obama plans to visit indonesia and australia in march 2010 .

his talks with indonesian president yudhoyono will likely focus on trade and security ties as well as raise the profile of the region's largest and arguably most democratic nation .

taken together , the message of the administration's symbolic and substantive moves appears to be that the united states intends to engage with asean and southeast asian countries at a higher level , and do so more persistently .

there remain questions about how far this change in approach will persist , particularly as it raises expectations in southeast asia .

for instance , will the u.s. - asean leaders' meeting be regularized , as many southeast asian leaders hope ? .

on the other hand , by raising the profile of u.s. - asean ties , the united states likely will place new pressures on asean to increase its own utility in resolving regional crises and addressing security and economic issues in a more concerted manner , lest a more activist united states eventually bypass it .

the association of southeast asian nations was founded on august 8 , 1967 , with the adoption of the asean declaration in bangkok , thailand .

originally , the association had five members — indonesia , malaysia , philippines , singapore , and thailand — and expanded to its current 10 members during the 1980s and 1990s with the addition of brunei darussalam , vietnam , laos , burma , and cambodia .

colonial experiences led to a strong desire by the original members to prevent the domination of the region by any single power .

furthermore , the formation of the organization reflected an attempt to forge independent foreign policies in the context of cold war pressures .

as stated in the asean declaration , the association was created to achieve joint goals including those related to economic growth ; regional peace and security ; collaboration and mutual assistance in a number of development areas ; trade promotion ; and linkages with other regional organizations .

on february 24 , 1976 , asean created the asean secretariat , located in jakarta , indonesia , an administrative body consisting of representatives of each asean member nation .

the secretariat is headed by a secretary - general , who serves a term of five years .

since its creation , the structure and the duties of the secretariat have been changed on several occasions .

as of 2009 , the secretary - general's main responsibilities are to organize the annual foreign ministers' meeting ; initiate , advise , coordinate , and implement asean activities ; serve as spokesman and representative of asean on all matters ; and oversee the operations of the asean secretariat .

asean remains , to a large degree , an informal organization .

the asean secretariat is lightly staffed , without the deep administrative resources and responsibilities of some multilateral organizations such as the european union .

its current secretary - general is surin pitsuwan , a former thai foreign minister , who has sought to institutionalize many of asean's practices and has pushed the introduction of the asean charter .

still , much of the diplomatic activity that occurs at meetings of asean leaders and senior officials occurs on the sidelines rather than at the formal level .

asean has traditionally operated on principles of consensus and non - interference in the internal affairs of members , which has led to considerable difficulty in the group operating in formal concert .

many analysts note that asean's expansion to include underdeveloped nations such as laos , cambodia , and burma has created a wide range of interests within the group that make formal security and economic moves difficult to agree upon .

although asean is starting to play a more active role in dealing with its members' differences — most notably over burma's human rights record — much of what the group does is still done through informal channels .

asean is at the center of several other security - and trade - related groupings in the asia - pacific region .

the asean regional forum ( arf ) , established in 1994 with 26 asian and pacific states plus the european union , was formed to facilitate dialogue on political and security matters in the region .

the asean + 3 ( china , japan , and south korea ) was created in 1997 , partly as a response to the asian financial crisis , and partly as a way to balance the northeast asian powers in the security dialogue process with asean .

created in 2005 , the east asia summit ( eas ) which , in addition to the asean + 3 members , includes australia , new zealand , and india , represented an effort by some countries in the region , particularly japan , to balance china's influence in the region through the inclusion of additional , non - east asian powers .

more recently , the geopolitical discussion in asia has turned to the issue of the formation of an eu - style association of asian nations .

while this discussion is in its early stages , there are already advocates for the creation of a pan - asian entity — the east asian community ( eac ) — that would include closer economic and trade relations among its members , possibly even the creation of a single asian currency .

at the same time , there has been a separate ongoing discussion about greater regional economic and trade integration in asia taking place in various fora .

the asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) forum was formed in 1989 with the express mission of accelerating regional economic integration and fostering greater trade and investment liberalization through a process known as "open regionalism. .

asean has also formed the core at periodic meetings of asean + 3 and the eas to consider ways and means of fostering closer economic and trade ties .

for its own part , asean has been pursuing ways to expedite closer economic ties amongst its 10 member nations with the goal of creating an asean economic community .

asean's most critical external relations continue to be with the united states , the region's primary security guarantor ; japan , the major provider of development assistance ; and china , a rising source of aid , trade , and , according to some , strategic influence in the region .

many analysts argue that china's "soft power" — global influence attained through economic , diplomatic , cultural , and other non - coercive means — has grown significantly in the past decade .

furthermore , many observers contend that china's diplomatic outreach , including building links to asean , has surpassed that of the united states during the past several years .

most southeast asian leaders and foreign policy experts have welcomed engagement from both the united states and china because of the benefits that strong relations bring ; they do not want a single foreign influence to dominate the region , and excluding either power is "not an option. .

although japan is a close development partner in the region , some southeast asians would welcome a more robust japanese diplomatic and security presence .

many analysts view india as an ascendant but still nascent regional power that has an interest in balancing china's rise in the region .

much of the congressional activity concerning southeast asia deals with bilateral relations and issues with individual southeast asian nations .

in recent years , however , congress has also sometimes played a leadership role in initiatives toward asean .

in 2006 , senator richard lugar introduced the u.s .

ambassador for asean affairs act ( s. 2697 ) , urging the bush administration to name an ambassador to the grouping .

its passage helped lead to the naming of scot marciel as the first u.s .

ambassador to asean and the first ambassador to the organization from outside the region .

there are several ways in which shifts in the u.s. approach toward asean could be of importance to congress .

congress may also seek to provide further assistance to support asean's secretariat and organizational capacity building .

in trade policy , congress may consider , on the one hand , pushing for further economic engagement and the passage of ftas or other agreements with asean and / or its member countries .

in october 2009 , senator richard lugar introduced s.res .

311 , calling for the start of discussions on a free trade agreement with asean .

stalled fta discussions with malaysia and thailand could potentially be considered by congress , although this does not appear to be on the near - term agenda .

on the other hand , congress could prevent further fta negotiations with southeast asian countries or ensure that labor and environmental concerns are addressed in such negotiations .

shifts in u.s. policy toward burma and the implications for relations with asean have been a major focus in 2009 and will likely continue to be of congressional interest .

senator jim webb , chair of the senate east asia and pacific affairs subcommittee , in august 2009 became the first member of congress in 10 years to visit burma .

senator webb also traveled to thailand , cambodia , laos and vietnam , where he reportedly told leaders that asean should call for the release of aung san suu kyi .

over recent years , congress has been a leader of the u.s. sanctions policy toward the burmese regime through legislation such as the burmese freedom and democracy act of 2003 and the tom lantos block burmese jade ( junta's anti - democratic efforts ) act of 2008 .

the conduct and outcome of parliamentary elections set to be held in burma in 2010 may play a significant role in how the obama administration implements its new burma policy , and in its relations with asean vis - à - vis burma .

congress may seek to play an active role in the development of u.s. policy toward burma and asean , both before and after burma's elections .

the development of asean's human rights body may also merit attention .

congress has frequently considered legislation and resolutions concerning human rights conditions in southeast asia , and asean's emerging human rights approaches may be of interest in future consideration of how to promote human rights in the region .

