the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( the 9 / 11 commission ) cited breakdowns in information sharing and the failure to fuse pertinent intelligence ( i.e. , "connecting the dots" ) as key factors in the failure to prevent the 9 / 11 attacks .

a bipartisan task force of former policy makers and senior executives described the challenge facing the government in "the new era of national security we have entered," as "the challenge of using information effectively , linking collection with sound and imaginative analysis derived from multiple perspectives , and employing cutting edge technology to support end - users , from emergency responders to presidents .

in other words , we need to mobilize information. .

in the 2004 intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act ( irtpa ) , congress mandated the creation of an information sharing environment ( commonly known as the "ise" ) .

congress intended the ise to be a "decentralized , distributed , and coordinated environment ... with 'applicable legal standards relating to privacy and civil liberties.' .

the act also directed that the ise provide and facilitate the means of sharing terrorism information among all appropriate federal , state , local , and tribal entities and the private sector through the use of policy guidelines and technologies .

a program manager for the information sharing environment ( pm - ise ) was established and placed within the office of the director of national intelligence ( odni ) .

as required by section 1016 ( h ) of the irtpa , the pm - ise submitted to congress three annual reports on the extent to which the ise has been implemented .

the obama administration reaffirmed effective information sharing as a "top priority" and established within the executive office of the president the position of senior director for information sharing policy .

also after 9 / 11 , states and major urban areas established intelligence fusion centers to coordinate the gathering , analysis , and dissemination of law enforcement , homeland security , public safety , and terrorism intelligence and analysis .

according to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , this activity by fusion centers contributes to the ise .

fusion centers have been defined as a "collaborative effort of two or more federal , state , local , or tribal government agencies that combines resources , expertise , or information with the goal of maximizing the ability of such agencies to detect , prevent , investigate , apprehend , and respond to criminal or terrorist activity. .

as of december 2011 , dhs notes that 72 centers are operational within the united states and its territories .

dhs has supported these centers with grant funding and has assigned intelligence officers to them .

information sharing is ... about establishing a collaborative environment with a clear purpose: ensuring that the right people have access to the right information at the right time under the right conditions to enable informed decisions .

the imperative for the exchange of terrorism - related intelligence information among law enforcement and security officials at all levels of government is founded on three propositions .

the first is that any terrorist attack in the homeland will necessarily occur in a community within a state or tribal area , and the initial response to it will be by state , local , and tribal emergency responders and law enforcement officials .

second , the plotting and preparation for a terrorist attack within the united states ( such as surveillance of a target , acquisition and transport of weapons or explosives , and even the recruitment of participants ) will also occur within communities .

every day , officers at thousands of state and local law enforcement agencies collect and document information regarding behaviors , incidents , and other suspicious activity associated with crime including terrorism .

a joint study by the departments of justice and homeland security and senior law enforcement officials concluded that "[t]he gathering , processing , reporting , analyzing , and sharing of suspicious activity is critical to preventing crimes , including those associated with domestic and international terrorism. .

third , "[i]nformation acquired for one purpose , or under one set of authorities , might provide unique insights when combined , in accordance with applicable law , with seemingly unrelated information from other sources. .

this recognizes that "relevant information comes from a much wider range of sources … and it is difficult to know a priori what information will prove relevant to analysts or useful to users .

for this reason , it is necessary to create a more horizontal , cooperative , and fluid process for intelligence collection , sharing , and analysis. .

or , as the 9 / 11 commission concluded , "a 'smart' government would integrate all sources of information to see the enemy as a whole. .

suspicious activity reports ( sar ) contain information about criminal activity that may also reveal terrorist pre - operational planning .

these reports could be based on an officer's observation of suspicious behavior , 9-1-1 calls , or other tips and leads provided to police by citizens .

many believe that the sharing of sars among all levels of government and combining them with other intelligence information will help uncover terrorist plots within the united states .

every day , more than 800,000 police officers collect and document information regarding behaviors , incidents , and other suspicious activity associated with crime , including terrorism .

"on the beat or mobile , cops are sensitive to things that do not look right or do not sound right," says one police chief .

"[r]emember , it was a rookie cop on a routine check that resulted in the arrest of eric robert rudolph in north carolina despite the enormous commitment of federal resources. .

oklahoma city bomber timothy mcveigh was arrested after a traffic stop when oklahoma state trooper charles j. hanger noticed that mcveigh's yellow 1977 mercury marquis had no license plate .

using his home state as an example , a former u.s. attorney maintains that "evidence of a potential terrorist threat or organized criminal enterprise is far more likely to be found in the incidental contact with the 10,000 police officers in the state of washington than by the less than 150 fbi agents assigned to the seattle field division. .

in addition to the arrests of rudolph and mcveigh , state and local law enforcement officers , in the normal course of their duties , have uncovered or disrupted the following terrorist plots: the japanese red army terrorist , yū kikumura , was arrested on april 12 , 1988 , at a rest stop on the new jersey turnpike by a state trooper who thought he was acting suspiciously .

he was found carrying three 18-inch ( 46-cm ) pipe bombs loaded with gunpowder .

prosecutors said kikumura had planned to bomb a military recruitment office in new york city .

in july 2005 , two undercover police officers noticed two men acting suspiciously near a gas station in torrance , ca .

after the men robbed the gas station , they were arrested by the undercover officers .

a search of the arrested men's apartment revealed that they were members of the terrorist group jamiyyat ul - islan is - saheeh .

they were planning to bomb synagogues in los angeles and were financing their operation through armed robberies .

in august 4 , 2007 , two egyptians studying in florida were stopped by police for a traffic violation near goose creek , sc .

they were found to have explosives in their vehicle .

a subsequent investigation revealed that one of the students had made and placed on the internet a video demonstrating how to use a doll to conceal an improvised explosive device .

the student later plead guilty to "providing material support to terrorism. .

one major city police department commander notes that the role of police officers has evolved after 9 / 11 .

they are now also "first preventers" of terrorism , and this represents a "dramatic paradigm shift," both for the federal government and for the local and state agencies themselves .

the need for intelligence information to support the police in this terrorism prevention role is considered crucial .

a national information - sharing system , says a former u.s. attorney , should also ensure that "federal agencies have access to information maintained in state and local agencies that may be pertinent to terrorist threats ... the benefit that would accrue to u.s. national security in having police records integrated in a strictly controlled fashion with sensitive federal data would be nothing short of remarkable. .

he cites the example of hani hanjoor , the hijacker who piloted american airlines flight 77 that crashed into the pentagon .

six weeks prior to the 9 / 11 attacks , hanjoor had been issued a speeding ticket by a local police department in the washington , dc , area .

had a system been in place to share this information with the fbi , it may have alerted them that a suspected al qaeda operative was present within the national capital region .

also prior to september 11 , 2001 , local police officers made separate traffic stops of two other 9 / 11 hijackers — mohammed atta and ziad samir jarrah .

like hanjoor , both were in violation of their immigration status .

there was even an outstanding arrest warrant on atta for failing to appear on a previous traffic citation .

the nsi is a framework to support the reporting of suspicious activity — from the point of initial observation to the point where the information is available in the information - sharing environment .

it supports one of the core principles of the 2007 national strategy for information sharing , that information sharing "be woven into all aspects of the counterterrorism activity , including preventive and protective actions , actionable responses , criminal and counterterrorism investigative activities , event preparedness , and response to and recovery from catastrophic events. .

the nsi responds to the strategy's mandate that the federal government support the development of a nationwide capacity for a standardized , integrated approach to gathering , documenting , processing , analyzing , and sharing information about suspicious activity that is potentially terrorism - related while protecting the privacy and civil liberties of americans .

according to the pm - ise , the nsi is neither a technology nor a single , monolithic program .

rather it is a coordinated effort that integrates all sar - related activities into a nationwide unified process .

the nsi is a framework that defines the data standards , business processes , and policies that facilitate the sharing of terrorism - related sars .

nsi has been described as a partnership among federal , state , local , tribal , and territorial law enforcement that establishes a national capacity for gathering , documenting , processing , analyzing , and sharing sar information — also referred to as the sar process — in a manner that rigorously protects the privacy and civil liberties of americans .

according to the 2010 nationwide sar initiative annual report , 29 fusion centers had implemented the nsi process and achieved operational status , with another 30 fusion centers in progress as of march 2011 .

the nsi also differs from data mining programs .

data mining entails the search of numerous commercial or government data sets that contain data — the vast majority of which documents legal activity .

mathematical algorithms are then used to identify data trends that can be examined as predictors of criminal activity .

the nsi establishes a federated search capability that requires the articulation of some type of criminal or law enforcement predicate before permitting a search of repositories consisting of documented events that are themselves considered reasonably indicative of criminal activity .

given the controversies surrounding various data mining programs , this difference may be a salient issue in terms of public acceptance of the nsi program .

in december 2008 , a concept of operations for the nsi program was published that describes the roles , missions , and responsibilities of nsi participating agencies and the top level nsi governing structure .

a comprehensive overview of the operational steps of the nationwide sar cycle grouped into five business process activities — planning , gathering and processing , analysis and production , dissemination , and reevaluation — is shown in figure 1 .

the intended operational steps of the cycle can be described simply: when a police officer detects suspicious activity that might be terrorist related , he or she documents that activity in a sar .

that report is reviewed within the officer's chain of command .

once vetted , it is submitted to a state / local fusion center , where it is reviewed by a trained intelligence analyst to determine whether it meets the established sar criteria .

if so , the report is entered into the information - sharing environment , where it becomes accessible to authorized agencies at all levels of government and available for analysis and fusion with other intelligence information .

the nsi is designed to increase the amount of information — the intelligence "dots" — that will flow from state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies to the federal government .

the goal of "connecting the dots" becomes more difficult when there is an increasingly large volume of "dots" to sift through and analyze .

because the nsi would establish mechanisms for — and indeed promote — the widespread reporting and sharing of data by numerous federal , state , and local agencies , some have expressed concerns about the risk of "'pipe clogging' as huge amounts of information are ... gathered without apparent focus. .

in an october 2007 report , the government accountability office ( gao ) identified a related challenge .

when "identical or similar types of information are collected by or submitted to multiple agencies , integrating or sharing this information can lead to redundancies. .

the gao found "that in intelligence fusion centers , multiple information systems created redundancies of information that made it difficult to discern what was relevant .

as a result , end users were overwhelmed with duplicative information from multiple sources. .

a challenge for the nsi is the extent to which the program will result in an avalanche of largely irrelevant or duplicative data while diverting the police from more productive law enforcement activities .

for example , in a 40-month period before the ise - sar ee pilot program , the fbi documented approximately 108,000 potential terrorism - related threats , reports of suspicious incidents , and terrorist watchlist encounters .

congress may be interested in how a future sar program management office intends to address this problem — specifically , which agency or agencies will be responsible for quality control of sars to prevent system overload from irrelevant or redundant ones and to ensure that the sars that are entered into the shared space environment adhere to privacy and civil liberties standards .

to achieve information - sharing objectives , government agency partners need to establish wide - scale electronic trust between the caretakers of sensitive information and those who need and are authorized to use that information .

the markle task force on national security in the information age , maintains that [i]n an effective information sharing framework , information is not simply shared without restraint ... information sharing will succeed only if accompanied by government - wide policy guidelines and oversight to provide robust protections for privacy and civil liberties ... [i]ts governance should require a user to provide a predicate in order to access data under an authorized use standard .

to establish a predicate , an analyst seeking information would need to state a mission - or threat - based need to access the information for a particular purpose. .

to accomplish this , proponents say that fusion centers must acquire a federated capability for identity and privilege management that securely communicates a user's roles , rights , and privileges to ensure network security and privacy protections .

the two elements of this are identification / authentication — the identity of end users and how they were authenticated — and privilege management — the certifications , clearances , job functions , and organizational affiliations associated with end users that serve as the basis for authorization decisions .

in order to protect sensitive data and the privacy of americans , congress may wish to examine the nsi policies that will govern data privacy and access to data within the ise shared spaces environment .

the success of the nsi is dependent on an it infrastructure that enables state and local fusion centers to have access to each other's information as well as to the appropriate federal databases .

under the "shared space architecture" concept , fusion centers replicate data from their systems to an external server under their control .

a secure portal is then created that allows simultaneous searching of all such databases so that fusion centers will be able to aggregate any relevant information that exists throughout the network .

to connect into the system , a fusion center requires a server and software to translate data from whatever case management or intelligence system it uses to a separate database on the server .

expenses for this it infrastructure may exceed the funds that states and cities will allocate for their fusion centers from the state homeland security program ( shsp ) or urban area security initiative ( uasi ) .

congress may wish to consider ways to provide funding to fusion centers for this purpose .

one of the biggest challenges facing policy makers is how to determine whether the nsi program is successful: are the number of sars produced or the number of sars shared relevant metrics ? .

how does one know if the sars that are produced and shared under the program are actually meaningful intelligence "dots ? .

how does one determine if the right "dots" are being connected ? .

congress may wish to ask the nsi pmo about metrics to measure the success of the nsi program .

appendix a .

significant information - sharing systems law enforcement online ( leo ) established prior to the 9 / 11 attacks , leo is a secure , internet - based communications portal for law enforcement , first responders , criminal justice professionals , and anti - terrorism and intelligence agencies around the globe .

managed by the fbi's criminal justice information services division , leo catalyzes and strengthens collaboration and information - sharing by providing access to sensitive but unclassified information and various state - of - the - art communications services and tools .

it is available around the clock and is offered free of charge to members of the criminal justice and intelligence communities , as well as military and government agencies associated with infrastructure protection in the united states .

regional information sharing systems program ( riss ) also established prior to the 9 / 11 attacks , riss is a national network of six multistate centers designed to operate on a regional basis .

it is federally funded and administered by doj's bureau of justice assistance ( bja ) .

riss supports law enforcement efforts nationwide to combat illegal drug trafficking , identity theft , human trafficking , violent crime , and terrorist activity , and to promote officer safety .

the regional centers provide member law enforcement agencies with a broad range of intelligence exchange and related investigative support services .

riss operates a secure intranet , known as rissnet™ , to facilitate law enforcement communications and information sharing nationwide .

homeland security information network ( hsin ) after the 9 / 11 attacks , dhs established the hsin , a secured , web - based platform for sensitive but unclassified information sharing and collaboration between federal , state , local , tribal , private sector , and international partners .

the hsin platform was created to interface with existing information - sharing networks to support the diverse communities of interest engaged in preventing , protecting from , responding to , and recovering from all threats , hazards , and incidents under the jurisdiction of dhs .

there are five community of interest portals on hsin: emergency management , critical sectors , law enforcement , multi - mission agencies , and intelligence and analysis .

hsin provides real - time , interactive connectivity between states and major urban areas and the 24 / 7 dhs operations center — the national operations center ( noc ) .

the hsin - intelligence portal provides state , local , and tribal officials with access to unclassified intelligence products .

classified intelligence products are provided to state and local fusion centers that have the appropriate security infrastructure through the homeland security data network ( hsdn ) .

through hsdn , users can access collateral secret - level terrorism - related information including products from the national counterterrorism center's ( nctc ) nctc online .

law enforcement information sharing program ( leisp ) after 9 / 11 , doj initiated the leisp to foster the sharing of information across jurisdictional boundaries to prevent terrorism and to systematically improve the investigation and prosecution of criminal activity .

two significant systems under the leisp are described below: onedoj system this system is a repository of data from doj law enforcement components ( bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives ; bureau of prisons ; drug enforcement administration ; fbi ; and the u.s .

marshals service ) that enables the sharing of investigative information within the department .

it is hosted at the fbi's criminal justice information services ( cjis ) data center .

external sharing is accomplished through bilateral partnerships with designated regional , state , or federal sharing initiatives .

these partnerships allow non - doj users to access onedoj data from within their own systems and vice - versa .

however , data are not contributed by external partners to the onedoj system .

law enforcement national data exchange ( n - dex ) n - dex is intended to facilitate the sharing of information across jurisdictional boundaries and to provide new investigative tools that enhance the nation's ability to fight crime and terrorism .

its proposed services and capabilities would allow participating agencies to detect relationships between people , places , things , and crime characteristics ; to link information across jurisdictions ; and to "connect the dots" between apparently unrelated data without causing information overload .

fbi terrorist threat information tracking systems after 9 / 11 , the fbi established two programs for the tracking , analysis , and sharing of information about terrorism threats: guardian guardian is described as a classified information technology system that allows the fbi to collect and review reports of suspicious activity in an organized way to determine which ones warrant additional investigative follow - up .

the primary purpose is not to manage cases , but to facilitate the reporting , tracking , and management of threats to determine within a short time span whether a particular matter should be closed or referred for an investigation .

guardian's database can be searched by fbi employees and certain other government agency partners thus providing a capability to analyze threat information for trends and patterns .

eguardian a companion system to guardian is eguardian .

it is an unclassified system designed to enable near real - time sharing and tracking of terrorist information and suspicious activity with federal , state , local , and tribal agencies .

unclassified information from the guardian system that appears to have a potential nexus to terrorism is to be passed down to eguardian , where it will be available for viewing by those members of state , local , and tribal law enforcement and representatives of other federal law enforcement agencies that have been given permission to access the system .

it is also intended to serve as the mechanism for the electronic transmittal of leads by state , local , and tribal agencies to the jttf's .

fbi has made eguardian available on its secure leo internet portal , allowing more than 18,000 agencies to run searches and input their own reports .

appendix b .

acronyms used in this repor .

