the combination of food and economic crises has pushed the number of food - insecure or hungry people worldwide to historic levels — more than 1 billion people are undernourished , according to estimates by the united nations ( u.n. ) food and agriculture organization ( fao ) .

in addition , the u.n. secretary general reports that the proportion of hungry people in the world rose in 2008 as a result of global food and economic crises .

first among the millennium development goals ( mdgs ) adopted by the u.n. general assembly in 2000 is the reduction by half in the proportion of the world's hungry by 2015 .

the vast majority of the world's undernourished live in developing countries , fao reports .

in asia and the pacific , an estimated 642 million people are suffering from chronic hunger ; in sub - saharan africa 265 million ; in latin america and the caribbean 53 million ; in the near east and north africa 42 million ; and in developed countries 15 million , according to fao's 2009 hunger report .

even before the 2007-2008 food price crisis and the current global recession , the number of undernourished people in the world had been increasing slowly but steadily for the past decade , reports fao .

the number of chronically hungry people in the world declined in the 1980s and early 1990s , a decline that fao attributes largely to increased investment in agriculture following the global food crisis of the early 1970s .

but between 1995-1997 and 2004-2006 , as official development assistance ( oda ) devoted to agriculture declined substantially , fao calculates that the number of hungry people increased in all regions except latin america and the caribbean .

gains in hunger reduction were later reversed in this region as well , fao says , as a result of the food and economic crises .

the u.n. secretary general's mdg report finds that the recent food and economic crises have also reversed the declining trend in the proportion of people who are undernourished .

according to u.n. estimates , the proportion of hungry people in the world dropped from about 20% in the early 1990s to about 16% in the middle of the following decade .

but current estimates show that the proportion of hungry people rose a percentage point in 2008 .

as a result , the u.n. secretary general suggests , progress in meeting the millennium development goals of reducing hunger , alleviating poverty , and improving health for the world's poor has slowed or even reversed .

fao points to two factors that make the current situation particularly devastating for poor households in developing countries .

first , the crisis is affecting large parts of the world simultaneously , reducing the scope for such mechanisms as currency devaluation , borrowing , or increased use of oda or migrant remittances to alleviate the plight of the poor .

second , the global recession comes on top of a food crisis that has already strained coping strategies of the poor , hitting those most vulnerable to food insecurity when they are down .

fao says that , faced with high domestic food prices and reduced incomes and employment — and having already sold off assets , reduced food consumption , and cut spending on essential items such as health care and education — poor families risk falling deeper into poverty and food insecurity .

u.s. foreign assistance is viewed by many ( including those in the current administration ) as an essential instrument of u.s. foreign policy .

the focus of u.s. foreign assistance policy has been transformed since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

in 2002 , a national security strategy for the first time established global development as a third pillar of u.s. national security , along with defense and diplomacy .

based on the notion that agricultural development has been a key driver of economic growth and poverty reduction in almost every industrialized nation in the world , u.s. assistance for agriculture has been a component of u.s. foreign aid since the 1960s .

agricultural productivity is still believed to be critical for the development of the world's poorest countries today , as three - quarters of the world's population live and work in rural areas .

the funding levels for u.s. foreign assistance for agricultural development , particularly in sub - saharan africa , have varied over time since the 1960s .

data from the development assistance committee ( dac ) of the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) show that the share of agricultural development assistance in total official development assistance ( oda ) has declined substantially from the 1980s , when it was 13% of total oda on average , and even 20% in 1980 , to about 3% in 2006 ( see figure 1 ) .

by 2006 , the overall percentage of oda going to agriculture from all donors , bilateral and multilateral , was around 4% .

in 1983-1984 , u.s. assistance for agriculture represented 11.4% of total development assistance from dac member countries , while by 2006 , the percentage of bilateral development assistance accounted for by u.s. agricultural development assistance had fallen to 2.3% of the total provided .

the united states' oda for agriculture peaked at about 20% in 1980 and declined to about 5% by 2007 .

agriculture regained some attention in the late 1990s as the global community focused on the persistent problems of poverty and hunger in africa , and its role was emphasized in the rome declaration on world food security ( fao 1996 ) , in the u.n. millennium development project , and in the poverty - reduction strategies of several african governments and international development institutions .

the obama administration is gearing up to increase commitments to agricultural development and global food security initiatives and claims that the united states will have provided over $5.5 billion to fight global hunger in fy2008 and fy2009 .

congress plays a central role in funding and overseeing u.s. agricultural development and food security assistance , which are administered by several u.s. agencies and international organizations .

most development assistance programs are authorized by either the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( p.l .

87-191 , as amended ) or one of three food aid laws: title ii of the food for peace act ( p.l .

480 ) , section 416 ( b ) of the agricultural act of 1949 ; and the food for progress act of 1985 .

congress typically influences development assistance programs through the appropriations process , most notably through congressional earmarks .

key bilateral and multilateral institutions that deliver agricultural development assistance are discussed below .

estimates of the amount of funding going towards agricultural development , specifically for activities in sub - saharan africa , were obtained from a recent report released by the partnership to cut hunger and poverty in africa .

the 111 th congress is faced with many issues and policy options regarding u.s. foreign aid reform .

please see additional crs reports for more comprehensive coverage of the broader issues .

the topics covered below are more directly relevant to u.s. agricultural development and global food security programs and policies .

a number of bills related to global agricultural development and food security assistance have been introduced in the 111 th congress .

three bills ( s. 384 , h.r .

3077 , h.r. , 2817 ) directly address components of a u.s. food security strategy .

two others ( h.r .

2139 , s. 1524 ) address more broadly the u.s. foreign assistance strategy and policy within which a u.s. food security strategy would be carried out .

these companion bills would establish that it is u.s. policy to promote global food security , improve agricultural productivity , and support the development of institutions of higher learning , research , and extension in developing countries .

both bills direct the president to designate an individual to serve as the special coordinator for food security to advise the president on international food security issues and oversee implementation of a comprehensive food security strategy .

the bills amend the foreign assistance act of 1961 to authorize fy2010-fy2014 appropriations for programs of agriculture , rural development , and nutrition .

one major difference is that s. 384 specifically includes biotechnology research in programs to be supported by the united states , while h.r .

3077 does not include that provision .

the bills authorize the president to provide assistance through u.s. land - grant universities , other eligible universities , and public and private partners of universities in the united states and other countries for ( 1 ) research on problems affecting food , agriculture , forestry , livestock , and fisheries ; ( 2 ) improved human and institutional capacity for the global application of agricultural and related environmental sciences ; ( 3 ) agricultural development and trade research and extension services to support rural population access to national and global markets ; and ( 4 ) application of agricultural sciences to solving food , health , nutrition , rural income , and environmental problems .

some of the funds appropriated would be available for the usaid collaborative research support program and the consultative group on international agricultural research .

both bills establish a u.s .

emergency rapid response to food crisis fund to respond to unexpected urgent food assistance needs .

food aid provided under s. 384 and h.r .

3077 could be purchased locally or regionally and funds could be provided to finance the provision of emergency non - food assistance , including vouchers or cash transfers , safety net programs , or other appropriate non - food assistance .

the food aid provided in these bills would be in addition to u.s. commodity food aid provided under the food for peace act ( p.l .

480 ) .

s. 384 was introduced on february 5 , 2009 , and reported by the senate foreign relations committee on may 13 , 2009 .

h.r .

3077 was introduced on june 26 , 2009 , and referred to the house foreign affairs committee .

h.r .

2817 declares that it shall be u.s. policy to reduce global hunger , advance nutrition , increase food security , and ensure that relevant federal policies and programs ( 1 ) provide emergency response and direct support to vulnerable populations in times of need ; ( 2 ) increase resilience to and reduce , limit , or mitigate the impact of shocks on vulnerable populations ; ( 3 ) increase and build the capacity of people and governments to sustainably feed themselves ; ( 4 ) ensure adequate access to the required calories and nutrients needed to live healthy lives ; ( 5 ) strengthen the ability of small - scale farmers to sustain and increase their production and livelihoods ; and ( 6 ) incorporate sustainable and environmentally sound agricultural methods and practices .

the bill establishes a white house office on global hunger and food security in the executive office of the president and directs the president to appoint , as head of the office , a coordinator on global hunger and food security .

the coordinator would be charged with developing and implementing a comprehensive government - wide strategy to address global hunger and food security and to ensure that the strategy ( 1 ) contributes to achieving the millennium development goal of reducing global hunger by half not later than 2015 and to advancing the united nations comprehensive framework for action with respect to global hunger and food security ; and ( 2 ) is integrated into any review or development of a federal strategy for global development .

h.r .

2817 requires ( 1 ) the office on global hunger and food security to work with all relevant federal departments and agencies ; ( 2 ) the coordinator to establish , schedule , and administer a high - level , government - wide global hunger and food security meeting each week ; and ( 3 ) the comptroller general to submit to congress biennial reports evaluating the design , implementation , and federal coordination of the hunger and food security strategy .

the bill establishes a permanent joint select committee on hunger .

it includes a sense of congress declaration that not less than $50.36 billion should be made available for fy2010-fy2014 for federal programs addressing global hunger and food security .

h.r .

2817 was introduced on june 11 , 2009 , and referred to the house foreign affairs committee and to the house agriculture committee .

h.r .

2139 directs the president to develop and implement ( 1 ) a national strategy for global development to further the u.s. foreign policy objective of reducing poverty and contributing to economic growth in developing countries , including responding to humanitarian crises ; and ( 2 ) a system to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of u.s. foreign assistance .

h.r .

2139 also expresses the sense of congress that american taxpayers and foreign assistance recipients should have , to the maximum extent practicable , full access to u.s. foreign assistance information .

h.r .

2139 was introduced on april 28 , 2009 , and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs .

s. 1524 amends the foreign assistance act of 1961 to establish in the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) ( 1 ) an assistant administrator for policy and strategic planning to assist in matters related to policy planning , strategic planning , program design , research , evaluation , and budget allocation and management ; and ( 2 ) a bureau for policy and strategic planning whose primary duties shall include policy and long - term strategy development , evaluation of program effectiveness , and establishment of resource and workforce allocation criteria .

it also establishes ( 1 ) in the bureau for policy and strategic planning an office for learning , evaluation , and analysis in development ; and ( 2 ) the council on research and evaluation of foreign assistance and the council on research and evaluation of foreign assistance advisory board .

s. 1524 directs the administrator of usaid to ( 1 ) develop a comprehensive workforce and human resources strategy and a related task force to support the objective of promoting development and reducing global poverty ; and ( 2 ) establish career guidelines for foreign service officers and civil service officers that incorporate interagency , intergovernmental , or international organization rotational assignments .

the bill directs the president to require all federal departments and agencies to make publicly available on their websites comprehensive and accessible information about u.s. foreign assistance on a program - by - program and country - by - country basis .

s. 1524 was introduced in the senate on july 28 , 2009 , and reported by the senate foreign relations committee on november 17 , 2009 .

