almost 30 years ago , congress addressed growing concerns regarding nuclear waste management by calling for the federal collection of spent nuclear fuel ( snf ) and high - level waste for safe , permanent disposal .

to this end , the department of energy ( doe ) was authorized by the nuclear waste policy act ( nwpa ) to enter into contracts with nuclear power providers to gather and dispose of the provider's snf in exchange for payments into the statutorily established nuclear waste fund ( nwf ) .

under the terms of the nwpa , these contracts were to require that the federal government begin disposal of the nation's nuclear waste no later than january 31 , 1998 .

over 10 years ago , doe breached these nuclear waste contracts by failing to begin the acceptance and disposal of snf by the statutory deadline established in the nwpa .

as a result , nuclear utilities have spent billions of dollars on temporary storage for toxic snf that doe was contractually and statutorily required to collect for disposal .

the breach has triggered a prolonged series of suits by nuclear power providers , many of which continue unresolved to this day .

approximately 78 breach of contract claims have been filed against doe since 1998 , resulting in over $2 billion in damage awards and settlements thus far .

in 2010 alone , the u.s. court of federal claims awarded nuclear utilities approximately $507 million in contract damages .

many of these awards , however , remain on appeal with the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit and are not yet final .

estimates for the total potential liability incurred by doe as a result of the nuclear waste contract litigation exceed $20 billion .

moreover , after decades of political , legal , administrative , and environmental delays , the obama administration has eliminated all funding for the yucca mountain repository project , closed the office of civilian radioactive waste management , and reemphasized an intention to pursue other alternatives for the disposal of snf by establishing the blue ribbon commission on america's nuclear future .

in addition , doe has attempted to permanently withdraw the yucca mountain construction authorization license from consideration before the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) — an action that triggered two separate lines of litigation before the nrc and the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) .

accordingly , contract damages will continue to build as delays in the disposal of snf continue .

this report analyzes more than 15 years of ongoing litigation over the government's obligations to collect and dispose of snf under the nwpa .

first , the report will provide a brief overview of the nwpa , the statute's subsequent amendments , and its relationship to nuclear waste disposal .

second , the report will provide a survey of key legal issues that have emerged during the protracted waste storage contract litigation , including a discussion of a significant jurisdictional dispute between the d.c .

circuit and the u.s. court of federal claims .

finally , the report will consider the prospects for future liability arising as a result of further delays in the disposal of the nation's high - level nuclear waste .

issues relating to the nwpa have been consistently litigated for the last 15 years , and will continue to be litigated into the immediate future .

many difficult legal questions have arisen during this time period due to the somewhat peculiar relationship between the nwpa and the standard contract and the courts' attempts to distinguish between statutory and contractual duties .

although doe argued early on that the department had no obligations absent a completed permanent repository , the courts have ruled that doe had a statutory obligation to begin collecting snf by no later than january 31 , 1998 .

as that statutory obligation was also converted into a contractual obligation through the standard contract , the courts have also determined that doe's delay in collecting the nuclear utilities' snf has placed the federal government in partial breach of contract .

additionally , overturning a divergent decision by the u.s. court of federal claims , the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) has affirmed a d.c .

circuit order that prohibits doe from concluding that the lack of a permanent repository excuses doe from liability for the delay in acceptance of snf .

approximately 78 lawsuits have been filed against doe related to the department's failure to commence the collection and disposal of snf .

of the lawsuits , a large majority remain pending .

as of the end of 2011 , the government's liability — based on settlements , final judgments , and entered judgments under appeal — stands at over $2 billion .

the following section will highlight key court decisions that have emerged from the ongoing contractual dispute between doe and the nuclear power utilities .

the total costs to taxpayers for delays associated with performing on the standard contract are difficult to project , especially given the uncertainty regarding the future of the yucca mountain facility or any alternative permanent repository for snf .

however , absent a significant change in the direction of nwpa - related litigation , doe predicts that damages stemming from partial breach of contract claims will measure close to $20.8 billion if the government is able to begin accepting snf by 2020 — an unlikely occurrence given the administration's decision to terminate the yucca mountain project .

approximately $500 million in additional legal damages will continue to build with each year beyond 2020 that doe is unable to begin accepting snf .

it is important to note that all paid legal damages are drawn from the doj judgment fund rather than the doe budget .

in addition , the department of justice , which has litigated the contract cases on behalf of doe , has spent over $192 million on litigation - related expenses .

the nuclear utilities reportedly incur $5 million to $7 million in litigation costs in each individual case .

in an attempt to curtail damages , doe and doj have sought to reach settlement agreements with a number of individual nuclear utilities .

as of december 2011 , agreements have been entered into with nuclear utilities that operate 65 of the 118 nuclear facilities covered by the standard contract .

under the settlements , contract parties submit annual reimbursement claims to doe for any delay - related nuclear waste storage costs that they incurred during that year .

as the settlement agreements cover continuing damages , the affected nuclear utilities are able to submit annual claims directly to doe rather than re - litigating ongoing damages in the federal courts .

as of july 27 , 2010 , doe had paid approximately $725 million pursuant to these settlements .

the department of justice has also entered into broader discussions with the nuclear industry "to explore the possibility of reaching a standard settlement with a larger segment of the utilities whose claims are currently pending. .

as most of the contentious legal questions involved with the standard contract have been resolved over the last decade , "the ultimate success of many types of claims is now more predictable to both the government and the utilities. .

rather than continue to re - litigate substantially similar claims , doj has suggested that establishing an administrative claims process would likely lead to a less expensive and more efficient resolution of the ongoing nuclear waste litigation .

an administrative claims process would presumably decrease litigation related expenses for both doj and the nuclear utilities by allowing qualified plaintiffs to submit claims to an administrative tribunal for approval , rather than force the parties to litigate damages in federal court .

the blue ribbon commission on america's nuclear future recommended that the government continue to conclude these lawsuits both fairly and quickly "through settlement agreements or through another process , such as mediation or arbitration. .

although problems related to the storage of snf remain unresolved , the obama administration has pronounced a commitment to invest in domestic nuclear power .

in his 2010 state of the union address , the president advocated for creating new "clean energy jobs" by "building a new generation of safe , clean nuclear power plants in this country. .

in a step toward implementing that vision , president obama announced on february 16 , 2010 , the government approval of an $8.3 billion conditional loan guarantee to help finance the construction of two new nuclear reactors in the state of georgia .

the proposed reactors would be the first to begin construction in the united states in more than 30 years .

reaffirming his commitment to nuclear power in his 2011 state of the union address , president obama called for nuclear power to be included in a national goal of generating 80% of u.s. electricity from "clean energy sources" by 2035 .

in preparation for any new reactors , doe has developed a new contract to govern waste disposal .

under the new provisions , doe "would not be required to complete disposal of [snf] until 20 years after the expiration of the [new reactor's] operating license and any extension thereto. .

doe predicts that any a contractual obligation to collect snf under the new contracts would not "come into effect until the end of this century. .

litigation related to the nwpa will undoubtedly continue .

whether defending breach of contract claims brought pursuant to the standard contract , or actions seeking equitable relief pursuant to the nwpa , the federal government will continue to encounter substantial legal costs in connection with its delay in disposing of the nation's snf .

in response to the impending litigation , the department of justice ( doj ) requested $11.4 million in its fy2011 budget specifically for the purpose of defending against nwpa related suits .

doj is seeking to add 10 new attorneys to its civil division in preparation for an anticipated 12 trials before the end of 2012 .

as the government makes preparations for future legal disputes , both litigation expenses and damages awards will continue to build as there seems to be no prospect for a completed facility capable of storing snf anywhere on the horizon .

