the united states has long sought to influence the peoples of foreign countries through public diplomacy ( pd ) efforts .

public diplomacy provides a foreign policy complement to traditional government - to - government diplomacy , which is dominated by official interaction carried out between professional diplomats .

unlike public affairs , which focus communications activities intended primarily to inform and influence domestic media and the american people , u.s. public diplomacy includes efforts to interact directly with the citizens , community and civil leaders , journalists , and other opinion leaders of another country .

pd seeks to influence that society's attitudes and actions in supporting u.s. policies and national interests .

public diplomacy is viewed as often having a long - term perspective that requires working through the exchange of people and ideas to build lasting relationships and understanding of the united states and its culture , values , and policies .

the tools of public diplomacy include people - to - people contact ; expert speaker programs ; art and cultural performances ; books and literature ; radio and television broadcasting and movies ; and , more recently , the internet .

in contrast , traditional diplomacy involves the strong representation of u.s. policies to foreign governments , analysis and reporting of a foreign government's activities , attitudes , and trends that affect u.s. interests .

there is a growing concern among many in the executive branch , the congress , the media , and other foreign policy observers , however , that the united states has lost its public diplomacy capacity to successfully respond to today's international challenges in supporting the accomplishment of u.s. national interests .

public diplomacy capacity and capabilities atrophied in the years following the dissolution of the soviet union in 1991 .

u.s. public diplomacy efforts were carried out primarily by the u.s. information agency ( usia ) , created in 1953 , as well as u.s. non - military international broadcasting by entities such as voice of america , radio free europe , and radio liberty .

these entities had been well resourced throughout the cold war ; however , with the end of the soviet threat , those resources dwindled as it was believed that there was no ideological fight still to win .

many analysts believe that the united states generally placed public diplomacy on a "back burner" as a relic of the cold war .

in 1999 , new legislation abolished usia and folded its responsibilities into the state department , again with reduced resources for public diplomacy .

after the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , and with u.s. combat operations in iraq and afghanistan , interest in public diplomacy as a foreign policy and national security tool was renewed .

concerns about the events in the middle east focused the attention of policy makers on the need for a sound , well - resourced public diplomacy program .

this concern was heightened by the realization that the worldwide perception of the united states has declined considerably in recent years with the united states often being considered among the most distrusted and dangerous countries in the world .

as the united states sought to revitalize its pd initiatives , it became clear the changes in the world order and changes caused by the internet and information technology in general created a new dynamic for u.s. public diplomacy initiatives .

the world of international communications and information sharing is undergoing revolutionary changes at remarkable speeds .

the rapid increase in available sources of information , through the proliferation of global and regional broadcasters using satellite technologies , as well as the global reach of news and information websites on the internet , has diversified and complicated the shaping of attitudes of foreign populations .

individual communicators now have the ability to influence large numbers of people on a global scale through social networking , providing a direct challenge to the importance of traditional information media and actors .

traditional media , such as newspapers , have created online interactive exchanges between providers and consumers of information by allowing readers to comment on news reporting .

new online social media networks such as weblogs , twitter , myspace , and facebook allow individuals to connect with one another on a global scale , providing opportunities for "many - to - many" exchanges of information that bypass the "one - to - many" sources that formerly dominated the information landscape .

in addition , the method of information delivery and receipt has been fundamentally changed , with cell phones and other handheld mobile devices capable of sending and receiving large amounts of written , visual , and audio information .

communication of information through these new media , regardless of how they depict the united states , contribute to the impressions about the united states and its society .

it is in this ever expanding and accelerating global communications environment that u.s. public diplomacy and international broadcasting must operate , "competing for attention and for credibility in a time when rumors can spark riots , and information , whether it's true or false , quickly spreads across the world , across the internet , in literally instants. .

the attitudes and perceptions of foreign publics created in this new environment are often as important as reality , and sometimes can even trump reality .

these attitudes affect the ability of the united states to form and maintain alliances in pursuit of common policy objectives ; impact the cost and the effectiveness of military operations ; influence local populations to either cooperate , support or be hostile as the united states pursues foreign policy and / or military objectives in that country ; affect the ability to secure support on issues of particular concern in multilateral fora ; and dampen foreign publics' enthusiasm for u.s. business services and products .

under secretary of state for public diplomacy and public affairs judith mchale , in discussing the implications of foreign perceptions and attitudes on u.s. foreign policy and national security , said , governments inclined to support u.s. policies will back away if their populations do not trust us .

but if we do this right , if we develop relationships with people around the world , if they trust us as a partner , this dynamic will be reversed .

less cooperative regimes will be forced to moderate their positions under popular pressure .

to the extent that we succeed , threats we face today will diminish and new partnerships will be possible .

today , 14 cabinet - level departments and over 48 independent agencies and commissions participate in at least one form of official public diplomacy , mostly regarding exchanges or training programs .

yet because of the increasing recognition of public diplomacy's key role in the conduct of u.s. foreign affairs , many in the executive branch , congress , think tanks , non - governmental organizations , and news media debate different approaches to improving u.s public diplomacy to respond to new challenges , determining public diplomacy authorities and responsibilities , defining and executing public diplomacy strategy , and adequately resourcing public diplomacy .

this section provides an overview of the legislative authorities for the conduct of public diplomacy activities within the u.s. government .

it continues with a discussion of the historical context of u.s. civilian - led public diplomacy as it developed since world war i , the creation of usia in 1953 , and its activities and organization .

it also provides budget and personnel information for the former usia .

with its establishment in 1953 , usia became the agency responsible for executing u.s. public diplomacy efforts to understand , inform , and influence foreign publics in promotion of the u.s. interests , and to broaden the dialogue between americans and foreign publics .

usia's stated goals were explaining and advocating u.s. policies in terms that are credible and meaningful in foreign cultures ; providing information about the official policies of the united states , and about the people , values , and institutions which influence those policies ; bringing the benefits of international engagement to american citizens and institutions by helping them build strong long - term relationships with their counterparts overseas ; and advising the president and u.s. government policy - makers on the ways in which foreign attitudes will have a direct bearing on the effectiveness of u.s. policies .

the foreign affairs agencies consolidation act of 1998 ( subdivision a of division g of p.l .

105-277 ) ( consolidation act ) abolished usia .

the act transferred usia's functions to the secretary of state .

it also created the position of under secretary for public diplomacy in the department of state .

a number of factors have been identified as important to this transfer of public diplomacy responsibilities , not all of which bore directly on the improvement or importance of having a robust u.s. public diplomacy capability .

first , the end of the cold war meant that the central justification for a strong public diplomacy mechanism , namely , the ideological fight against the soviet union , no longer existed .

after more than four decades of engaging the soviet union and its allies in ideological warfare , the cold war came to an end with the collapse of the soviet union .

the united states was the sole superpower , and the spread of democracy seemed to be on the march around the world .

many believed that the united states and the rest of the free world had won the war of ideas , and terms such as the "end of history" became popular .

some considered usia an expendable "cold war relic. .

usia had a difficult time defining its mission in this new context , attempting to focus on new issues such as trade and economic liberalization .

second , while some saw a greatly diminished need for public diplomacy resources in general , others perceived a specific weakness in the public diplomacy apparatus represented by an independent usia that operated separately from the state department .

as one commentator argued , u.s. public diplomacy is characterized by two types of activities: advocating for u.s. foreign policy , and building mutual understanding between americans and foreign peoples .

arguments for keeping public diplomacy in an organization separate from the state department often focus on the importance of developing long - term relationships with the people of foreign countries , in order to create a foundation of mutual understanding , values , and interests that prepares the ground for acceptance of specific u.s. policies and actions .

placing those duties too close to the short - term policy activities of traditional diplomats within the state department might diminish the importance of long - term efforts to achieve mutual understanding .

on the other hand , public diplomats also endeavor to explain u.s. actions and policies to foreign publics in a positive light , advocating for the united states on day - to - day , shorter - term issues moving through foreign news cycles .

for these activities , some argue , a closer proximity and relationship to those in the state department responsible for foreign policy and u.s. actions abroad would improve the synchronization and coordination of public diplomacy with official diplomacy and specific foreign policy .

this argument has been bolstered as advances in technology required ever quicker communications in support of policies as news and information is spread instantly to a global audience in a 24-hour - a - day media cycle .

the case of abolishing usia and folding public diplomacy into the state department has been described as placing quick public diplomacy responses on policy issues ahead of the protection of long - term mutual understanding efforts .

third , and related to the first two factors , certain members of congress and leadership within the executive branch were seeking to reorganize and streamline government in general , as well as to reduce the size and resources of u.s. foreign policy agencies in particular .

concerns about the u.s. national debt , annual federal budget deficits , and the size of government led to initiatives to "reinvent government" and reap a "peace dividend" in the form of agency and bureaucracy consolidation .

usia became part of a group of foreign affairs agencies , along with the arms control and disarmament agency ( acda ) and the agency for international development ( usaid ) , that were targeted as prime candidates for consolidation into the state department .

after an extended period of political wrangling in congress and the clinton administration over issues not related to public diplomacy or arms control , congress passed the consolidation act eliminating usia and acda , with usaid surviving but in a restructured form .

many recent recommendations for reform of the public diplomacy structure call for a new agency or other entity to remove public diplomacy from the state department's responsibilities , or to reorganize or reform state department organization to better accommodate public diplomacy .

this section explains the current structure of public diplomacy organization , as well as the organization of u.s. international broadcasting , and recent budget information .

with the enactment of the united states international broadcasting act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-236 ) , all u.s. international broadcasting services were consolidated under a new broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) within usia .

in 1998 , congress passed legislation establishing the bbg as an independent entity within the executive branch at the same time it abolished usia .

the bbg , which acts independently of the department of state , is composed of nine members , with the secretary of state serving as a voting member ex officio and providing foreign policy information and guidance to the board .

by ensuring broadcasting independence while at the same time institutionalizing guidance from the secretary of state , the legislation struck a balance between u.s. international broadcasting that is credible in the view of foreign audiences and support for the foreign policy objectives of the united states .

the president appoints the remaining eight members to three - year terms , and the members are confirmed by the senate .

the bbg has responsibility for supervising , directing , and overseeing the operations of the international broadcasting bureau ( ibb ) .

the ibb , whose director is appointed by the bbg , supervises the worldwide broadcasting services of the voice of america ( voa ) and worldnet television broadcasts , cuba broadcasting ( radio and tv marti ) , an engineering and technical operations office , and various support and transmission services to the broadcasters .

the bbg also has funding and oversight authority over surrogate radio grantees: radio free europe / radio liberty ( rfe / rl ) which also operates radio farda ( iran ) and radio free iraq ; radio free asia ( rfa ) ; and the middle east broadcasting network which operates radio sawa and alhurra television .

among bbg's responsibilities is reviewing and evaluating the operations of the radios , and assessing their quality , effectiveness , and professional integrity .

it is also responsible for determining the addition or deletion of the language services under the ibb .

see figure 4 .

funding for public diplomacy is located in annual state department / foreign operations appropriations legislation , which includes funds appropriated for public diplomacy within the state department and separate funding for international broadcasting .

while the state department is the recognized lead for u.s. public diplomacy efforts , a number of government agencies engage in communications with foreign publics by virtue of their missions .

the department of defense ( dod ) and the agency for international development ( usaid ) are two organizations with clear foreign policy aspects to their activities .

a number of other agencies conduct exchanges under the mutual educational and cultural exchange act of 1956 ( mecea ) , and , with the advent of instant global communication through satellite and internet media , more agencies must consider the effect of their messaging on foreign publics than before .

an overview of dod and other agencies' efforts follows .

there have been numerous attempts to create government - wide strategies and to foster interagency coordination for public diplomacy and strategic communication in recent years , but none has been regarded as successful .

the national security council established a strategic communication policy coordinating committee in 2002 , and tasked it with creating a national strategy for strategic communication .

although a draft strategy was produced , it was not released , and this policy coordinating committee was disbanded with the advent of the war in iraq .

president george w. bush created the office of global communications in july 2002 , with a similar assignment to provide strategic direction to u.s. - government communications , but instead it performed only day - to - day public affairs functions , providing guidance on policy messaging .

it was disbanded in 2005 .

in april 2006 , national security advisor stephen hadley authorized creation of a new policy coordinating committee for public diplomacy and strategic communication ( pcc ) , to be led by the under secretary of state for public diplomacy and public affairs , with support from the deputy national security advisor for strategic communication and global outreach .

the pcc was intended to act as the principal interagency coordination body for u.s. government communications with foreign publics , and is comprised of representatives from the state department , dod , the department of the treasury , the national security council , the intelligence community , and other agencies .

the global strategic engagement center , established by former under secretary of state for public diplomacy and public affairs james k. glassman , acts as a subject - matter advisory group for the pcc , and also serves as a response unit for counterterrorism communications .

it is staffed by civilian personnel from the state department , the central intelligence agency , and other agencies , as well as by active - duty military personnel .

in 2007 , the pcc released the national strategy for public diplomacy and strategic communication .

it articulates three strategic objectives for u.s. government communications with foreign publics: 1 .

america must offer a positive vision of hope and opportunity that is rooted in our most basic values .

2 .

with our partners , we seek to isolate and marginalize violent extremists who threaten the freedom and peace sought by civilized people of every nation , culture and faith .

3 .

america must work to nurture common interests and values between americans and peoples of different countries , cultures and faiths across the world .

it identifies three main target audiences: ( 1 ) key influencers , those who can effectively guide foreign societies in line with u.s. interests ; ( 2 ) vulnerable populations , including the youth , women and girls , and minority groups ; and ( 3 ) mass audiences , who are more connected to information about the united states and the world than ever before through new and expanding global communications media .

the strategy identifies three public diplomacy priorities: expand education and exchange programs , "perhaps the single most effective public diplomacy tool of the last fifty years" ; modernize communications , including a heightened profile for u.s. officials in foreign media , increased foreign language training for u.s. diplomats , and utilization of internet media such as web chats , blogs , and interactive websites ; and promote the "diplomacy of deeds," publicizing u.s. activities to benefit foreign populations through humanitarian assistance , health and education programs , and economic development , as well as u.s. government activities that show respect for foreign culture and history .

as the first steps toward better interagency coordination and unity of effort with regard to public diplomacy and strategic communication , the strategy asked each relevant agency to develop an agency - specific plan to implement the objectives of the strategy , as well as to increase information sharing with other agencies to encourage clear and consistent messaging across all u.s. government communications to foreign publics .

although the strategy was considered a step forward in government - wide coordination of communications efforts , it was criticized for failing to clearly define agency roles and responsibilities , and implementation of the strategy has been lacking , especially with regard to the creation and coordination of agency - specific plans .

in addition , the pcc does not convene regularly , although rosa brooks , senior advisor to under secretary of defense for policy michele flournoy , currently meets regularly with under secretary of state for public diplomacy and public affairs judith mchale to discuss interagency issues and plans concerning public diplomacy and strategic communication .

in light of these deficiencies , congress has mandated creation of a new strategy for public diplomacy and strategic communication .

section 1055 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 ( p.l .

110-417 ) requires the president to submit by the end of 2009 a report on a federal government strategy for public diplomacy and strategic communication to specified congressional committees .

for more information see the section entitled " recent legislative action . .

the national security council ( nsc ) also provides fora for interagency public diplomacy and strategic communication coordination .

when events occur that may impact counterterrorism efforts or that generally require coordinated response , the nsc convenes the international crisis communication team , which includes nsc , white house , dod , and state department representatives , as well as other agency representatives as needed , to coordinate a government - wide communication response .

in addition , in may 2009 , president obama announced the creation of a global engagement directorate ( ged ) within the nsc , "to drive comprehensive engagement policies that leverage diplomacy , communications , international development and assistance , and domestic engagement and outreach in pursuit of a host of national security objectives...." as part of the activities of the ged , nsc holds weekly interagency policy committee meetings that can directly concern public diplomacy and strategic communication issues .

a number of issues currently present challenges to the future implementation of u.s. public diplomacy efforts .

these issues relate to the following: leadership ; strategy at the national level ; roles , responsibilities , and interagency coordination ; organizational issues within the state department ; personnel matters ; exchanges and other outreach activities ; u.s. international broadcasting ; leveraging outside expertise and best practices ; monitoring and evaluation of public diplomacy ; and restrictions on domestic dissemination of public diplomacy information .

congress might wish to take these issues into account when considering new legislation or conducting oversight over u.s. public diplomacy and strategic communication .

a number of members of congress have already proposed legislation in the 111 th congress that touches upon a number of the issues discussed in this section .

congress has recently proposed and enacted legislation that would make changes to u.s. public diplomacy .

enacted during the 110 th congress , section 1055 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 ( p.l .

110-417 ) is a key provision that requires the president to submit by the end of 2009 a report on a federal government strategy for public diplomacy and strategic communication to specified congressional committees .

the report must include the following elements: a comprehensive interagency strategy that integrates specific foreign policy objectives with overall communications with foreign publics ; considers consolidating and elevating government leadership for public diplomacy and strategic communication , and the possibility of creating a single office to direct government - wide efforts ; and improves interagency coordination on public diplomacy and strategic communications .

a study of whether an independent support organization for public diplomacy and strategic communication should be created to provide guidance and assessment to the federal government .

a description of the roles and responsibilities of the national security council , department of defense , and department of state regarding public diplomacy and strategic communication , as well as how these organizations currently coordinate efforts .

section 1055 requires an another report from the president to be submitted two years after the first report providing the status of implementation of the strategy , progress toward achieving strategic benchmarks , and any changes made to the strategy .

in addition , the section directs the secretary of defense to submit by the end of 2009 to the armed services committees a report on the current organizational structure within dod for advising the secretary of strategic communication , and the possibility of creating an advisory board within dod ( with representation from other relevant agencies ) responsible for strategic communication and public diplomacy strategic direction and communication priorities .

several pieces of legislation proposed thus far in the 111 th congress concern changes to , improvements in , and funding for public diplomacy .

the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 2010 and 2011 , h.r .

2410 ( 111 th congress ) , which contains a subtitle on "public diplomacy at the department of state," as well as other several other pertinent provisions , is a central bill related to public diplomacy .

several other bills are devoted to or include provisions directly related to u.s. public diplomacy efforts , covering a broad array of concerns , many of which are directly parallel to the important issues discussed in the previous section of this report .

these bills include provisions regarding strategy for communications with foreign publics ; agency roles and interagency coordination ; personnel and human resources issues ; increased outreach activities and exchanges ; reforming the organization of u.s. international broadcasting ; research , monitoring , and evaluation ; leveraging the best practices knowledge and public diplomacy expertise both within government , and from private sector / nongovernmental actors , possibly through an independent support organization ; and creating exception to the restrictions on domestic dissemination of information prepared for public diplomacy purposes by the department of state .

in addition , certain committee reports on defense authorizations and appropriations for fy2010 include reporting requirements concerning dod's communications with foreign publics .

provided below are descriptions of legislative provisions related to public diplomacy and strategic communication , organized by issue .

s. 1707 ( p.l .

111-73 ) : section 101 ( c ) ( 6 ) ( c ) of the enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2009 provides the sense of congress that the united states should have a coordinated strategic communication strategy for engagement with the people of pakistan to meet the bilateral cooperation goals of the act .

h.r .

2647 ( p.l .

111-84 ) : section 1242 ( b ) of the senate version of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 requires the president to submit an annual counterterrorism strategy report .

paragraph ( 1 ) ( g ) requires the report to include a description of strategic communication and public diplomacy activities undertaken to counter terrorist recruitment and radicalization .

h.r .

490 : section 2 ( b ) requires the secretary of state to submit a "quadrennial review" to the senate foreign relations and house foreign affairs committees by october 1 , 2012 , and every four years thereafter .

such review would consist of a comprehensive examination of u.s. government foreign affairs activities , including public diplomacy efforts .

section 2 ( d ) ( 4 ) provides that the quadrennial review's contents would include recommendations for improvements in public diplomacy initiatives .

h.r .

2387 : section 4 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the strategy and effectiveness of foreign policy and assistance act of 2009 requires the president to report to congress on long - term strategies for u.s. national security and foreign affairs , including a description of how public diplomacy efforts are "related to a long - term strategy that advances national security objectives and needs of the united states. .

h.r .

2410 : division b of this bill is entitled the pakistan enduring assistance and cooperation enhancement ( peace ) act of 2009 .

it authorizes implementation of a public diplomacy strategy for pakistan that would highlight the weaknesses of extremists operating in pakistan , degrade the ability of extremist groups to get their messages to the pakistani people , and increase person - to - person and technical and cultural exchange between u.s. citizens and business and their pakistani counterparts .

s. 894 : section 4 ( a ) ( 6 ) of the success in countering al qaeda reporting requirements act of 2009 requires the president to report on all u.s. government strategic communication and public diplomacy efforts to counter terrorist recruitment and radicalization as part of reporting on overall counterterrorism strategy .

h.r .

489 : section 3 of the strategic communication act of 2009 requires a report from the secretary of state that would include information on current efforts to coordinate u.s. government strategic communication and public diplomacy , international broadcasting , and military information operations .

the section also requires reporting that would discuss the possibility of creating an strategic communication organization within the national security council to lead interagency coordination .

h.r .

2410 : section 211 would amend section 60 of the state department basic authorities act of 1956 ( 22 u.s.c .

§ 2732 ) to give the primary responsibility for coordinating unified public diplomacy activities to the secretary of state .

the section provides for creation of an interagency coordination working group , to meet at least once every three months , to be chaired by the secretary of state and to include representatives of other relevant agencies .

these relevant federal agencies would be required to designate a representative to conduct ongoing consultations and coordination concerning public diplomacy .

the section does not provide a seniority requirement for such representatives .

h.r .

2410 : section 211 would amend section 60 of the state department basic authorities act of 1956 ( 22 u.s.c .

§ 2732 ) to require federal agencies involved in public diplomacy to report to the president annually on the public activities undertaken by each respective agency , and directs the president to provide such reports to the secretary of state .

such reports would be expected to provide a clearer explanation of the current public diplomacy roles of different agencies , and provide opportunities to better define or to alter such roles .

h.r .

489 : section 3 of the strategic communication act of 2009 directs the secretary of state to submit a report assessing the possibility of elevating public diplomacy personnel within the hierarchy of the state department , including designating certain public diplomacy officials ( presumably within the regional and functional bureaus ) as deputy assistant secretaries or senior advisors to the assistant secretary , and elevating the coordinator of international information programs to the assistant secretary level .

h.rept .

111-166 on h.r .

2647 ( p.l .

111-84 ) : the report of the house armed services committee on the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 requires detailed information on the strategic communication workforce within dod , including analysis of the skills and competencies of strategic communication personnel , strategic communications gaps being filled by contractors , and assessment of top - level guidance on strategic communication recruiting , policy , organization , and management .

the committee's report also directs dod to provide information on its military public diplomacy , including a list of all activities that may be considered to fall within the category of public diplomacy .

it further requires description of the performance metrics for such activities ; current management of military public diplomacy ( given the recent disestablishment of the deputy assistance secretary of defense — support to public diplomacy ) ; coordination of military public diplomacy with regional theater plans ; and assessment of the feasibility of a dod - state department exchange for informational and public diplomacy programs .

h.rept .

111-230 on h.r .

3326 : the house appropriations committee included a section on dod's information operations in its report on the fy2010 dod appropriations bill .

the committee states that dod's budget justification for its information operations request of $1 billion is "woefully inadequate," especially given the massive increase in requested funding that totaled only $9 million for fy2005 .

the committee also explains its concerns over dod's moves into non - military communications with foreign publics , and the questionable effectiveness of the programs .

in a classified annex , the committee lists a number of information operations programs that dod should terminate immediately , and reduces funding accordingly , by $500 million .

the committee also states that the remaining funding will not be available until dod reports on all information operations programs , including information on strategies , goals , target audiences , and measuring effectiveness , as well as detailed budget and spend information .

s.rept .

111-35 on s. 1390 : the senate armed services committee , in its report on the senate version of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 , focused on the wide array of strategic communication activities that dod undertakes , and the estimated $10 billion dod has spent on strategic communication since 9 / 11 .

it states that dod does not break out budget figures for strategic communication , and that the committee cannot determine what parts of dod are carrying out the programs , and cannot conduct proper oversight for the programs .

it requires the under secretary of defense — policy and the under secretary of defense — comptroller to develop detailed strategic communication budgets for 2011 , clearly explaining the objectives and funding levels for its strategic communication and public diplomacy activities .

h.r .

2311 : section 2 of the united states - china diplomatic expansion act of 2009 provides funding for hiring new local public diplomacy staff for the u.s. foreign mission in china .

h.r .

2410 : section 212 provides for the establishment of a public diplomacy reserve corps , made up of mid - and senior - level former foreign service officers to fill the current shortage of mid - level public diplomacy officers within the foreign service .

reserve officers would serve for six - month to two - year appointments .

section 301 requires the secretary of state to expand the foreign service in general by 1,500 officers over the next two fiscal years .

this number would likely include new public diplomacy officers .

s. 1707 ( p.l .

111-73 ) : section 101 ( a ) ( 5 ) of the enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2009 authorizes the president to provide assistance to pakistan to strengthen u.s. public diplomacy .

section 101 ( b ) lists activities that would be supported by such assistance , including , in paragraph ( 5 ) ( a ) , strengthening public diplomacy to combat militant extremism and increase understanding of the united states through encouraging civil society leaders to speak out against extremist violence .

h.r .

2311 : section 2 of the united states - china diplomatic expansion act of 2009 provides new funding for public diplomacy programs and related information technology infrastructure in china .

h.r .

2410 : section 213 provides for the reestablishment of america centers , recognizing the current shortfalls of the international resource centers ( ircs ) and the decreased u.s. presence in important foreign city centers .

such centers would be run as free - standing facilities through partnerships with qualified local or regional organizations .

the secretary of state is required under the section to consider waiving the security co - location requirements of section 606 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( b ) of the secure embassy construction and counterterrorism act of 1999 ( 22 u.s.c .

§ 4865 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( b ) ) .

section 214 would amend section 1 ( b ) ( 3 ) of the state department basic authorities act of 1956 ( 22 u.s.c .

§ 2651a ( b ) ( 3 ) ) to require the under secretary for public diplomacy and public affairs to establish libraries and resource centers in connection with u.s. foreign missions .

section 214 states that such libraries and centers should be open to the public , and should include among their cultural outreach screenings of appropriate u.s. films .

the information in such facilities and such u.s. films should be available online to the extent practicable .

section 215 provides for grants to encourage distribution of american independent documentary films in foreign countries , and distribution of foreign documentaries in the united states .

h.r .

3701 : section 2 of the more books for africa act of 2009 finds the need for books to be more readily available in africa , and section 3 states the sense of congress that providing books to africa is a powerful tool of public diplomacy .

section 4 provides for establishment of the more books for africa program in usaid to provide not fewer than 3,000,000 books from the united states per year .

h.r .

3714 : section 2 ( b ) of the daniel pearl freedom of the press act of 2009 requires the secretary of state to create the freedom of the press grant program , which would provide grant funding to nonprofit and international organizations to promote press freedom worldwide through training and professionalization of skills for foreign journalists .

the under secretary of state for democracy , human rights , and labor would administer the program in conjunction with the under secretary of state for public diplomacy and public affairs .

s. 587 : section 12 of the western hemisphere energy compact provides $5 million in funding for public diplomacy activities concerning renewable energy in the western hemisphere , with at least 50% of funding to be provided for educational programs through local civil society organizations .

s. 1707 ( p.l .

111-73 ) : section 101 ( b ) ( 5 ) ( b ) of the enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2009 authorizes the president to provide assistance to pakistan for increasing exchange activities under the fulbright program , the international visitor leadership program , and the youth exchange and study program .

h.r .

2647 ( p.l .

111-84 ) : section 1263 of the of the victims of iranian censorship ( voice ) act ( subtitle d of title xii of division a ) provides for the creation of the iranian electronic education , exchange , and media fund .

this fund , to be administered by the secretary of state , would support the development of technologies and programs to increase the iranian people's access to media , especially through the internet .

paragraphs ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) of subsection ( d ) include in the authorized uses of funding the creation of internet - based distance - learning programs and u.s. - iranian exchange programs .

h.r .

1969 : section 402 of the vietnam human rights act of 2009 states that it is the policy of the united states that u.s. exchange programs with vietnam should promote the advancement of freedom and democracy in that country .

h.r .

2311 : section 5 of the united states - china diplomatic expansion act of 2009 authorizes funding for chinese language exchanges .

h.r .

2410 : the bill contains provisions for new exchange programs in title ii , subtitle b .

these include exchanges and related educational programs for students from central asia , mexico and south and central america , and sri lanka ; professional development exchanges for liberian women legislators and liberian women congressional staff , as well as afghan women legislators ; and establishment of a u.s. - caribbean educational exchange program .

title vii of h.r .

2410 provides for the establishment of the senator paul simon study abroad foundation , a government corporation that would provide grants to increase the number of american students studying abroad , especially in nontraditional countries , to increase u.s. citizens' knowledge of other countries and foreign language skills .

division b of h.r .

2410 , the pakistan enduring assistance and cooperation enhancement ( peace ) act of 2009 , authorizes increased educational exchanges between the united states and pakistan .

h.r .

2985 : this legislation requires the secretary of state to establish the ambassador's fund for strategic exchanges to bring foreign "political , economic , civil society , and other leaders to the united states for short - term exchange visits to advance key united states strategic goals. .

exchanges would take place in groups of 8-10 visitors , over five to eight days , and focus on certain broad strategic goals .

funding would come from eca and u.s. embassies in a cost - sharing arrangement .

h.r .

3328 : the gandhi - king scholarly exchange initiative act of 2009 provides for the establishment of an exchange program between india and the united states .

the gandhi - king scholarly exchange initiative would provide multiple opportunities for exchange according to section 3 ( a ) of the act , including a public diplomacy forum focusing on the work of mohandas gandhi and martin luther king , jr. , a professional training initiative for conflict resolution , and student exchanges .

s. 230 : section 503 of the international women's freedom act of 2009 would amend section 102 ( b ) of the mutual educational and cultural exchange act of 1961 ( 22 u.s.c .

2452 ( b ) ) to include a provision to support international exchanges that promote the respect for and protection of women's rights abroad .

s. 384 : section 301 of the global food security act of 2009 would amend part i , title xii of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( faa ; p.l .

87-195 ) to include provisions for assistance to university partners for improvement of agriculture abroad .

it would add a new section 298 to the faa , which would give authority to the president to provide assistance for agriculture programs through universities .

section 298 ( b ) lists types of support , including paragraph ( 5 ) of the subsection , which includes agricultural education opportunities through international exchanges .

s. 589 : this bill provides for the establishment of an office of volunteers for prosperity in the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , which would administer a newly created global service fellowship program .

the program would be designed to "promote international volunteering opportunities as a means of building bridges across cultures , addressing critical human needs , and promoting mutual understanding. .

h.r .

2647 ( p.l .

111-84 ) : section 1262 of the victims of iranian censorship ( voice ) act ( subtitle d of title xii of division a ) authorizes $15 million for the bbg's international broadcasting operations fund , and $15 million to its capital improvements fund , for expenditures to increase u.s. international programming in farsi to iran .

uses authorized include efforts to stop the iranian government's blocking of u.s. international broadcasting to iran , and creation and expansion of farsi programming .

h.r .

363 : this bill , the united states broadcasting reorganization act of 2009 , would abolish the broadcasting board of governors and the international broadcasting bureau , and transfer international broadcasting authorities to a new united states international broadcasting agency .

a bipartisan board of governors , appointed by the president , would oversee u.s. international broadcasting within the agency .

among its functions would be to review broadcasting activities and their effectiveness within the context of u.s. foreign policy objectives and american guiding principles , such as freedom and democracy .

the act requires the new agency to submit annual reports to the president and congress on broadcasting activities with emphasis on this review function for meeting foreign policy objectives .

h.r .

1969 : section 401 of the vietnam human rights act of 2009 provides funding to stop the government of vietnam from jamming the signal of radio free asia .

s. 230 : section 502 of the international women's freedom act of 2009 would amend section 303 ( a ) ( 8 ) of the united states international broadcasting act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-236 ) to add respect for women's rights to the broadcasting standards of the broadcasting board of governors .

h.r .

489 : section 3 of the strategic communication act of 2009 provides for establishment of a center of strategic communication that would be tasked with , among other things , developing monitoring and evaluation tools and techniques , and performing analysis on foreign public opinion , cultural influence , and media influence .

h.r .

2410 : section 214 ( c ) requires the advisory commission on public diplomacy to report to the house foreign affairs and senate foreign relations committees , one year after enactment of h.r .

2410 , on the effectiveness of libraries , resource centers , and online outreach authorized by the section .

section 216 requires the commission to review and assess the effectiveness of u.s. public diplomacy policies , activities , and programs every two years , and report to the secretary of state and the house foreign affairs and senate foreign relations committees on its findings .

as part of its the review , the commission would be entitled to receive any information it requests from federal agencies involved in public diplomacy or strategic communication activities and from the broadcasting board of governors .

h.r .

489 : entitled the strategic communication act of 2009 , this bill authorizes the secretary of state to solicit offers from organizations specializing in research and analysis to create a center for strategic communication .

the secretary would choose one organization to establish the center as a tax - exempt corporation .

the center would be tasked with providing information and analysis to government decision makers on communications with foreign publics ; developing communications plans and programs , leveraging private sector and academic institution expertise and resources ; and providing public diplomacy services to the government utilizing nongovernmental organizations and private sector knowledge .

the secretary of state would designate a liaison to coordinate between the center and the state department , as well as dod , the department of justice , the department of homeland security , and the director of national intelligence .

the act provides the center $250 million from the state department budget each fiscal year .

h.r .

2410 : although it does not call for a new independent support organization for public diplomacy , section 216 would amend section 604 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the united states information and educational exchange act of 1948 ( 22 u.s.c .

§ 1469 ( a ) ( 2 ) ) to improve the public diplomacy expertise of commission members by requiring that at least four members possess "substantial experience in the conduct of public diplomacy.... " section 303 authorizes the secretary of state to establish a lessons learned center within the state department to serve as a "central organization for collection , analysis , archiving , and dissemination of observations , best practices , and lessons learned by , from , and to foreign service officers.... " the center would be tasked with creating a system for evaluating performance of state department and foreign service activities , which would likely include public diplomacy activities .

h.rept .

111-166 on h.r .

2647 ( p.l .

111-84 ) : the report of the house armed services committee on the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 encourages dod to conduct a legal review of the smith - mundt act's restriction on domestic dissemination of public diplomacy information as it applies to dod .

the committee states its opinion that the restriction does not apply to dod , and should not be allowed to hamper dod's internet - based strategic communication , which the committee currently finds to be inadequate and unable to properly respond to enemies' online communications in real time .

h.r .

363 : section 4 of the united states international broadcasting act of 2009 would restate section 305 of the united states international broadcasting act of 1994 to set out authorities and functions of a new united states international broadcasting agency .

subsection ( b ) provides for an exception to the general prohibition on domestic dissemination of information materials intended for distribution abroad , making broadcasting to the middle east available to u.s. satellite and cable operators .

it also makes an u.s. international broadcasting in any language available to u.s. satellite and cable operators if a foreign broadcaster in a corresponding country has access to u.s. operator transmissions .

also , section 8 of the act would amend section 501 of the smith - mundt act , the provision that contains the restriction on domestic dissemination , to allow the secretary of state to make information available to foreign publics on the internet "without regard to whether such material can be accessed domestically. .

