efforts to mitigate climate change have focused on reducing carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions into the atmosphere .

some of these efforts focus on reducing deforestation , since deforestation is a significant source of co 2 emissions .

deforestation releases about 1.6 gtco 2 ( gigatons or billion metric tons of co 2 ) annually , about 17% of all annual anthropogenic greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions .

thus , discussions and negotiations on international climate change mitigation policies , such as in congress and at the 15 th conference of the parties to the u.n .

framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) in copenhagen in december 2009 , typically include reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation ( redd ) .

the two primary climate change bills in the 111 th congress , s. 1733 and h.r .

2454 , include redd activities as part of a strategy to reduce ghg emissions .

both s. 1733 and h.r .

2454 seek to reduce u.s. ghg emissions , among other things .

both would establish "cap - and - trade" systems , where emissions from many economic sectors ( accounting for about 85% of u.s. ghg emissions ) are capped , with the emissions cap declining over time .

the cap would establish the total quantity of annual allowances .

capped , or covered , entities would be required to acquire allowances to fulfill their compliance obligations .

congress may choose to distribute emission allowances at no cost to capped ( or covered ) sources or to non - capped entities , or to sell the allowances through auctions .

because allowances to non - covered entities can be sold by the recipients to covered entities , they effectively provide funding to the recipients , generally called allowance value .

in both bills , many allowances would be allocated to various entities at no cost ; others ( especially from the reserves ) would be auctioned by the government to covered entities .

both bills would allocate 5% of the allowances to finance redd activities in developing countries ( although the bases for allocating allowances differ ) ; the funding that this would generate depends on the market value of those allowances .

offsets are ghg emissions reductions by a non - covered entity ( including other countries ) that can be purchased by covered entities and used to meet their compliance obligations under the emissions cap .

redd activities could be a major source of offsets , because deforestation in tropical countries is a major source of emissions .

both bills would authorize international offsets from redd activities in developing countries , within limits .

in addition to allocated allowances and offsets , both bills would establish allowance reserves .

the primary purpose of the reserves is for allowance sales to stabilize market prices for allowances .

if carbon prices are too high or rise too quickly , reserve allowances could be sold , expanding supply and moderating prices .

the proceeds from reserve allowance sales could ( under s. 1733 ) or must ( under h.r .

2454 ) be used for additional redd activities , thus providing a third source of funding to reduce deforestation .

advocates support redd activities to reduce ghg emissions because it will not require new technology , and thus can be implemented quickly , providing time for longer - term solutions that involve the energy sector .

further , some contend that reducing deforestation is a low - cost strategy to reduce ghg emissions .

the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) estimated that the opportunity for u.s. firms to get credits from international offsets reduces the permit price by 89% under one climate bill , and that nearly 60% of the international offsets will come from redd activities .

critics object to relying heavily on redd for ghg reductions .

they are concerned that flooding carbon markets with redd offsets will detract from other critical ghg - reducing activities , such as developing and implementing new technologies to lower emissions .

other concerns are that redd projects might not be sustainable in developing countries for long periods of time and that use of redd in developing countries may inhibit both developed and developing countries from reducing their own emissions .

this report summarizes , compares , and analyzes provisions related to international redd in h.r .

2454 ( as passed the house ) and s. 1733 ( the revised chair's mark of 10 / 30 / 09 ) .

this includes a discussion of major differences between bills and potential issues associated with selected provisions .

three aspects of the bills address international redd activities: ( 1 ) allowances for capacity - building and emissions reductions ; ( 2 ) international redd offsets ; and ( 3 ) allowance reserves .

s. 1733 and h.r .

2454 both would allocate 5% of allowances for redd activities in developing countries .

the aim under both bills is to use the allowance value to reduce deforestation in developing countries .

the allowance value could be used in two ways: ( 1 ) to build capacity ( eg , develop a deforestation baseline and acquire monitoring technology ) for countries to reduce deforestation and to participate in markets for international offset credits , and ( 2 ) to directly reduce deforestation emissions and supplement emissions reductions from non - redd activities .

supplemental emissions reductions from redd activities are expected to help the united states reach emission reduction goals , particularly in the first 10-15 years of the program .

under both bills , supplemental emissions reductions from redd activities are expected to reduce ghg emissions in developing countries by at least 720 million tons of co 2 in 2020 ( a one - year target quantity for 2020 ) , and a cumulative quantity of 6 gtco 2 by 2025 .

this is in addition to the u.s. emissions reductions targets from covered sources that the bills aim to achieve by 2020 , which could be achieved in part through international offsets including redd activities .

 ( see below. ) .

some contend that the supplemental emission reduction targets in both bills might be unrealistic , due to the lack of readiness and unwillingness of some developing countries to participate in the program .

they argue that , in the early years of the program , funds from allowances might have to flow largely to capacity - building activities rather than emission - reducing activities , thus delaying progress toward the emission reduction targets .

supporters counter that an abundance of emission reduction opportunities are ready to be funded , and that sub - national or program - level projects are the first steps toward reducing emissions .

h.r .

2454 ( ยง754 ( b ) ) would allow sub - national deforestation activities and pilot programs that aim to reduce ghg emissions ; s. 1733 does not specify that these activities would be allowed under this program , although the regulations required by s. 1733 could include them .

international offsets are a mechanism for covered entities to "offset" their emissions by purchasing credits for activities that reduce ghg emissions elsewhere , including in foreign countries .

redd activities are one category of international offsets under both bills .

a third source of money for redd activities might come from the expenditure of proceeds from the auction of allowances in a strategic reserve .

under both bills , a portion of the allowances would be deposited in a strategic reserve ( h.r .

2454 ) or market stability reserve ( s. 1733 ) .

the purpose of the reserve is to provide a supply of allowances that can be auctioned off to stabilize prices if allowance markets become highly volatile .

reserve allowances would be auctioned separately from quarterly auctions of other allowances .

under h.r .

2454 , epa would use the proceeds from each strategic reserve auction to purchase international offsets from redd activities .

these offsets would be converted back into emissions allowances ( with 1.25 offsets needed for each 1 allowance ) and placed in the strategic reserve account to refill the reserve to its size before the auction .

once the reserve is replenished , additional allowances from international offsets ( to some extent ) would be allocated and auctioned as part of the normal allowance auction in a future year .

for each of the first five years , epa may auction up to 5% of the emissions allowances established for each year .

the percentage increases incrementally during each five years .

under s. 1733 , the expenditure of proceeds from the market stability reserve ( similar in function to the strategic reserve under h.r .

2454 ) could be used to purchase either domestic or international offset credits .

this could enhance the domestic offset credit sector , since domestic offsets are expected to be available sooner than international offsets .

further , s. 1733 would not limit purchases to international redd offsets , and therefore other types of international offsets could presumably be purchased .

when the offsets are converted back into emissions allowances , it would be at a one - to - one ratio under s. 1733 .

the strategic reserve under h.r .

2454 and the market stability reserve under s. 1733 have the potential to generate large sums of funds for redd offsets .

this potential depends on the price of offsets in the market and how that compares to the price of reserves .

redd activities would likely benefit more under h.r .

2454 since proceeds can only be used to purchase international redd offsets .

deforestation is a significant source of global co 2 emissions .

the two primary climate change bills , h.r .

2454 and s. 1733 , generally include similar processes to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation ( redd ) .

both would use allowances for capacity building in developing countries and for supplemental emissions reductions .

both would allow international redd offsets for covered entities in the united states .

both contain a reserve to stabilize carbon offset prices and possibly supplement redd efforts .

h.r .

2454 generally contains more details on the implementation of these programs ; s. 1733 leaves more of the details to be determined in regulation .

h.r .

2454 would use the u.s. environmental protection agency as the primary federal administrator of these redd - related programs ; s. 1733 would rely substantially on the u.s. agency for international development for implementation .

allowances for redd activities could include both capacity building and supplemental emissions reductions .

the pending legislation provides significant details on the supplemental emissions reductions , although "forest" is undefined and concerns about the effectiveness of implementation for supplemental reductions will persist until countries can demonstrate their capacity .

the bills do not identify how to balance funding between supplemental emissions reduction and capacity building , although developing country capacity for implementing redd is critical to both the supplemental reductions and redd offsets .

furthermore , the activities included in "capacity building" are ill - defined .

carbon offsets from redd activities offer a substantial opportunity to reduce global co 2 emissions .

however , concerns persist about offsets generally and about redd offsets in particular .

many developing countries do not have the ability ( personnel and equipment ) to verify ( to measure , monitor , and report on ) avoided deforestation , and may have difficulty acquiring or developing the ability .

because of existing forest protection programs , many question whether redd activities would merely substitute for efforts that a country would undertake anyway .

furthermore , avoiding deforestation in one location may merely displace it to another location ( leakage ) .

many also question the capacity of developing countries to provide permanence in avoided deforestation .

in addition , the bills allow for project level or state level redd activities , with a transition to national programs , but the process for making the transition is largely undefined .

many also question whether redd offsets in developing countries might undermine global efforts to get all nations to participate in reducing ghg emissions and might inhibit those countries from developing low - carbon economies .

