the u.s. house and senate have produced two major bills ( h.r .

2454 , the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( also known as the waxman - markey bill ) and s. 1733 , the clean energy jobs and american power act of 2009 ( also known as the kerry - boxer bill ) ) addressing greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions associated with concerns over global climate change .

this report summarizes and compares provisions for green jobs training and worker adaptation assistance for climate change impacts .

under a two - part subtitle for "green jobs & worker transition" ( title iv subtitle b of h.r .

2454 , and title iii , subtitle a of s. 1733 ) , essentially identical provisions are focused ( in part i ) on the development of programs to provide training and education in energy efficiency and renewable energy , and ( in part ii ) on providing retraining and financial assistance for workers made redundant ( or whose earnings have been substantially reduced ) by climate change mitigation measures .

since the provisions in both bills are so similar , this report will focus on the provisions as discussed in s. 1733 .

a "chairman's mark" of s. 1733 was released in october 2009 .

any resulting modifications to applicable areas of the original kerry - boxer version are discussed in the report .

reducing ghg emissions will likely require the curtailed use of fossil fuels for generating electricity , powering vehicles , and fuelling the furnaces of industrial production .

current legislation envisions an economic "price" on high - carbon fossil fuels to encourage switching to cleaner energy alternatives .

since fuel costs are often the third - highest cost component in manufacturing a product ( after materials and labor ) , any increase in fuel costs could significantly affect the competitiveness of such products and therefore the profitability of an enterprise .

some companies may be able to adapt , finding more efficient ways to manufacture their products , while other businesses will cut labor costs .

the legislative provisions examined in this report are intended to assist the development of green jobs training programs and to establish an internet - based clearinghouse for information on the green jobs industry .

the provisions also seek to provide employment retraining and financial assistance for workers found to have been made redundant by climate change mitigation requirements , or those whose earnings have been significantly reduced .

a summary of provisions in s. 1733 , "clean energy jobs and american power act" title iii , subsection a follows .

essentially the same organization and titles exist in h.r .

2454 , "american clean energy and security act," title iv , subtitle b , with only the section numbering differing .

green jobs training provisions in part 1 of both bills focuses on the development of training programs in renewable energy and energy efficiency .

part 2 of both bills focuses on a new government program specifically to assist workers impacted by climate change mitigation measures .

essentially , there are no differences in content between the original kerry - boxer version of the bill and the chairman's mark except for section 313 , general provisions .

in the chairman's mark , definition ( 10 ) was added to correct the omission of the term "industries dependent upon energy industries. .

a summary of differences between the house and senate bills follows , with section numbers referring to the senate bill ( unless otherwise stated ) .

overall , these differences do not appear to be material .

section 313 , general provisions .

in the chairman's mark , definition ( 16 ) defines "state" to include the district of columbia and the commonwealth of puerto rico ; and the term "united states" when used in the geographic sense is defined to include such commonwealth .

this definition is not in h.r .

2454 .

section 313 , general provisions .

in the chairman's mark , definition ( 20 ) adds citation ( 45 u.s.c .

351 , et seq. ) .

for the railroad insurance act .

this cite is not in h.r .

2454 .

section 313 , general provisions .

the spending limit designation of where funding for the climate change worker assistance fund is to be established in a proposed title vii of the clean air act differs with h.r .

2454 .

in the senate version , section 209 of division b has proceeds of allowance auctions being available pursuant to section 771 ( b ) ( 5 ) of the caa .

the house version has amounts deposited per section 782 ( j ) of the caa .

this appears to be a result of differences in house - senate organization for proposed new sections of the caa .

increased funding for energy worker training program: section 422 of h.r .

2454 adds another $25 million in funding to section 171 ( e ) ( 8 ) of the workforce investment act of 1998 , and establishes a separate account in the u.s. treasury to be known as the "energy efficiency and renewable energy worker training fund. .

title iv of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) specifies that $100 million of the $4.5 billion made available to the u.s. department of energy's office of electricity delivery and energy reliability be used for worker training .

title viii of arra provides $500 million to the u.s. department of labor under "training and employment services" for research , labor exchange , and job training projects that prepare workers for careers in renewable energy and energy efficiency .

both the house and senate bills contain essentially the same provisions intended to provide employment retraining with a focus on jobs in renewable energy and energy efficiency in part 1 — green jobs , and financial assistance for workers found to have been made redundant by climate change mitigation requirements , or those whose earnings have been significantly reduced in part 2 — climate change worker adjustment assistance .

the source of funding for the provisions of part 1 , while apparently associated with the establishment of the "energy efficiency and renewable energy worker training fund," is not clearly established in either bill .

the term "green jobs" is undergoing definition at the labor department as to what these jobs are , and the sector or sectors they will be classified in under the north american industry classification system ( naics ) .

the naics is used by the federal government to collect and analyze data with regard to the u.s. economy .

there is agreement that green jobs will relate to renewable energy and energy efficiency , but the extent to which these jobs will be exclusive to these areas is under debate as the skills and training necessary may be transferable from and to other job classifications .

the level and specialization of these jobs could vary from tradesmen such as electricians and welders , to technical engineers or financial managers , and from intellectual design to maintenance workers .

part 2 of the legislation focuses on assisting workers impacted by climate change mitigation measures .

climate change mitigation may adversely affect the competitiveness of u.s. industries as legislation requiring adaptation to a low - carbon future has the potential to increase the costs of manufactured products .

as such , if a group of workers can show how their current or prospective employment is impaired by such measures , then these workers may apply for climate change adjustment assistance .

assistance may include a monetary allowance while workers are retrained or otherwise seeking new jobs or seeking full employment if their work hours are reduced .

the proposed legislation appears to be adaptable to the training needs of affected workers from various employment levels and backgrounds , as assistance may be provided for up to three years for eligible workers .

training for part 1 — green jobs seems to be focused on providing qualified workers for renewable energy construction projects , i.e. , wind and solar projects , energy transmission systems , and energy efficiency jobs envisioned by the act .

it is likely that while certain of these jobs will require new skills , many of these jobs can be filled by tradesmen with existing skills in electrical wiring and welding .

other skills in machining and parts fabrication may also be directly transferable .

many of these jobs may require workers to follow projects as they are won and built , and require moving on to where the jobs are .

many of these projects will be built where the renewable resources are best , and for large scale wind or solar thermal projects , this means the broad plains of the midwest or the sunny arid desert regions of the southwest .

funds are to be made available to states to carry out the retraining , on - the - job training , career counseling , or other employment services .

the federal government may seek to audit use of funds and applicants to guard against fraud or misuse of funds .

eligible workers must be citizens or nationals of the united states , or have "satisfactory immigration status" to receive program benefits .

linkages of "apprenticeship" and "pre - apprenticeship" programs with business and industry needs must be addressed ( and eventually with potential employers' needs ) , and secondary schools prepared to advise students on apprenticeship career options .

the separate jobs retraining and assistance program envisioned by s. 1733 appears to be more comprehensive than existing workforce ( such as at "one stop career center" ) and employee retirement income security act apprenticeship programs , perhaps raising issues of equity for unemployed workers not eligible for climate change worker adjustment assistance .

"middle class careers" and "quality employment" are described as goals of the green construction careers demonstration project in section 303 .

but over the longer term , higher paying , less transient jobs are more likely to come from positions in manufacturing companies rather than jobs in construction .

development of a competitive , domestic renewable energy industry which designs and produces the turbines , solar panels , and related parts and components is the likely source of these jobs , but may require a longer - term focus on the needs of future markets .

more clarity may be sought with regard to the federal policies , oversight , and planning for the support or development of industries and businesses expected to absorb retrained workers .

retraining programs and climate adjustment assistance benefits are projected up to three years for eligible workers , during which time the worker may or may not be placed .

the worker may then apply for a lump sum for job search assistance or relocation , or both if suitable employment is not found .

at the same time , adjustment assistance to climate change - impacted industries is to be made available through allocations and auctions of emissions allowances , but such businesses are likely to downsize to survive .

growth in green industries and other sectors is assumed to provide future employment as companies look to climate change business opportunities .

coordination of government , education , and retraining providers and potential employers on one hand , and corresponding efforts to create or rebuild competitive industrial sectors on the other hand will likely be crucial if the desired economic growth and employment results are to be realized .

