as this report illustrates , the nonprofit and charitable sector represents a significant , highly diverse component of the u.s. economy .

currently , there are a number of policy issues that could affect , either directly or indirectly , the structure and functioning of nonprofit and charitable organizations .

president barack obama has turned toward the nonprofit sector while seeking solutions to social problems via the social innovation fund .

the recent economic downturn increased the demand for many of the goods and services provided by charitable organizations , while simultaneously placing the same organizations under increased financial constraints .

the treatment of nonprofits in health care reform has also been a major issue , as the tax code cannot provide the same incentives to nonprofits ( nonprofit health care providers and nonprofit employers providing insurance ) that are available to for - profit organizations .

finally , the tax treatment of nonprofits and their contributors raises issues of efficiency , equity , and fairness .

to assist policymakers in evaluating reforms that will potentially affect nonprofit and charitable organizations , this report provides a broad overview of the charitable sector .

such context and background information will help policymakers determine if the government's current relationship with the nonprofit and charitable sector is efficient , or if there are policy changes that could lead to a better use of resources .

this report begins by defining the nonprofit and charitable sector .

it is especially important to understand the distinction between nonprofit and charitable organizations .

while the term nonprofit tends to be used loosely in the literature , nonprofit here is used to identify the broad array of organizations with federal tax - exempt status .

charitable organizations are defined as organizations with 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) public charity status , and are a subcategory of the broader nonprofit sector .

the second section provides an overview of the charitable sector , focusing specifically on employment within the sector , as well as revenue and assets of charitable organizations .

the charitable sector's role in the broader economy is evaluated by comparing the charitable sector to other major industrial sectors .

third , the finances of charitable organizations are explored .

specifically , various revenue sources , both government and nongovernment , are examined .

the amount of revenue coming from private contributions , government grants and transfers , private payments , and investment income is identified .

the differences in revenue sources across charitable sectors are also analyzed .

finally , the impact of the economic downturn on revenue for charitable organizations is briefly addressed .

the fourth section reviews the relationship between the charitable sector and government .

to evaluate the relationship between the charitable sector and the federal government , the economic rationale for subsidizing charities is presented .

after presenting the theoretical underpinnings for interaction between charities and government , direct evidence on the cost of the relationship as it presently exists is discussed .

finally , the report concludes with policy considerations and options .

the policy options are framed by examining policy issues deemed important by nonprofit and charitable organizations .

the possibility of increasing support through grants and subsidies , introducing an oversight agency within the federal government , and revising the rules on itemized deductions for charitable organization are explored .

this report analyzes data relating to the nonprofit and charitable sectors .

for purposes of this report , the term "nonprofit sector" is generally intended to include all organizations with federal tax - exempt status .

the term "charitable sector" is used to refer to one type of tax - exempt organization , specifically those organizations with 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) public charity status .

the internal revenue code ( irc ) describes approximately 30 types of tax - exempt organizations .

examples include charitable organizations , social welfare organizations , labor unions , trade associations , fraternal societies , and political organizations .

the largest category , and the primary focus of this report , are the organizations described in internal revenue code ( irc ) section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) .

organizations eligible for 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status include charities , religious organizations , hospitals , and educational institutions .

the entire universe of these organizations is commonly referred to as "charitable organizations. .

every 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organization is classified as either a "public charity" or "private foundation. .

public charities have broad public support and tend to provide charitable services directly to the intended beneficiaries .

private foundations often are tightly controlled , receive significant portions of their funds from a small number of donors or a single source , and make grants to other organizations rather than directly carry out charitable activities .

501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations are presumed to be private foundations unless they qualify for public charity status based on support and control tests .

various charitable activities are subsidized by the federal tax code or funded via government grants .

in order to understand the rationale for government support of the charitable sector , it is important to understand the economic theories relevant for charitable activities .

this section considers a variety of policy issues , drawn from a number of sources .

some of these issues stem from current and past legislative proposals , others arose during current debates , and still others are the result of this report's findings .

given the size and diversity of the nonprofit and charitable sector , an exhaustive list of policy options is not feasible .

instead , some of the most legislatively relevant have been presented below .

before considering possible policy proposals , it is useful to consider what nonprofits themselves indicate are their most important policy priorities .

the johns hopkins listening post project surveyed nonprofit executives focusing on children and family services , elderly housing and services , community and economic development , and arts and culture .

the survey results indicated the four top priorities were restoration and growth of federal funds in their field ; reinstatement and expansion of tax incentives for individual charitable giving ; federal grant support for nonprofit training and capacity building ; and reform of reimbursements under medicare , medicaid , and other programs to ensure they cover the cost of services .

other proposals that more than half of respondents identified as somewhat or extremely useful included expansion of tax incentives to encourage volunteering ; student loan forgiveness for those working in the nonprofit sector ; a credit for investment making low - cost private capital available ; restoration of the estate tax ; a commitment to support research and improve data on the nonprofit sector ; expansion of national service programs like americorps ; replacement of the charitable contribution deduction with tax credits ; a federal agency to represent and promote the interests of the nonprofit sector ; strengthening of government oversight agencies ; clarifying the community benefits standard ( this issue relates to nonprofit hospitals ) ; eliminating or reducing the limits on lobbying activities ; and providing a special category of "hybrid" organizations , such as social enterprises ( organizations that operate businesses but with a social mission , such as hiring the hard to employ or using the surplus for a charitable purpose ) .

the importance of different priorities varied by type and size of charitable organizations .

all organizations considered federal funding important , while those organizations that rely on reimbursement for services considered reform in that area important .

museums considered tax provisions ( restoring the estate tax and expanding charitable giving ) important while community and economic development organizations considered nonprofit training and capacity development important .

small nonprofits ( less than $500,000 ) considered tax incentives for individual charitable giving , health insurance tax credits , and training funds important .

the independent sector , an organization representing the charitable community , has also provided a list of policy proposals .

most of the policies indicated above were suggested in their report .

their work also included some specific tax proposals , including extending and expanding the ira rollover provision , revising the excise tax on foundation income , and allowing mileage deduction rates to be the same as those of business .

the independent sector also suggested , in addition to loan forgiveness , offering scholarships in return for a specific term of service in the nonprofit community .

they proposed that loans , training , and technical assistance similar to that provided by the small business administration to for - profit firms be provided to nonprofits .

they also proposed relief from new funding obligations under the pension protection act of 2006 .

modifying lobbying rules , including allowing private foundations to support non - partisan lobbying of organizations they contribute to , was also suggested .

the independent sector indicated that anti - terrorism restrictions may have discouraged international charity and might be revised .

proposals from the independent sector also emphasized that subsidies provided to employers in a health care reform should also be made available to nonprofits .

it is natural that nonprofits and charitable organizations want more support from the government .

these desires should be weighed against the effectiveness and efficiency of nonprofits and other potential uses of government funding .

gao testimony suggested that improving the governance and skills , particularly of nonprofits , and collecting more comprehensive data are among the issues that might be addressed .

there have also been a series of legislative proposals that relate to the tax treatment of charitable contributions and organizations .

some of these proposals expanded benefits , while others were designed to address potential abuses .

are federal grants for nonprofits and charities insufficient , adequate , or too generous ? .

this type of assessment is almost impossible to make , although the questions that need to be answered are straightforward .

is the objective worthy of diversion from other budgetary purposes or diversion from private consumption and investment if financed by tax increases ? .

will the funds provided cause crowding - in or crowding - out of private giving ? .

can the objective be met more efficiently with a government program or a nonprofit one ? .

these questions , of course , must be considered on a project by project basis .

for example , evidence on crowding - out and crowding - in suggested variation by type of charity .

are subsidies that are tied to specific features of the charity desirable compared to grants ? .

these subsidies include existing ones , such as the postal subsidy and tax subsidies that are tied to reliance on charitable giving or investment funds , or , in the case of state and local subsidies , need for real property .

normally having benefits triggered by these characteristics might be thought to be less desirable than targeted grants , because the government can make a judgment about whether the activity is desirable .

that is , the tax subsidies tend to favor education and arts , while grants tend to be more important in other charities .

moreover , while the information on crowding - in or crowding - out of grants is mixed , it largely suggests crowding - in .

on the other hand , recent evidence on price elasticities suggests that the government spends more than a dollar to induce an additional dollar in charitable contributions .

the government may want to seek to design policies that provide the greatest increase in revenue for nonprofit and charitable organizations with the least cost to the government .

 ( see the discussion below for ways to increase the "bang for the buck." ) .

one advantage of subsidies that are triggered automatically ( by contributions , investment income , real property , or use of the mail ) is that no administrative oversight is required .

moreover , some would argue that the federal government cannot easily make judgments about the value of different options or charitable objectives , leading one to conclude that a general subsidy may be in order .

it is also important to consider proposals for reform which could affect not only the level of funding , but the mix of existing funding .

since different types of charities receive different shares of their funds from different sources , policies that change incentives regarding one funding source will have a larger impact on some charities relative to others .

one example would be taxing investment income for charitable organizations .

such a reform would affect university endowments .

but would it be better to tax the returns of university endowments and use the revenue to expand aid for poor students or expand funding for university research grants ? .

these types of questions prove very difficult to answer in practice .

the consequences of new initiatives can also vary across charitable sectors , and should be considered .

for example , one policy proposal mentioned above is to forgive student loans for those who work in the nonprofit sector .

is student loan forgiveness for charitable sector employees a better way to benefit charities than grants or other mechanisms ? .

such a policy would favor charities that are more labor intensive and that tend to employ younger , less experienced workers .

is tipping the scales in favor of charities with these types of employees a desirable outcome ? .

a similar issue might be raised about a special health insurance credit ( although the issue of parity under current health care reform proposals is different ) .

one proposal is to provide an oversight agency in the federal government that , for example , might be similar to the small business administration .

such an agency could support the nonprofit sector in two ways: conduct research and data collection and serve as an advocacy organization .

such an agency could fulfill a number of functions that are discussed in this report .

it could collect data , process existing data , and provide research on the nonprofit sector to guide federal policy .

it could coordinate broad government initiatives including social innovation and volunteerism .

it could also collect and provide information to the public .

such an agency could also provide information on foundations and advice on grant applications ( information now available but typically at a cost ) and information on donor - advised funds .

an oversight agency could provide outreach efforts , either free or at a small charge , to assist small nonprofits with efficient and effective organization management , including training of staff and grants for such training .

it could also provide low - interest loans , similar to the small business administration .

finally , an organization whose mission was to make the nonprofit sector more efficient would have a very different objective from the internal revenue service , whose purpose is to enforce the tax laws .

in the survey of charitable organizations discussed above , 79.6% of respondents believed more research and data were somewhat or extremely useful ( 29.2% believed them extremely useful ) .

64.1% believed creating a government agency to represent nonprofits' interests was somewhat or extremely useful ( 36.4% believed it extremely useful ) .

in addition , one of the top priorities , supported by 88.2% of respondents as either somewhat or extremely useful ( 51.4% as extremely useful ) , was federal grants for training and capacity building .

all of these issues along with improved oversight could be addressed with an new oversight agency .

the main concern about such an agency is whether the benefits exceed the costs , a question that is difficult to answer .

the cost would depend on whether the agency also provided grants and loans .

in general , however , the cost would be small compared to tax subsidies and grants .

the small business administration's budget was $923 million in fy2009 and much of the cost was for loan guarantees ; $345 million was for disaster loans ( which also cover nonprofits ) while only $20 million was for general administrative overhead .

relative to an oversight agency for the nonprofit sector , the small business administration serves a much larger group of small entities , and would be likely to have higher costs .

additionally , it is important to note that a government agency is not the only entity capable of providing information and data on the charitable sector .

there are a number of other organizations and educational institutions that currently collect data and disseminate research on the charitable sector ( much of their work is cited throughout this report ) .

if other organizations and educational institutions can more efficiently collect , analyze , and report data on the charitable sector , perhaps providing more funds to these organizations , rather than creating a government agency , is an option .

an alternative to an executive agency would be a congressional committee or agency .

this option may be preferable if the main objective of the proposed entity is to advocate for the health of the nonprofit sector , rather than providing some of the other functions discussed above .

or , as in the case of small business , both an agency and a committee could be considered .

the nonprofit and charitable sector faces a number of challenges during economic downturns .

this section addresses three issues of potential importance for the sector during periods of slow economic growth: encouraging foundations to give during downturns , encouraging states to maintain efforts and pay bills on time , and how to effectively provide funds directly to nonprofits as economic stimulus .

one observation discussed in this report is that foundations played , or could play , a stabilizing role by making more grants during recessions ( or at a minimum not reducing grants ) .

one policy option is to remove any tax impediments to foundations temporarily increasing payouts .

currently , foundations are discouraged from making large one - time grants as the excise tax on investments increases if the payout ratio falls .

currently , if a foundation's payout ratio falls from one year to the next , the foundation incurs an additional 1% tax on their investment income for that year .

this disincentive could be eliminated by altering the excise tax treatment on foundation investment by going to a single rate , one that does not penalize large contributions .

under the current system , foundations are required to payout 5% of the average market value of total assets .

allowing foundations to carryforward excess payouts to use in the future ( so that if the foundation paid out 6% rather than 5% in one year , the extra 1% could be used to satisfy part of future payout requirements ) could help foundations smooth giving during slow economic times .

this carryforward might only be allowed in recessions .

alternatively , foundations could be given a refundable credit for a share of payouts in excess of the required amounts during recessions .

in the recent economic crisis , states reduced funding to nonprofit and charitable organizations and in some cases were delinquent on payments .

to avoid this in the future , incentives could be put in place to encourage states to maintain funding for nonprofits .

an example would be to set up a fund to head off a shortfall in nonprofit funding , with receipt of funds contingent on sustaining the current level of spending and providing payments on time .

it is always risky , however , to create incentives of this nature because it requires determining the base level of funding and avoiding situations where states reduce funding in advance in anticipation of a slowdown .

having an advocacy agency in the federal government also might help address issues pertaining to state support and contract payments .

if there were a spotlight on states' behaviors , especially states not making their contract payments on time , they might be less willing to address their short - term cash flow problems in this manner .

an agency in the federal government might also offer low - cost loans to either states or nonprofits for cash flow stresses of this type .

the principal objective of a government stimulus in a recession is to induce additional spending .

monetary expansion , which is often the first measure taken by the government , eases credit and helps to restore spending on investment goods and durable consumer goods ( such as houses and cars ) .

fiscal policy can either provide direct spending ( through government spending ) or induce consumers through tax cuts .

reducing taxes increases wages and leads to spending by those working to produce the additional demand , through multiplier effects .

to accomplish the objective of increasing demand , a fiscal stimulus needs to translate into increased spending and do so fairly quickly .

the demand for goods and services provided by charities increases during recessions .

it is unclear , however , whether stimulus money can quickly and effectively flow through charities , simultaneously meeting the increased demand for charitable services and providing economic stimulus .

information and administration issues limit what types of organizations are eligible for stimulus funds , including nonprofits .

since stimulus spending needs to work quickly , taking the time to identify specific recipients on a case by case basis would defeat the purpose .

funds are therefore often disbursed based on formulas and existing identification of potential recipients .

this suggests that funds targeted to existing and established nonprofits are more likely to be effective economic stimulus , as opposed to funds targeted towards establishing new nonprofit or charitable organizations .

currently , the rules of the tax code effectively provide a formula for funding for both individuals and businesses .

general attributes ( such as income , family size and composition , investments ) trigger tax benefits .

similarly , expansions of existing programs with recipients identified by specific characteristics ( income , age , disability , unemployment , etc. ) .

can be used for transfers .

the government can rely on formulas to provide funds and can identify states and to some extent local governments .

nonprofits do not generally have these mechanisms in place and are therefore not normally the recipients of automatically distributed funds .

nonetheless , policies could be established to direct stimulus funds , via grants , to nonprofits during times of economic distress .

a second object of government policy during economic downturns could be to assist those groups most impacted by the slowdown , and , indeed , programs such as expanded unemployment payments are often considered during recessions .

were the government able to direct funds to nonprofits , it might wish to target them in the same fashion , and direct them to specific nonprofit activities .

again , this would be administratively difficult to implement .

having a system in place where certain nonprofits were pre - registered with the government could expedite the grantmaking process when needs increase .

even if nonprofits cannot easily be direct recipients of funds , they benefit from economic stimulus programs .

grants to state and local governments may , in part , flow through to nonprofits , and even if state funding has fallen , it might have fallen more without stimulus funds .

in addition , nonprofits benefit from the overall improvement in the economy that is aided through federal fiscal and monetary policy .

nonprofits could also be allowed investment subsidies provided to for - profit firms by providing the credit equivalent of the subsidy which they could file for using the income tax form ( as was done for social security payments in 2008 ) .

subsidies could also be provided based on number of employees or their wages .

programs could also require a certain fraction of funds to be directed to nonprofits , as is the case for the low - income housing tax credit .

a number of proposals have developed over the years relating to the itemized deduction for charitable contributions .

recently , the president proposed a cap on all itemized deductions to finance health - care reform , which would have automatically affected charitable deductions and resulted in some concerns being expressed .

however , a crs report indicated the effects on charities would be small .

this report reviewed the evidence on price elasticities which suggests that the response of charitable contributions to tax incentives is small .

it also reviewed some survey evidence and evidence on the response to matching gifts , as well as historical data , which all point to a small response as well .

as noted above , more recent evidence on price elasticities suggests that charitable contribution deductions are not very efficient , in that the government spends more than a dollar to induce a dollar of contributions .

using the elasticity of 0.5 , which was identified as a central estimate , a dollar of revenue loss results in 50 cents of contributions .

the itemized deduction has also been criticized because it favors the charities preferred by high - income taxpayers , who tend to be those claiming the deduction , since only about 30% of taxpayers itemize their deductions .

some have suggested allowing all taxpayers to deduct charitable contributions on top of the standard deduction or converting the deduction to a credit available to all taxpayers .

converting the deduction to a credit could be designed to be revenue neutral which would reduce the benefit for current itemizers while extending it to non - itemizers .

there are other policy options that could potentially address the concern that the current system tends to direct more donations towards charities preferred by those with higher incomes .

for example , a floor on charitable contributions could be imposed .

specifically , only charitable contributions in excess of 2% of adjusted gross income could be deducted , and this deduction made available for all taxpayers .

revenue gains from such a policy could be used to finance deductions from non - itemizers or to provide grants .

imposing a floor alone would likely raise revenue and increase the efficiency of the charitable deductions without having much of an effect on giving .

according to the 2004 statistics of income public use file , 96% of contributions are made by taxpayers who contribute at least 1% of income and 88% are made by those who contribute at least 2% of income .

according to the congressional budget offices options report , a 2% floor would raise an average of $22 billion , per year , over the next 10 years .

there is some evidence that price elasticities are smaller for lower - income individuals , although the evidence is not definitive .

many of these individuals' contributions go to religious organizations where donors may not be very sensitive to price .

in any case , extending the deduction for non - itemizers would likely cost more than it induced in additional deductions .

converting to a credit might also reduce charitable contributions .

but it could increase the equity between charitable preferences of higher - income and lower - income individuals .

this section summarizes several other tax issues that relate to charitable contributions and organizations .

the use of the tax system to provide incentives or benefits generally excludes nonprofits since they are generally exempt from federal income tax .

this effect occurred for the stimulus proposals to provide investment incentives , and it is also in some versions of the health reform bills ( h.r .

3200 ) .

specifically , the use of tax credits to assist small businesses in obtaining health insurance coverage for employees provides no assistance for tax - exempt organizations .

nonetheless , it is possible to provide a separate credit ( or grant ) for nonprofits .

the current senate finance committee proposal provides a credit for small nonprofits to provide health insurance for low - income employees as it did for profitable firms , although the credit rate is 35% rather than 50% .

the senate health , education , labor and pensions proposal did not use the tax system as the mechanism for health insurance subsidy .

as noted above in the discussion of economic downturns , other tax subsidies , even deductions , could be converted into equivalent credits and provided to nonprofits .

job tax credits , which have recently been proposed by some , would not automatically be available if credited against the income tax , but would be if credited against payroll taxes .

for provisions that are not related to the tax structure but rather use the tax system as a convenient delivery mechanism , there might not be a reason to deny benefits to nonprofits .

the two basic issues associated with donor - advised funds and supporting organizations are the possibility of receiving private benefits by donors and payout rates .

while some changes were enacted , others remain possible .

although payout requirements are planned for certain type iii supporting organizations , there are no payout requirements for donor - advised funds and for other supporting organizations .

these issues might be revisited when treasury completes its studies .

the treasury was directed to study specific issues: whether deductions for contributions to donor - advised funds and supporting organizations are appropriate given the use of the assets or benefits to the donor , whether donor - advised funds should have a distribution requirement , whether the retention of rights by donors means that the gift is not completed , and whether these issues apply to other charities or charitable donors .

thus , it is possible that results of the studies could also have implications for charities in general .

as noted earlier , concerns have also been raised about college endowments , and the senate finance committee received testimony on college endowments in connection with hearings held on offshore funds in 2007 .

a possible legislative change might impose payout requirements on university and college endowments .

in past years discussions were also directed at possible abuses of gifts of appreciated property , which led to some limited changes ( such as disallowing partial gifts ) .

a more restrictive proposal for charitable gifts would be to allow only the basis ( generally the cost of the property ) rather than the fair market value to be deducted .

the cbo estimates the revenue gain from that change to raise an average of $2 billion per year over the next 10 years .

an alternative could be to require taxpayers to sell the asset and donate the proceeds to charity .

this would likely result in a revenue loss to the government but might address valuation problems .

taxpayers could avoid payment of the capital gains tax if donations were made in a timely fashion .

other approaches for valuation have included proposals for "baseball arbitration" where the court may only choose either the irs or the taxpayer's valuation , which would provide an incentive to the taxpayer to state a value closer to market value .

some in congress have also been interested in nonprofit hospitals .

a major concern raised by some is the degree of charity care provided by these hospitals and whether they are providing benefits that justify their tax - exempt charitable status .

the congressional budget office released a study in 2006 that found that nonprofit hospitals overall provided only slightly more charity care than for - profit hospitals .

the senate finance committee held hearings on the topic , "taking the pulse of charitable care and community benefits at nonprofit hospitals," on september 13 , 2006 , and the house ways and means committee held hearings on "the tax exempt hospital sector," on may 26 , 2005 .

the following concerns have been raised about nonprofit hospitals: establishing and publicizing charity care , the amount of charity care and community benefits provided , conversion of nonprofit assets for use by for - profits , ensuring an exempt purpose for joint ventures with for - profits , governance , and billing and collection practices .

in july 2007 , the irs released an interim report on nonprofit hospitals , where they found that the median share of revenue spent on charity care was 3.9% and almost half of hospitals spent 3% or less .

the average was 7.4% .

another concern that has been expressed is that , since a 1969 revenue ruling issued by the internal revenue service , nonprofit hospitals are no longer required to provide charity care to qualify for exempt status as a charitable organization ; rather they must meet a "community benefit" standard that does not require charity care and is not precisely defined .

as discussed above , there are several charitable provisions that are temporary , with the major one being the ira rollover deductions .

whether to extend , make permanent , or expand this treatment is one policy issue .

some might argue that there is no reason for providing benefits for contributions made from iras , but there is a benefit in having the certainty of a permanent provision .

other provisions relate to gifts of inventory and other , largely business , issues .

a number of charitable organizations have expressed concerns about retaining the estate tax .

the estate tax rates were reduced and the exemptions increased in 2001 , although those tax changes are scheduled to expire in 2010 , and then revert to the levels prior to the 2001 tax changes .

president obama has proposed to maintain the estate tax permanently at current rates and exemptions .

the empirical evidence suggests that the response of bequests to tax incentives is larger than that of lifetime giving and that charitable contributions could fall .

if so , the charitable deduction for estate taxes is an efficient method of providing benefits , but , of course depends on the retention of the estate tax and the magnitude depends on its features .

 table a - 1 contains data on the sources of revenue across various sectors of charitable organizations .

this data was used to generate figure 5 in the text .

