with a population of 82 million and a gdp of $3.6 trillion , germany is the world's fifth largest economy ( after the united states , china , japan , and india ) and the largest in europe , accounting for about one - fifth of the gross domestic production ( gdp ) of the european union ( eu ) .

based on a per capita income of around $44,280 ( 2008 ) , germany is one of the world's high - income countries .

germany has also been the world's number one exporter of goods and the largest european trade and investment partner of the united states .

although its economic and commercial policies are increasingly determined within the eu , germany plays a key role in influencing eu policies .

the health and functioning of the german economy , as well as policy approaches adopted by the government , are not only of bilateral and regional importance , but also of global importance to the united states .

since its founding in 1949 , the federal republic of germany has experienced a continuous rise in living standards .

gdp per person has risen by a factor of 6 since 1950 .

this increase in material well - being has helped create a very stable middle class .

german firms remain competitive internationally and the work force tends to be highly skilled .

the economy is heavily dependent on exports .

in 2008 exports of goods and services accounted for 47% of germany's gdp — more than three times the rate in the united states .

germany's strong export performance in goods or merchandise is also denoted by the term exportweltmeister ( world champion exporter ) .

at the same time , relatively weak consumer demand is a consistent feature of the german economy .

germany has been a driving force in european integration , including the creation of the european monetary union .

germany's eu partners remain its prime trade customers and suppliers .

in 2008 , 63% of german exports went to other eu member states and 64% of its imports came from other eu member states .

the united states is germany's largest trading partner outside of europe .

in 2008 , 7.2% of german exports went to the united states and 4.2% of its imports came from the united states .

in turn , germany is the united states' largest european trading partner and its fifth largest trading partner worldwide , accounting for 4.5% of u.s. total trade .

the two countries also share strong foreign direct investment ( fdi ) ties .

the united states in 2008 accounted for $110 billion , or over 25% , of germany's total stock of outward fdi and was the second most important provider of fdi in germany .

germany's stock of fdi in the united states stood at $212 billion in 2008 , making germany the fifth largest foreign investor in the united states .

these investments drive trade and create jobs .

in 2007 , 62% of u.s. imports from germany consisted of related party trade — trade between german parent companies and their own affiliates in america .

german companies doing business in the united states employ about 670,000 people , or one in every 200 people in the private sector .

u.s. companies operating in germany employ nearly 800,000 people , which accounts for nearly one out of every 35 jobs in the private sector .

mutually profitable , growing , and beneficial u.s. - german commercial ties historically have been facilitated by a strong german economy .

by most standards , west germany registered an impressive economic performance in the 1950s and 1960s , the first decades of its existence .

powered by export - led economic growth based on low wages and high - level engineering , the federal republic of germany grew at an average of 6.3% per year during this twenty - year period .

the economy grew at a less rapid , but still strong pace of 3.6% per year in the 1970s and 1980s .

but beginning in the mid - 1990s , the german economy has been on a much lower growth path , averaging around 1.5% gdp growth per year ( as compared to an oecd average growth rate of 2.7% ) .

unemployment has ratcheted upward since 1970 , from virtually full employment to a situation where in some years 10% of the population is out of work and another 4% can't find work but are in government programs .

these trends , have been exacerbated by a 5% decline in german gdp growth in 2009 , raise questions about the long - term vitality and strength of this european powerhouse .

a number of mostly domestic factors may account for germany's suboptimal economic performance .

these include the heavy and continuing costs of reunification with east germany in 1990 , escalating costs associated with generous social security and welfare programs , rigid labor market laws and perceived over - regulation , and an economy more geared towards exporting than consumption .

amidst the current global economic slowdown , questions have been raised concerning the impact that germany's export dependency has on the domestic economy , particularly for growth .

some of the aforementioned factors are at the same time valued by many germans as essential features of the country's so - called social - market economy .

since the founding of the federal republic and reunification in 1990 , german policymakers have consistently pursued parallel national goals of export - driven economic growth and social cohesion through a robust system of social welfare programs .

most germans appear to continue to take pride in germany's position as a leading exporter and to support government - funded programs aimed at reducing economic disparities within their society .

in turn , german political leaders have displayed a willingness to sacrifice a degree of economic growth for what they perceive as social cohesion .

these preferences are evident in the reluctance of most german governments to pursue the kinds of economic reforms advocated by many economists .

most recently , from 2005-2009 , a so - called grand c oalition government of the center - right christian democratic / christian social union ( cdu / csu ) and the left - of - center social democratic party ( spd ) proved reluctant to advance unpopular cut - backs in welfare programs and labor market protections .

some believe that chancellor angela merkel's ( cdu ) september 2009 reelection in coalition with the pro - business free democratic party ( fdp ) could increase the likelihood of market - friendly reforms being enacted , but any radical restructuring of germany's social market economy is considered unlikely .

failure to enact substantial reforms could mean that the problems posed by an aging population and germany's system of social benefits will place an even larger strain on the economy in the future .

as a result of its declining economic growth , aging population , and the growing costs of maintaining generous social security programs , germany , as many other industrialized countries , faces a resource crunch .

this resource crunch arguably has limited germany's flexibility to maneuver domestically and appears to have been a factor in the evolution of somewhat more assertive german international economic policies .

with dwindling economic and financial resources , germany arguably has become less capable of compromising on matters of potential economic advantage .

this has affected not only the trade and economic leadership role that germany has traditionally played in europe and the world economy , but also its position on issues that directly affect u.s. interests .

these include different approaches in dealing with the global economic downturn and economic sanctions .

in short , a prosperous german state remains critical to both the u.s. and european economies .

difficulties germany may have in regaining a stronger growth pattern are an important concern , affecting the u.s. - german partnership in addressing a range of bilateral , regional , and multilateral challenges .

this report elaborates on these themes in three parts: the first part examines germany's economic performance in historical perspective and assesses some of the domestic factors that may be contributing to germany's less than optimal growth pattern in recent years .

the second section discusses the reform challenges facing german political leaders .

the third section evaluates selected u.s. - german economic policy differences and strains that may be influenced by germany's economic situation .

in the first decades of its existence , west germany experienced impressive economic performance .

powered by export - led growth and close collaboration between business , government , and labor , the federal republic of germany was hailed as an "economic wonder" ( w irtschaft s wunder ) as it averaged 8.2% growth rates during the 1950s , 4.4% in the 1960s , and 2.8% in the 1970s .

in the 1980s , germany's economic performance began to slip further , falling to an annual average increase of 2.3% .

as shown in table 1 , with only a few years of exceptions , the growth rate has continued to decline since 1990 .

in the 1990s , germany recorded an average growth rate of only 1.6% and a meager 0.6% between 2001 and 2005 .

the economy did bounce back in the three years from 2006-2008 , with growth averaging 2.3% .

but the economy was again hard hit in late 2008 and early 2009 by the global economic downturn .

germany's economy contracted by 5% in 2009 , compared with a 3.7% drop in the euro - zone overall .

once europe's growth engine , germany since the mid - 1990s has had , along with italy , one of the lowest growth rates in europe .

the aggregate output of the german economy , for example , increased by 7% between 2000 and 2009 compared to a euro area increase of 12.6% .

slower german economic growth , in turn , has been accompanied by high unemployment ( see table 2 ) .

in the 1960s , both west and east germany had almost no unemployment .

in 1970 , about 150,000 people or 0.7% of the labor force were unemployed — compared to over 3 million today .

but by 2005 unemployment reached 11.7% nationwide and 18% in the states of the former east germany .

when the economy did bounce back in the three years from 2006-2008 , with growth averaging 2.3% , unemployment also fell from nearly 5 million to around 3.3 million , but the unemployment rate barely dipped below 8% .

the oecd also predicts that the number of unemployed will rise to 5.1 million and that the unemployment rate will increase sharply to 11.6% by the end of 2010 .

many economists argue that unemployment in the german economy is higher than the unemployment data indicate .

this "hidden" unemployment is allegedly due to a large number of workers employed in government schemes or subsidized in early - retirement programs .

in addition , the government funds a so - called "short - term working benefit" ( k ürzarbeit ) through which it subsidizes 60% - 67% of lost income for individuals whose working time has been reduced by their employer .

according to some estimates , the program has saved at least 400,000 jobs and 1.4 million employees are working shorter hours .

high unemployment translates into underutilization of the german labor force and foregone production .

the fact that the german labor force , on average , tends to work fewer hours than its counterparts in most industrialized countries , and enjoys more paid leave and holidays , could further impede more robust economic growth .

on the other hand , as noted above , many germans appear comfortable foregoing potential gains in economic growth in order to maintain relatively generous social benefits .

a number of factors help explain germany's declining growth record .

one factor has been the high costs of integrating the formerly communist east german economy into the federal republic .

a second factor is germany's generous social welfare provisions which may undercut incentives for work and entrepreneurship .

a third is an economy that may be excessively dependent on exports , and saddled with labor market rigidities and other barriers that make investment in the domestic economy less attractive than investing abroad .

these trends are discussed below .

as illustrated in the first section of this report , the economic challenges facing german policymakers include low economic growth , high unemployment , and a deterioration of public finances .

also as shown , these problems are linked to the continuing costs of reunification , rising social welfare costs , and the dependency on export - led growth .

moreover , troubling demographic trends — germany's population has been shrinking since the 1970s and its birthrate is one of europe's lowest — are further exacerbating the strain on the social market economy .

german policymakers , politicians , and scholars have proposed or considered a number of reforms aimed at reinvigorating and strengthening the german economy .

these include changes in social and labor policies that provide protections at the expense of a more efficient and dynamic economy , as well as reforms that would create an economy driven more by domestic demand than exports .

given the significant proportion of the german public that directly benefits from the status quo , political opposition to reforms has been and continues to be significant .

given weak economic growth and the rising costs of maintaining generous social security programs , germany faces budgetary constraints , as do many other industrialized countries .

with dwindling economic and financial resources , germany arguably has become less willing to compromise on matters of potential economic advantage .

in this regard , germany's domestic economic challenges could limit its policymaking flexibility .

this has affected not only the economic and trade leadership role that germany traditionally has played in europe , but also its position on issues that directly affect u.s. interests .

these include different approaches in dealing with the global economic downturn and economic sanctions .

germany in the past has been a key ally of the united states on international trade issues .

given its heavy export orientation and dependence on the international economy , germany traditionally has been a strong voice for trade liberalization , both within the eu and the world trading system , as well as the decisive swing vote between french and british views on trade policy .

every successful multilateral trade round in the past has depended on germany to use its bilateral economic clout to influence the policies of more inward - looking countries in europe .

german support for a liberal trade policy and generalized opposition to blatantly protectionist proposals , with few exceptions , has been provided by the major political parties and leading stakeholders in the private sector .

yet , in recent years , german leadership of the free trade bloc within europe has weakened .

it was first compromised in the 1990s' uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations when then - chancellor helmut kohl backed restrictive agricultural trade proposals the french government was advocating in an effort to advance european integration .

the trend solidified in 2002 when then - chancellor gerhard schröder agreed with france on setting parameters for agricultural liberalization within the eu .

the same budget agreement on reform of the common agricultural system ( cap ) continues to serve as a constraint to achieving a breakthrough in the on - going doha round of trade negotiations under the world trade organization .

germany is also providing less unconditional support for european integration than it used to , particularly when the european integration under question entails international trade pressures from increased labor mobility and low - wage service providers .

this was first evident in the schröder government's decision to demand transition periods of up to seven years before granting full labor mobility to the citizens of new central and eastern european eu member states .

another instance of german opposition to further market liberalization in europe involved rejection of the european services directive .

this directive would have opened highly protected low - wage services ( such as cleaning and transport ) and high - wage services ( such as public infrastructure and health ) to competition from the rest of the eu — a proposal that was opposed by unions and the left - wing of the spd .

the german government announced in may 2009 that it was keeping labor restrictions in place on workers from the eight central and european countries that joined the eu in 2004 .

the controls had been expected to be rescinded this year , but germany invoked a clause allowing two more years in case of "serious labor market disturbance , or threat of them. .

the idea that free movement of east european labor would threaten "serious disruption" is questionable given that germany still has shortages of skilled labor in some areas .

chancellor merkel and the previous grand coalition government faced criticism from within europe and elsewhere for its role lobbying general motors ( gm ) to sell a majority stake in its opel unit to magna international , a canadian - austrian group , and sberbank , its russian partner .

in may 2009 , the merkel government approved eur 4.5 billion ( about $6.7 billion ) in loan guarantees to enable the takeover in return for which berlin reportedly sought a pledge that magna would not close factories in germany where opel employed some 25,000 workers , half of its 50,000 employees in europe .

the deal led to speculation that plants in belgium , spain , and the uk would be closed in order to keep the german plants open .

this prompted critics , including the belgian government , to cast germany's action as "protectionist" and raised questions as to whether the sale would conform to the european union's rules on permissible state aid to companies .

on november 3 , 2009 , gm angered german officials by deciding to maintain its european business and pull out of the berlin - backed proposal to sell opel .

chancellor merkel and others sharply criticized the decision , which they fear could lead to job losses in germany .

gm will reportedly seek financial support from european governments to realize its plans to restructure opel .

however , the german government is expected to show little support for any deal that involves significant job losses in germany .

the united states and germany have differences over the causes and appropriate policy responses to the global economic downturn .

obama administration officials have criticized germany for what some consider a relatively cautious response to the crisis .

they have also taken aim at a perceived german reluctance to support common european approaches to fixing the banking sector , to join in coordinated cooperative spending programs , and to deal with the central european financial crisis .

german political leaders have vigorously defended their policy response to the crisis , arguing that they have taken substantial action to stimulate the german economy .

they have also urged the united states and others to commit to an "exit strategy" from fiscal stimulus measures which they feel could lead to potentially debilitating deficits and dangerous inflation .

moreover , they have argued that such domestic spending measures will do little to address the root causes of the crisis , which they tend to view as inadequate regulation of global financial markets .

indeed , many in germany view profligate consumption and unregulated markets in the united states and uk as having been the cause of the global crisis .

these critics argue that the downturn could have been avoided had others behaved as prudently as germans by cutting wage costs and public expenditures .

many u.s. policymakers and politicians counter that germany shares responsibility for the downturn because it has run - up large current account surpluses over the last six years .

these surpluses , combined with those run by china and japan , funneled excess savings to the rest of the world .

under this view , if the united states had not decided to run an accommodating monetary policy in the 2001 to 2002 period , which contributed to the expansion of easy credit and the financial crisis , aggregate global demand would have fallen short of supply and unemployment would have increased worldwide .

the imbalances in the global economy , according to this view , required that the united states serve as the world's "consumer of last resort" to keep the world economy growing .

many u.s. observers have argued that a reduction of germany's large current account surplus could be a crucial component in the global rebalancing that will be necessary to bring the world economy back on a more sustainable growth path .

as part of this process , domestic demand in germany must increase faster than it has in the past .

german leaders tend to reject this line of argument , citing concern that increased spending would impose long - term debt on a shrinking population and arguing that the basic features of their export - oriented and social market economy model are solid .

even though chancellor merkel , at the september 2009 g - 20 meeting in pittsburgh , signed the leaders' statement pledging to adopt the measures needed to "lay the foundation for strong , sustained , and balanced growth in the 21 st century," most german leaders appear to reject the idea that global economic recovery requires fundamental changes in the german way of doing business .

although it was widely criticized for an initially cautious domestic response to the global economic crisis , germany has implemented a range of policies to stimulate economic growth and to support the german private sector .

in december 2008 and january 2009 , the parliament passed domestic stimulus measures totaling eur 71 billion ( about $105 billion ) for 2009 and 2010 .

german officials also emphasize the positive effects on domestic demand of so - called "automatic stabilizers," public expenditures for guaranteed social welfare benefits such as unemployment programs .

in total , they estimate that germany's fiscal stimulus measures amount to about 1.5% of german gdp .

unlike the u.s. focus on increasing consumption , germany's stimulus packages have been geared towards creating incentives for private investment and infrastructure projects , and for stabilizing exports .

germany's high household savings rate ( 11.4% of disposable income in 2008 compared to 1.8% in the united states ) has provided the justification for not providing tax breaks to stimulate consumption .

however , the new merkel government has pledged a series of tax breaks for companies in the hope that this will decrease unemployment , among other things .

berlin has also focused on tightening financial regulation .

while most applaud germany for adopting significant stimulus measures , there is still a view among some u.s. policymakers that washington is shouldering the burden of getting the world economy moving again .

related to this concern is the perception that heavily export dependent germany could use demand created by the united states and uk to surge german exports into these counties as demand rises .

germany would thus benefit from u.s. domestic stimulus as the united states adds to its domestic debt .

merkel has committed her new government to restoring growth to the german economy .

the governing coalition has agreed to pass significant tax cuts for german businesses and the middle class in the coming four years .

however , any additional and broader fiscal spending measures are considered highly unlikely because of a strong desire to prevent future inflation .

the new government will also be hindered in any effort to support global rebalancing by increasing german domestic demand by new budget rules approved by the parliament this year .

the new rules , written into germany's constitution , the basic law , set a legally binding deficit ceiling to take effect in 2016 .

under the constitutional amendment , the federal deficit will not be allowed to exceed 0.35% of gdp and individual states will be constitutionally barred from running deficits after 2020 .

even if the rule proves impractical and needs to be changed in the future , in the interim , according to one analyst , "germany will again try to be more austere than the rest of the world. .

the united states and germany have in the past had policy differences over the use of economic sanctions as a foreign policy tool .

germany has traditionally been reluctant to use economic sanctions , despite u.s. urgings .

those in germany who oppose economic sanctions tend to question whether sanctions are the most effective means to achieve foreign policy aims .

they argue , for example , that sanctions have at times proved counterproductive by serving to unite citizens in the targeted country against those implementing them .

they add that without strong multilateral backing , sanctions are likely to fail ; if only a few countries continue to trade with the targeted state , the implementing countries lose their leverage , the argument goes .

u.s. and other critics contend that germany's position on sanctions is greatly influenced by commercial interests and the economy's strong dependence on industrial exports .

german business groups often oppose calls for economic sanctions and their views are thought to carry considerable political weight , particularly with the right - of - center cdu and fdp parties .

for example , industrial lobbies have reportedly played an important role in demanding that german foreign policy elevate commercial relations as a priority factor in germany's policies towards russia and china , two of its fastest growing markets .

observers highlight german policy toward iran as the most pertinent example of this influence .

as a member of the so - called eu - 3 ( france , germany and the united kingdom ) , germany has been at the forefront of eu and u.n. efforts to prevent iran from developing nuclear weapons .

however , of the eu - 3 , germany has reportedly been the most reluctant to endorse more stringent sanctions against tehran .

berlin continues to face pressure from the united states and others to limit civilian commercial ties with iran .

along with italy and china , germany remains one of iran's most important trading partners .

although german exports to iran dropped 25% between 2005 and 2007 , they reportedly grew 10% between 2007 and 2008 .

germany has in the past argued that sanctions without russian and chinese support would both be ineffective and hurt the german economy .

on the other hand , germany's two largest banks , deutsche bank and commerzbank ag , have withdrawn from the iranian market and officials in berlin report that new export credit guarantees to companies doing business in iran have dropped by more than half since 2005 .

while some interpret weakening german - iranian economic ties as a sign that berlin is intent on increasing economic pressure on tehran , others argue that german - iranian trade remains robust and that politicians in berlin are unlikely to seek further cuts in commercial ties .

currently , german officials reportedly are more inclined to impose economic sanctions on iran than they have been in the past , but simultaneously question their effectiveness .

public support for stronger actions if sanctions fail is also weak in germany .

according to one poll , only one in five germans back the option of using military force to stop iran's nuclear programs if diplomacy fails , compared to one in two americans .

