on december 15 , 2009 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) published its most important action to date related to climate change .

it found that the combined greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from new motor vehicles in the united states contribute to an "endangerment" from climate change .

more precisely , epa found that such emissions , in the words of clean air act ( caa ) section 202 ( a ) , "cause or contribute to air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. .

under section 202 ( a ) , this final determination requires that epa promulgate "standards" to control such emissions from new motor vehicles .

it is not , however , the likelihood of standards for new motor vehicle ghg emissions that has sparked controversy .

indeed , epa's proposed standards for emissions of carbon dioxide ( co 2 , the principal ghg ) from new light - duty vehicles were set so as to align with the department of transportation's simultaneously proposed fuel economy standards , and are reported to be achievable with presently available technology .

rather , objection has been raised to the section 202 endangerment finding for ghgs and the upcoming motor vehicle ghg emission standards because of the argument they will trigger a cascade of unacceptable regulatory consequences under other caa provisions .

these regulatory consequences , objectors say , would impose unattainable air quality goals on epa and the states , and / or economically and administratively unreasonable burdens on both epa and regulated entities .

this report examines the caa provisions that have figured in this debate to assess whether this alleged "cascade" of legal consequences would likely occur as the result of epa's endangerment finding under 202 ( a ) and resulting emission standards .

looked at another way , the report assesses the legal leeway epa has should it wish to limit its expansion of ghg regulation beyond new motor vehicles under section 202 ( a ) .

the reader also may wish to consult epa's own analysis of this issue in an advance notice of proposed rulemaking ( anpr ) issued in 2008 , and the analyses submitted to epa in response to the anpr .

the policy pros and cons of using caa provisions other than 202 ( a ) to address ghgs are treated in crs report r40585 , climate change: potential regulation of stationary greenhouse gas sources under the clean air act , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

a caveat: the issue analyzed here is important primarily if congress does not enact climate change legislation that puts regulation of emissions based on their climate change impacts beyond the reach of some of the caa provisions discussed here .

in particular , the house - passed climate change bill , h.r .

2454 , states that sections 108 ( national ambient air quality standards ) and 115 ( international air pollution ) may not be used to address air pollutants based on their climate change impacts .

the bill also would prohibit the use of section 165 ( requiring preconstruction "new source review" in prevention of significant deterioration areas ) to regulate ghg emissions , and specifies that no stationary source of ghgs could be required to obtain a permit under title v of the caa solely because of its ghg emissions .

part two of this report offers some history as to how epa came to issue its endangerment determination for new motor vehicle ghgs on december 15 , 2009 .

part three assesses epa's leeway , following its endangerment determination , in deciding whether to regulate ghg emissions from other sources — where those sources are covered by caa provisions that , like section 202 ( a ) , have an "endangerment" finding as the trigger .

part four gauges the effect of the same endangerment determination , or more accurately the standards that must follow , under caa provisions that lack an endangerment determination trigger .

part five offers a summary and comment .

the events leading up to epa's endangerment finding for new motor vehicle ghgs in 2009 began a decade earlier .

in 1999 , 19 organizations and 13 states petitioned epa to regulate the four ghgs emitted by new motor vehicles ( carbon dioxide , methane , nitrous oxide , and hydrofluorocarbons ) .

petitioners invoked caa section 202 ( a ) : the [epa] administrator shall by regulation prescribe … standards applicable to the emission of any air pollutant from any class or classes of new motor vehicles … which in his judgment cause , or contribute to , air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare .

petitioners argued that ghgs are "air pollutants" under the term's definition in caa section 302 ( g ) , and that ghgs "endanger public health and welfare" because of their impact on global climate .

thus , petitioners concluded , epa must regulate such emissions through standards under section 202 ( a ) .

epa rejected the petition in 2003 , concluding that ghgs are not "air pollutants" under the caa so the agency lacked authority to regulate ghg emissions from new motor vehicles based on their climate change effects .

moreover , said epa , even if it did have the authority , it would be imprudent for the agency to exercise it at that time because of political opposition in congress and various bush administration policies opposing mandatory controls on ghgs .

epa's rejection of the petition was appealed to the federal appeals court in washington , dc , which upheld the agency's decision 2-1 .

in 2007 , the supreme court in massachusetts v. epa reversed the appeals court 5-4 , finding for massachusetts .

the court held that for caa purposes , ghgs are "air pollutants" and hence that epa has the power under the act to regulate ghg emissions from new motor vehicles .

moreover , said the court , the phrase "in his judgment" in section 202 ( a ) does not permit epa to avoid regulation of air pollutants such as ghgs based on policy considerations .

that is , an epa decision not to grant a section 202 petition must relate not to administration policy , but to whether an air pollutant causes , or contributes to , air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare .

that being so , the epa can avoid regulating ghgs under 202 ( a ) only if it finds that ghgs "do not contribute to climate change or if it provides some reasonable explanation as to why it cannot or will not exercise its discretion to determine whether they do. .

the supreme court decision did not order epa to make a positive endangerment finding , only to resolve the petition asking it to regulate vehicle ghgs on a correct understanding of the caa .

in response to massachusetts v. epa , the epa under the bush administration moved toward an endangerment determination in 2007 but ultimately backed off .

on april 24 , 2009 , under the newly arrived obama administration , epa issued a proposed positive endangerment determination for ghgs from new motor vehicles .

in response , it received 380,000 comments .

on september 28 , 2009 , epa also proposed the aforementioned emission standards for ghgs from new light - duty motor vehicles — the standards required by caa section 202 ( a ) and referred to in this report's title .

 ( september 2009 was a busy month for epa on the climate change front .

besides proposing vehicle emission standards , the agency went final with its ghg monitoring rule for large stationary sources , and proposed a "tailoring rule" discussed in part four of this report. ) .

most recently , epa published its final endangerment determination for ghgs from new motor vehicles on december 15 , 2009 .

actually , epa's endangerment determination consists of two findings , one addressing each component of the section 202 ( a ) endangerment provision .

first , epa found that current atmospheric levels of the six major ghgs — from all emission sources — constitute in combination "air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health and welfare. .

this is a generic determination , not tied to any particular source category .

second , epa found that emissions of ghgs by new motor vehicles ( comprising four of the aforementioned six ghgs ) will in combination "cause or contribute to" those atmospheric levels .

in contrast to the generic determination , this finding is plainly linked to one source category .

this bifurcation of the 202 ( a ) endangerment language is important in part three of this report .

in part three , a reference to a caa endangerment provision being satisfied or simply to a "positive endangerment finding" means that both the "may reasonably be anticipated to endanger" component finding and the "contributes to" component finding are satisfied .

to what extent will the endangerment finding under section 202 ( a ) narrow epa's discretion to deal , or not deal , with ghgs under other caa provisions with endangerment preconditions ? .

the caa contains about a dozen such "endangerment" preconditions .

each one , like section 202 ( a ) , establishes a precondition for epa action against an air pollutant: epa first must find that emissions of that air pollutant ( or group of pollutants ) from a particular source category "cause or contribute to air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. .

some endangerment provisions , not section 202 ( a ) , add the qualifier "significantly" after "contribute," and there are slight variations in singular / plural and punctuation ; otherwise the quoted language repeats throughout the statute .

depending on the caa section , if epa finds an endangerment , it is required or at least authorized , usually without other preconditions , to take action addressing the endangerment by the source category .

at the outset , an administrative law question arises .

since this report's topic is whether epa might be forced to regulate ghg emissions under caa provisions outside 202 ( a ) , one must ask: does epa have to respond at all to petitions it receives for endangerment findings and standard setting under those provisions ? .

 ( at least 10 such petitions seeking epa control of ghg emissions from this or that source category have been filed with the agency since massachusetts v. epa . ) .

can the agency simply ignore requests to regulate ghg emissions , or inform a petitioner that epa is studying the matter without ever reaching a decision ? .

none of the caa endangerment provisions expressly authorizes petitions to the agency , in contrast with other provisions in the caa and elsewhere that do establish petition mechanisms with agency deadlines for response .

the answer is that while courts afford federal agencies wide discretion as to whether to initiate a rulemaking , the discretion is not without limit .

the administrative procedure act is the touchstone: under section 553 ( e ) , each agency must give interested persons "the right to petition for the issuance … of a rule," which petition is subject to section 555 ( b ) 's command that an agency "within a reasonable time … proceed to conclude a matter presented to it. .

if an agency fails to heed these directives , section 706 ( 1 ) empowers courts to "compel agency action unlawfully withheld or unreasonably delayed. .

the supreme court recently explained that an apa section 706 ( 1 ) claim can proceed only when an agency failed to take a discrete agency action that it is required to take — but petitions seeking epa regulation of ghg emissions would presumably argue that this is exactly what they are alleging .

moreover , these apa provisions have been applied not only where an agency responds to a rulemaking petition by denying it , but to instances such as those hypothesized here , where the agency refuses to respond at all .

in sum , a reviewing court likely would require epa to respond — up or down — to a well - supported petition for ghg regulation within a generous , but finite , period of time .

given that epa responds to the petition ( or acts without petition ) , one issue that arises under every non - 202 ( a ) endangerment provision is the effect of the generic component of the agency's 202 ( a ) finding .

recall that the generic component declared that ghgs already in the atmosphere from all sources may , in combination , reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare .

because non - 202 ( a ) endangerment provisions use identical language , arguably at least the generic component of those provisions also must be deemed satisfied .

this is an important preliminary step in understanding the legal relevance of epa's 202 ( a ) endangerment finding to other endangerment - triggered sections of the caa — but it is only a preliminary step .

beyond this , as the following discussion shows , there are differences in the language surrounding the endangerment provisions , and lower levels of ghg emissions from most non - section - 202 source categories .

these differences , it would appear , generally give epa leeway in deciding whether to regulate ghgs from sources other than new motor vehicles , notwithstanding the 202 ( a ) finding .

following are the caa endangerment provisions being debated as possibly authorizing , or even mandating , epa regulation of ghg emissions now that epa has issued its 202 ( a ) endangerment determination .

epa's endangerment finding for new motor vehicle ghg emissions , or the emission standards that must follow , appears to force certain regulatory actions by epa , leave the agency free to resist certain other regulatory actions if it chooses , and leave two additional regulatory authorities in a gray area in between .

into the first category — forced regulatory action — appears to fall new source review of major emitting facilities and major modifications of existing facilities in psd areas .

final motor vehicle ghg standards , expected by march , 2010 , will necessarily mean that ghgs from new stationary sources that emit more than some threshold amount of any pollutant ( 100 or 250 tons / year under the caa ; 25,000 tons / year if the proposed tailoring rule is finalized ) , and ghgs from major modifications of existing facilities , will be subject to bact in such areas .

bact , however , is loosely defined , particularly if there is no nsps for the pollutant to set a floor on bact .

title v permitting requirements likely will be triggered as well .

further , stationary source categories that emit large quantities of ghgs may have to be regulated by nspss , though the caa gives epa wide latitude in shaping such regulations .

the second category — epa retains discretionary latitude — appears to include almost all the endangerment - triggered action authorities under the caa .

these can be distinguished in varying degrees from section 202 ( a ) on the grounds that , unlike section 202 ( a ) , some of them use the discretionary "may," some demand that the source category contribute "significantly" to the endangerment , and some add additional preconditions .

most of these non - 202 ( a ) caa authorities involve source categories whose ghg emission levels are lower than from new motor vehicles , meaning that a "contribute to" finding under section 202 ( a ) may not dictate the same finding under that other authority .

stationary source categories that do not emit large amounts of ghgs will not have to be covered by nspss if epa defines "significantly" at a high tons / year level .

the third category — the gray area between epa being forced to act and not being forced to do so — appears to comprise promulgation of naaqss for ghgs under section 108 and international pollution abatement under section 115 .

these sections can be read to force epa action , but there would appear to be wiggle room for agency interpretation given the awkward consequences and unattainable pollution - control goals such a reading could entail .

the administrative necessity and absurd results arguments presented so vigorously by epa in connection with psd new source review and title v permitting may be available to the agency here as well .

ultimately whether epa acts against ghg emissions under caa provisions in the second and third categories is likely to be a function of the agency's ( and administration's ) political desires more than anything else .

the epa under the obama administration has repeatedly stated that it is willing to take on ghg emissions through caa regulation if congress does not soon enact comprehensive climate change legislation reducing such emissions .

there are several possible motivations for the agency's saying this: caa regulation by the agency in the near future ( 1 ) ensures that time is not lost in abating the causes of climate change while congress debates ; ( 2 ) buttresses our credibility in international climate change negotiations ( such as copenhagen ) by showing that the united states is "serious" about tackling climate change ; and ( 3 ) puts pressure on congress to enact climate change legislation .

