several comprehensive bills have been introduced on the topic of health reform in the 111 th congress , such as h.r .

3962 ( the affordable health care for america act ) , s. 1679 ( affordable health choices act ) , and s. 1796 ( america's healthy future act of 2009 ) .

on november 3 , 2009 , an additional health reform proposal was made public: amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r .

3962 offered by mr. boehner of ohio ( "the amendment" ) .

if adopted , the amendment would replace the substantive text of h.r .

3962 with the text of the common sense health care reform and affordability act .

according to the congressional budget office and the joint committee on taxation , enacting the amendment would result in a net reduction in federal deficits of $68 billion over the 2010-2019 period .

this report summarizes the contents of the proposed amendment .

the amendment consists of seven divisions .

division a provisions are intended to improve affordability of health insurance through the development of state reinsurance programs and high - risk pools , private insurance reforms , state innovation programs , and administrative simplification .

division b provisions are intended to improve access to health insurance for small businesses .

these include the establishment of association health plans .

division b would also establish requirements to improve interstate purchasing of health insurance coverage and expand tax preferences for health savings accounts and high - deductible health plans .

division c would establish national medical malpractice laws that would effectively preempt existing state medical malpractice laws , with certain exceptions .

division d is focused on the doctor - patient relationship and comparative effectiveness research .

it would provide that the act would not affect the doctor - patient relationship or the practice of medicine , and would repeal a federal council on comparative effectiveness .

division e focuses on employee wellness programs and would specify how a group health plan or a health insurer offering group health coverage could vary premiums and cost sharing based on participation in a standards - based wellness program .

division f focuses on fraud , waste , abuse , and abortion .

division g focuses on licensure of biosimilar products and would provide a pathway for such licensure .

this report discusses each of the broad topics addressed in the amendment .

each discussion consists of an overview of the issue and current law followed by a summary of provisions of the amendment .

a biosimilar , often called a "follow - on" biologic , is similar to a brand - name biologic while a generic drug is the same as a brand - name chemical drug .

chemical drugs are small molecules for which the equivalence of chemical structure between the brand - name drug and a generic version is relatively easy to determine .

in contrast , comparing the structure of a biosimilar and the brand - name biologic is far more scientifically challenging .

a biologic is a preparation , such as a drug or a vaccine , that is made from living organisms .

most biologics are complex proteins that require special handling ( such as refrigeration ) and are usually administered to patients via injection or infused directly into the bloodstream .

in many cases , current technology will not allow complete characterization of biological products .

additional clinical trials may be necessary before the fda would approve a biosimilar .

congress is interested in creating an expedited pathway for the approval of biosimilars for the same reasons it was interested in allowing access to generic chemical drugs in 1984: cost savings .

the pathway for biosimilars would be analogous to the fda's authority for approving generic chemical drugs under the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-417 ) .

often referred to as the hatch - waxman act , this law allows the generic company to establish that its drug product is chemically the same as the already approved innovator drug , and thereby relies on the fda's previous finding of safety and effectiveness for the approved drug .

the generic drug industry achieves cost savings by avoiding the expense of clinical trials , as well as the initial drug research and development costs that were incurred by the brand - name manufacturer .

the cost of brand - name biologics is often prohibitively high .

for example , the rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis treatment enbrel reportedly costs $16,000 per year .

it is thought that a pathway enabling the fda approval of biosimilars will allow for market competition and reduction in prices , though perhaps not to the same extent as occurred with generic chemical drugs under hatch - waxman act .

the amendment contains the exact same language as the biosimilars provision in h.r .

3962 .

the amendment would open a pathway for the approval of biosimilars .

a biosimilar is defined as a biological product that is highly similar to the reference ( brand - name ) product such that there is no clinically meaningful difference between the biological product and the reference product .

a biological product is defined as a protein ( except any chemically synthesized polypeptide ) .

the amendment would allow the secretary to determine that elements ( such as clinical studies ) in the application for the licensure of a biological product as biosimilar or interchangeable may be unnecessary .

the secretary would determine that the reference product and a biological product are interchangeable according to specified criteria .

interchangeable means that the biological product may be substituted for the reference product without the intervention of the health care provider who prescribed the reference product .

special requirements would apply to certain biosimilars that might present a greater risk ( eg , toxins or controlled substances ) .

the amendment would allow for a period of exclusive marketing for the biological product that is the first to be established as interchangeable with the reference product .

the provision also would provide a 12-year data exclusivity period ( from the date on which the reference product was first approved ) for the reference product and would provide an additional six months of exclusivity if pediatric studies show health benefits in that population .

the secretary may publish proposed guidance as specified for public comment prior to publication of final guidance on the licensure of a biological product .

if guidance is to be developed , a process must be established to allow for public input regarding priorities for issuing guidance .

the issuance or non - issuance of guidance would not preclude the review of , or action on , an application .

the provision also would require the secretary to ensure that the labeling and packaging of each biological product bears a unique name that distinguishes it from the reference product and any other biological products that are evaluated against the reference product .

the amendment would set forth a process governing patent infringement claims against an applicant or prospective applicant for a biological product license .

it also would establish new processes for identifying patents that might be disputed between the reference product company and the company submitting a biosimilar application .

the amendment would require reference product and biosimilar product sponsors to file with the assistant attorney general and federal trade commission copies of the text of any agreement they reach regarding the manufacture , marketing , or sale of either product .

agreements that solely concern purchase orders for raw materials , equipment and facility contracts , employment or consulting contracts , or packaging and labeling contracts are excluded .

failure to comply with this filing requirement may result in civil fines and other relief as the courts deem appropriate .

with the concurrence of the assistant attorney general , the federal trade commission may engage in rulemaking regarding the filing requirement .

the amendment would allow for the collection of user fees for the review of applications for approval of biosimilars .

the amendment would also stipulate that the filing of a statement by a biosimilar applicant regarding patents identified by the reference product sponsor and other interested parties may be considered an act of patent infringement .

it would require reference product sponsors , and allow other interested parties , to identify patents that relate to the proposed biosimilar product .

the biosimilar applicant would then be afforded the opportunity to state its position regarding those patents .

if the biosimilar applicant responds by asserting that one or more of these patents are invalid , unenforceable , or would not be infringed by the proposed biosimilar product , the biosimilar applicant would be deemed to have committed an act of patent infringement that would be immediately actionable in the courts .

