in an increasingly competitive economy , and with retirement underway for the baby boomer generation , congress has indicated a strong interest in ensuring that today's young people have the educational attainment and employment experience necessary to become highly skilled workers , contributing taxpayers , and successful participants in civic life .

challenges in the economy and among vulnerable youth populations , however , have heightened concern among policymakers that many young people may not be prepared to fill these roles .

the employment levels for youth under age 25 have generally declined since 2000 , though attachment to the workforce has improved for this population in the wake of the recession that extended from december 2007 through june 2009 .

certain young people in particular — including those from low - income families , high school dropouts , foster youth , and other at - risk populations — face b arriers to completing school and entering the workforce .

since the 1960s , federal job training programs and policies have sought to connect these youth to education and employment pathways .

contemporary federal employment programs with this same purpose include the youth activities program ; job corps ; youthbuild ; and the reentry employment opportunities ( reo ) program , which includes a youth component .

these programs provide a range of services and supports to youth .

some of the programs concentrate on specific job trades and / or serve targeted at - risk populations .

the programs were previously authorized under the workforce investment act ( wia ) of 1998 ( p.l .

105-220 ) .

on july 22 , 2014 , president obama signed into law the workforce innovation and opportunity act ( wioa , p.l .

113-128 ) .

wioa superseded wia and made significant amendments to the youth programs .

changes made by wioa generally went into effect on july 1 , 2015 .

this report provides an overview of federal employment programs for vulnerable young people .

it begins with a discussion of the current challenges in preparing all youth today for the workforce .

the report then provides a chronology of job training and employment programs for at - risk youth that began in the 1930s and were expanded or modified from the 1960s through the 1990s .

it goes on to discuss the four youth programs authorized under wioa , and draws comparisons between these programs .

following this section is a detailed discussion of each of the programs .

as they leave high school , either through graduation or by dropping out , young people can pursue various options .

youth with a high school diploma may attend a two - or four - year college , enlist in the armed services , or secure part - time or full - time employment ( sometimes paired with attending school ) .

youth without a high school diploma can do some of these same things , but their opportunities are more limited .

they cannot enroll in a four - year college or , in most cases , enlist in the military .

these youth will likely have difficulty supporting themselves if they do work .

in fact , individuals who drop out are less likely to secure employment and have lower earning power .

as the level of education rises , the unemployment rate decreases and median weekly earnings increase for those who work .

in 2015 , among workers with less than a high school degree , the unemployment rate was 8.0% and earnings averaged $493 per week .

this is compared to an unemployment rate of 5.4% and $678 in weekly earnings for workers with a high school degree .

workers with a bachelor's degree had an unemployment rate of 2.8% and median weekly earnings of $1,137 .

with the shift to a knowledge - based economy , many new jobs will require some college education or better .

according to dol's bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) , the fastest growing occupations between 2014 and 2024 will require some postsecondary education .

the costs of dropping out extend beyond the individual's foregone job opportunities and lower wages .

according to the research literature , costs can be incurred by society overall .

these costs include possible lost payroll tax revenue and increased transfers for welfare payments , imprisonment , and programs to re - enroll dropouts in school .

federal youth employment and job training programs have long targeted services to young people who leave school before graduating or are in school and may be vulnerable to dropping out .

the purpose of these programs , as they currently exist , is to provide job training , employment , educational services , and social services that can help youth become economically self - sufficient and achieve their career and academic goals .

these contemporary programs also emphasize leadership development and community service .

note that while youth employment and job training programs are also enhanced with state workforce and other dollars , the extent to which this support is provided is unclear .

for more than 90 years , the federal government has played a role in helping young people secure employment and achieve academic success .

generally , these young people have been defined as being vulnerable in some way — either because they are economically disadvantaged and / or have a barrier to securing employment or completing their education .

during the great depression , the focus was on employing idle young men in public works and other projects .

the employment programs from this era included an educational component to encourage youth to obtain their high school diplomas .

beginning in the 1960s , the federal government started funding programs for low - income youth , such as job corps , that address their multiple needs , including job training , educational services , housing , and supportive services .

during the 1970s and 1980s , job corps was expanded and the federal government funded additional programs for both in - school and out - of - school youth .

funding was also appropriated to test the efficacy of some of these programs .

the workforce investment act of 1998 extended earlier programs and created new ones , with the intention of providing more seamless job training and education services for youth year - round .

the workforce innovation and opportunity act maintained these programs and changed some of their requirements .

generally , these programs are targeted to teenagers and young adults , usually to age 24 , who are at risk of dropping out or have already done so .

wioa authorizes , and congress has funded , three job training and employment services for youth: youth workforce investment activities program ( hereinafter , youth activities program ) , a formula grant program for state and local workforce development boards ( wdbs ) that includes employment and other services that are provided year - round ; job corps , a program that provides job training and related services primarily at residential centers maintained by contractor organizations ; and youthbuild , a competitive grant program that emphasizes job training and education in the construction trades .

as mentioned , job corps was enacted as part of the economic opportunity act of 1964 ( p.l .

88-452 ) , and was later incorporated into ceta , jtpa , and wia .

youthbuild was originally authorized under the cranston - gonzalez national affordable housing act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-550 ) .

the program was administered by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) until it was transferred to dol in 2007 under the youthbuild transfer act ( p.l .

109-281 ) and incorporated into wia .

under wia's pilot and demonstration authority , dol established the reintegration of ex - offenders ( rexo ) program , a program for juvenile and adult offenders that provides job training and other services .

wioa does not explicitly authorize the program , now known as the reentry employment opportunities ( reo ) program ; however , congress appropriated funding in fy2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) under the authority of section 169 of wioa and the second chance act .

section 169 authorizes evaluations and research .

dol's employment and training administration ( eta ) administers the four programs .

all of the programs offer employment , job training , and educational services .

for example , local workforce development areas must provide specific elements , including mentoring and follow - up , to youth who receive services under the youth activities program .

youthbuild program participants engage in employment and other activities primarily related to housing and other types of construction work .

job corps is the only one of the programs that provides residential services ; youth can live onsite and receive health care services , child care , and other supports .

further , the programs generally serve vulnerable youth .

participants in youthbuild and job corps must be low - income and have specified barriers to employment .

the same is true in the youth activities program , except those who are out - of - school do not have to be low - income .

the youth component of the reentry employment opportunities program serves youth who have become involved in the juvenile justice or criminal justice system or youth at risk of becoming involved .

the programs are funded somewhat differently .

dol allocates funding for the youth activities program to state wdbs based on a formula , while job corps enters into contracts with nonprofit and for - profit organizations and into an interagency agreement with the u.s. department of agriculture's forest service .

the other programs competitively award grants to nonprofit and other organizations and local communities .

table 1 summarizes the programs' major features .

wioa provides funding authorization from fy2015 through fy2019 for youth employment and job training programs .

funds appropriated for a program or activity carried out under title i of the act are available for obligation on the basis of a program year .

the program year begins on july 1 in the fiscal year for which the appropriation is made and ends june 30 of the following year .

funds for the youth activities program may first become available for a new program year in the preceding april .

in addition , congress has tended to specify that funds appropriated for youthbuild and the youth component of the reentry employment opportunities program are available for obligation beginning in the april preceding a given program year .

congress has generally required that obligated funds for job corps are made available for one program year , although funding for certain purposes can be obligated through later dates .

funds obligated for any program year for the youth activities may be expended by each state receiving such funds during that program year and the two succeeding program years .

local areas may expend funds received from the state during the program year and the succeeding program year .

grants to provide education and employment activities for youth offenders have been funded by dol since fy1999 .

under wia , these grants were made part of the reintegration of ex - offenders program .

funding for the program was authorized under both wia and section 112 ( responsible reintegration of offenders ) of the second chance act ( p.l .

110-199 ) , enacted on april 9 , 2008 .

the second chance act authorizes dol to make grants to nonprofit organizations for the purpose of providing mentoring , job training and job placement services , and other comprehensive transitional services to assist eligible offenders ages 18 and older in obtaining and retaining employment .

following the enactment of wioa , congress has appropriated funding for the program , now known as the reentry employment opportunities program , under the authority of section 169 of wioa and the second chance act .

section 169 authorizes evaluations and research .

the youth component of the reo program ( and its predecessor programs ) has been comprised of related initiatives that seek to assist youth offenders and youth at risk of dropping out ( or who have dropped out ) with pre - release , mentoring , housing , case management , and employment services ; to reduce violence within persistently dangerous schools through a combination of mentoring , educational , employment , case management , and violence prevention strategies ; and to provide alternative education and related services for youth at risk of involvement with the justice system .

currently , the program supports education and reentry initiatives .

the earliest dol initiatives for youth offenders , from fy1999 through fy2004 , operated under what is known as the youth offender demonstration project ( yodp ) .

the pilot funded 52 grantees to assist youth at risk of court or gang involvement , youth offenders , and gang members ages 14 to 24 in finding long - term employment .

the more contemporary grant programs for youth offenders have funded multiple projects in recent years that have a focus similar to the earlier projects under yodp .

these projects have included ( 1 ) education - related grants ; ( 2 ) apprenticeship and related grants under grants collectively called categorical grants ( youth offender registered apprenticeship , alternative education , and project expansion grants ) ; ( 3 ) grants that focus on reentry , including beneficiary - choice demonstration , high growth youth offender initiative , planning , state / local implementation , and replication grants ; and ( 4 ) grants that focus on community service , including civic justice grants and serving young adult ex - offenders through training and service learning .

grantees have included local and state governments , nonprofit organizations , including faith - based organizations ; school districts ; and community colleges .

fy2016 appropriations support an education - related grant , the pathways to justice careers program .

funds have been provided to five nonprofit organizations and two local governments to support youth 16 to 21 who are at risk of dropping out of high school , becoming involved in the juvenile justice system , or already have had involvement in the juvenile justice system .

the program focuses on providing mentoring — by individuals in justice - related positions ( eg , police officers , fire fighters , lawyers , etc .

 ) — and career training that uses a career pathways model for youth who are in school .

a career pathway model includes a sequence of rigorous academic and career and technical education courses that result in educational and skills credentials .

the program also aims to ensure that youth graduate from high school and / or pursue further training or post - secondary education .

a reentry program , reentry demonstration projects for young adults , is also funded with fy2016 appropriations .

these projects are designed to assist youth ages 18 to 24 who are reentering , with a focus on interventions such as mentoring , registered apprenticeships , family unification efforts , and other promising practices that focus on providing occupational training and credentials .

dol intends to conduct a rigorous evaluation of the seven grantees .

each of the initiatives funded under the reentry employment opportunities program ( and its predecessor programs ) have generally served select groups of at - risk youth .

however , the projects generally serve youth ages 14 and older ( or 18 or older ) who have been involved with or have a high risk of involvement in gangs or the juvenile justice system or criminal justice system .

as noted , grants have been competitively awarded to entities such as community - based organizations and state and local juvenile justice agencies , based on ranked scores and other factors , depending on the project .

only schools that meet the criteria of "persistently dangerous," as specified by the states and as permitted under the elementary and secondary education act were eligible to apply for funds under the persistently dangerous schools initiative .

allocations have varied for each of the projects , but , generally , grantees have received grants of $1 million to $5 million for one or more years .

dol has three performance measures for each reo initiative: ( 1 ) attainment of a degree or industry - recognized certificate for individuals age 18 or older ; ( 2 ) literacy and numeracy attainment ; and ( 3 ) out - of - school participants age 18 or older who are placed in unsubsidized jobs , post - secondary education , or occupational training .

