the group of twenty , or g - 20 , is a forum for advancing international economic cooperation and coordination among 20 major advanced and emerging - market economies .

originally established in 1999 , the g - 20 rose to prominence during the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 .

it is now considered to be the premier forum for international economic cooperation , a position in effect held for decades following world war ii by a smaller group of advanced economies ( the group of 7 , or g - 7 ) .

g - 20 countries account for about 85% of global economic output , 75% of world exports , and two - thirds of the world's population .

the g - 20 leaders meet annually , and meetings among lower - level officials are held throughout the year .

the g - 20's focus is generally on financial and economic issues and policies , although in recent years , the g - 20 has also increasingly become a forum for discussing pressing foreign policy issues .

the 2017 g - 20 summit was unusually contentious , with the united states at odds with other g - 20 countries on trade and climate change .

argentina is chairing the g - 20 in 2018 and hosting the annual summit on october 4-5 in buenos aires .

argentina's theme is "building consensus for fair and sustainable development. .

congress exercises oversight over the administration's participation in the g - 20 , including the policy commitments that the administration is making in the g - 20 and the policies it is encouraging other g - 20 countries to pursue .

additionally , legislative action may be required to implement certain commitments made by the administration in the g - 20 process .

this report analyzes why countries coordinate economic policies and the historical origins of the g - 20 ; how the g - 20 operates ; major highlights from previous g - 20 summits , plus an overview of the agenda for the next g - 20 summit ; and debates about the u.s. role in the g - 20 and its effectiveness as a forum for economic cooperation and coordination .

the g - 20 summits are the key meetings where major g - 20 policy commitments are typically announced .

the types of commitments or agreements reached at the g - 20 summits have evolved as global economic conditions have changed , from the pressing height of the global financial crisis , to signs of recovery amid high unemployment in some advanced economies , to concerns about the eurozone crisis .

in addition , as the pressing nature of the global financial crisis has abated , the scope of issues covered by the g - 20 has expanded to other issues , such as development and the environment .

table a - 1 presents information about major highlights from the summits held to date .

g - 20 policy announcements and commitments are nonbinding , and the record of implementing these commitments is wide ranging .

examples of major g - 20 initiatives include coordination of fiscal policies during the global financial crisis , a tripling of imf resources , and strengthening the financial stability board ( fsb ) to coordinate and monitor international progress on regulatory reforms , among others .

however , progress on other g - 20 commitments has been much slower , such as correcting global imbalances , concluding the wto doha round of multilateral trade negotiations , and eliminating fossil fuel subsidies .

tracking progress on g - 20 commitments can be complicated , as subsequent summits may extend the timelines for completing policy reforms , reiterate previous commitments , or drop discussion of prior policy pledges .

previous g - 20 summits have typically attracted protesters from a broad mix of movements , including environmentalists , trade unions , socialist organizations , faith - based groups , antiwar camps , and anarchists .

at the 2009 summit in pittsburgh , for example , thousands of protestors gathered in the streets , holding signs with slogans such as "we say no to corporate greed" and "g20=death by capitalism. .

likewise , the 2017 summit in hamburg attracted thousands of protestors .

protests turned violent , with more than 100 police officers injured and 45 protestors jailed .

not all g - 20 summits are marked by large - scale demonstrations .

for example , the 2014 summit in australia and the 2016 summit in china were relatively quiet , which may be related to the distance required to travel to australia and the tight control on protests in china .

the summit also raises questions about the g - 20's usefulness .

some argue it is a vital forum for a diverse set of countries to discuss their differences .

others wonder whether the g - 20 , which initially brought together leaders to coordinate the response to the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 , has become less consequential over time .

three broad scenarios for the future of the g - 20 have been discussed .

specifically , the g - 20 as a coordinating forum will be ( 1 ) effective ; ( 2 ) ineffective ; or ( 3 ) effective in some instances but not others .

these possible scenarios are discussed in greater detail below .

some believe that the g - 20 will be an effective forum for international economic cooperation moving forward .

the g - 20 will be able to play this role , it is argued , for three reasons .

first , the g - 20 includes all the major economic players at the table , but at the same time is small enough to facilitate concrete negotiations .

second , the involvement of national heads of state in the negotiations could serve to facilitate commitments in major policy areas .

third , as the issues discussed by the g - 20 leaders expand , the g - 20 may be able to facilitate cooperation by enabling trade - offs among major concerns , such as climate change and trade , that are not possible in issue - specific forums and institutions .

g - 20 optimists typically point to the g - 20's successes at the height of the financial crisis , when the g - 20 played a unique , strong , and central role in steering the recovery efforts .

the g - 20 was the source of major decisions regarding fiscal stimulus , regulatory reform , tripling the imf's lending capacity , and other response efforts .

the g - 20 also tasked other international organizations , such as the bank for international settlements ( bis ) , the imf , the world bank , and the financial stability board ( fsb ) , with facilitating , monitoring , or implementing various aspects of the response to the crisis .

finally , g - 20 proponents argue that , even if agreement on policies is not always reached , it is a critical forum for discussing major policy initiatives across major countries and encouraging greater cooperation .

others are skeptical that the g - 20 will be an effective forum for international cooperation moving forward for at least four reasons .

first , the g - 20 includes a diverse set of countries with different political and economic philosophies .

as economic recovery becomes more secure , it is argued that this heterogeneous group with divergent interests will have trouble reaching agreements on global economic issues .

some argue that the g - 20 has failed to provide adequate leadership in responding to the eurozone crisis or in helping forge a conclusion to the doha negotiations .

second , some believe the g - 20 does not include the right mix of countries .

it is argued that europeans are overrepresented at the g - 20 ( with germany , france , italy , the united kingdom , and the european union accounting for 5 of the 20 slots ) , while some important emerging - market countries are excluded .

poland , thailand , egypt , and pakistan have been cited as examples ( see appendix b ) .

by concentrating european interests while excluding important emerging markets from the negotiating table , it will be difficult , it is argued , to achieve cooperation on economic issues of global scope .

third , some experts believe that the g - 20 will be ineffective because it has no enforcement mechanism beyond "naming and shaming" and with little follow - up will not be able to enforce its commitments .

as evidence that the g - 20 is an ineffective steering body in the international economy , g - 20 skeptics point to the portions of recent g - 20 declarations that merely reiterate commitments made by countries in other venues and institutions or at previous g - 20 summits .

likewise , some of the declarations identify areas that merit further attention or study , without including concrete policy commitments .

fourth , some argue that the g - 20's effectiveness since the crisis has diminished because the issues covered by the g - 20 have broadened , but there is now little follow - through from one summit to the next .

for example , a major deliverable from the toronto summit in june 2010 was targets for fiscal consolidation among advanced economies .

however , these targets received little attention in the subsequent g - 20 summit in seoul in november 2010 , where the focus shifted to development , among other issues .

likewise , france's focus for the november 2011 summit was on reform of the international monetary system , but it is not clear how much attention was focused on that issue at subsequent summits .

a third scenario represents a middle ground between the previous two , namely , that the g - 20 will be effective in some instances but not others .

it is argued the g - 20 could be an effective body in times of economic crisis , when countries view cooperation as critical , but less effective when the economy is strong and the need for cooperation feels less pressing .

proponents of this view point to the strong commitments achieved during the height of the crisis compared to what many view as the weaker outcomes of subsequent summits , when financial markets were more stable .

another variant is that the g - 20 will prove effective in facilitating cooperation over some issue areas but not others .

for example , the g - 20 could be effective in coordinating monetary policy across the g - 20 countries , by providing a formal structure for finance ministers , central bankers , and leaders to gather and discuss monetary policy issues .

in most countries , central banks exercise largely autonomous control over monetary policy issues and would have the authority to implement decisions reached in g - 20 discussions .

likewise , the g - 20 may be effective at tasking other international organizations , such as the imf and the fsb , with various functions to perform or reports to write .

by contrast , it is argued that the g - 20 could find coordination of other policies more difficult .

one example may be fiscal policies , because although finance ministers and national leaders undoubtedly can influence fiscal policies at the national level , control over fiscal policies in many countries ultimately lies with national legislatures .

it is not clear to what extent national legislatures will feel bound in their policymaking process by decisions reached at the g - 20 and thus how effective g - 20 coordination on these issues will be .

appendix a. g - 20 summits: context and major highlights appendix b .

world's largest countries and entitie .

