this report summarizes key provisions applicable to medicaid and the children's health insurance program ( chip ) in h.r .

3590 , the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) , as passed by the senate on december 24 , 2009 .

the bill , a comprehensive health reform proposal , resulted from the merger of two separate senate health reform bills , , the affordable health choices act , and s. 1796 , america's healthy future act of 2009 .

s. 1679 was ordered reported by the senate committee on health , education , labor and pensions ( help ) , july 15 , 2009 , while s. 1796 was ordered reported by the senate committee on finance , october 19 , 2009 .

the senate voted to take up s.amdt .

2786 on november 21 , 2009 , after invoking cloture on the motion to proceed to consider the legislation .

the patient protection and affordable care act was passed by the senate on december 24 , 2009 , as an amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r .

3590 , a homeowner tax credit bill that passed the house unanimously on october 8 , 2009 .

the patient protection and affordable care act — herein referred to as the senate bill — consists of 10 titles that cover the following general topics: title i – health insurance ; title ii – medicaid , maternal and child health ; title iii – medicare , quality of care ; title iv – prevention and wellness ; title v – health workforce ; title vi – transparency , program integrity ; title vii – drugs and biologics ; title viii – long - term care insurance ; title ix – revenues ; and title x - strengthening quality , affordable health care for all americans .

this report summarizes key medicaid and chip provisions in the bill .

to help highlight the senate bill's most important medicaid and chip health reforms , applicable provisions were grouped into the following six major issue areas: eligibility , benefits , financing , program integrity , demonstrations and grant funding , and miscellaneous medicaid and chip provisions .

the eligibility issue area may include the bill's most dramatic health reforms applicable to medicaid , namely a coverage expansion for nonelderly , non - pregnant individuals with income up to 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) .

this reform not only would expand eligibility to a group of individuals who were previously ineligible for medicaid ( low income childless adults ) , but also would raise medicaid's mandatory income eligibility level for certain existing groups from 100% to 133% of the fpl .

in addition , federal financial participation ( ffp ) would be increased for these new eligibility groups .

further , the bill would encourage states to improve outreach , streamline enrollment , and coordinate with the american health benefit exchanges ( exchange ) .

other eligibility reforms would require states to maintain current medicaid and chip coverage levels — through 2013 for adults and 2019 for children .

the bill also would require states to maintain the current chip structure through fy2019 , but would not provide federal chip appropriations beyond fy2013 .

the benefit reforms proposed in the bill for medicaid and chip , would add new mandatory and optional benefits .

mandatory benefit additions would include premium assistance for employer - sponsored health insurance , coverage of free standing birth clinics , and tobacco cessation services for pregnant woman .

the bill also would authorize states to offer new optional benefits such as preventive services for adults , health homes , and a program to permit medicaid beneficiaries first choice to remain in their community , rather than institutional care .

under financing reforms , the bill would introduce measures to reduce the growth of medicaid expenditures and would increase federal matching payments for eligibility expansion .

cost control reforms include proposed reductions in medicaid disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) payments , reduced expenditures for prescription drugs and payment reforms to reduce inappropriate hospital expenditures for health - care acquired conditions .

the bill would give states and other stakeholders new program integrity enforcement and monitoring tools as well as impose new data reporting and oversight requirements on states and providers .

additional medicaid and chip program integrity provisions would include requirements for states to implement initiatives used by the medicare program , such as a national correct coding initiative and a recovery audit contract program .

the bill also proposes a broad nursing home accountability initiative that would add a number of requirements to improve the transparency of information on facilities and chains as well as provide ltc consumers with information on the quality and performance of nursing homes .

the bill includes a number of demonstrations , pilot programs , and grants .

these proposals would provide the secretary of the department of health and human services ( the secretary ) and state medicaid and chip programs with opportunities to test models for improving the delivery , quality , and payment for services .

finally , the senate bill would include a number of miscellaneous medicaid and chip reforms .

these proposals would add several offices within the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) to work to better coordinate care across the medicare and medicaid / chip programs .

one of these offices would be dedicated to improve coordination for beneficiaries eligible for both medicare and medicaid ( dual eligibles ) and another would add a medicare and medicaid innovation center , which may permit states to have more control over both medicare and medicaid expenditures for dual eligibles .

unless otherwise indicated , the secretary of the department of health and human services is referred to as "the secretary" throughout this report .

medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program operated by states within broad federal guidelines .

to qualify , an individual must meet both categorical ( i.e. , must be a member of a covered group such as children , pregnant women , families with dependent children , the elderly , or the disabled ) , and financial eligibility requirements .

medicaid's financial requirements place limits on the maximum amount of assets and income individuals may possess to participate in medicaid .

additional guidelines specify how states should calculate these amounts .

the specific asset and income limitations that apply to each eligibility group are set through a combination of federal parameters and state definitions .

consequently , these standards vary across states , and different standards apply to different population groups within states .

state application of income counting rules result in expanding eligibility to higher - income individuals .

of the approximately 50 different eligibility "pathways" into medicaid , some are mandatory while others may be covered at state option .

examples of groups that states must provide medicaid to include pregnant women and children under age six with family income below 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) , and poor individuals with disabilities or poor individuals over age 64 who qualify for cash assistance under the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program .

three examples of groups that states may choose to cover under medicaid include pregnant women and infants with family income between 133% fpl and 185% fpl , and "medically needy" individuals who meet categorical requirements with income up to 133% of the maximum payment amount applicable under states' former aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) programs based on family size .

"childless adults" ( nonelderly adults who are not disabled , not pregnant and not parents of dependent children ) , for example , are generally not eligible for medicaid , regardless of their income .

the measure would make several changes to medicaid eligibility .

among the provisions that would impact eligibility , the bill would add two new mandatory eligibility groups , and several new optional eligibility groups .

in addition , it would make several modifications to existing eligibility groups , and add provisions to facilitate outreach and enrollment in medicaid , chip , and the health insurance exchange .

medicaid standard benefits are identified in federal statute and regulations and include a wide range of acute and long - term care services and supplies .

additional benefits include premium payments for coverage provided through medicaid managed care arrangements or for employer - sponsored insurance , and medicare premium and cost - sharing support for persons dually eligible for both medicare and medicaid .

medicaid financing is shared by the federal government and the states .

the federal share for most medicaid expenses for benefits is determined by the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) .

fmap rates are based on a formula that provides higher reimbursement to states with lower per capita income relative to the national average ( and vice versa ) .

fmaps have a statutory minimum of 50% and a maximum of 83% , although some medicaid services receive a higher federal match rate .

fy2009 fmaps ranged from a high of 75.8% in mississippi to a low of 50.0% in 13 other states .

in february 2009 , with passage of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) , states received temporary enhanced fmap rates for nine quarters beginning with the first quarter of fy2009 and running through the first quarter of fy2011 ( december 31 , 2010 ) .

state expenditures to administer medicaid programs are generally matched by federal funding at 50% .

federal matching rates for administrative expenditures are the same for all states , although some activities are matched at higher rates .

program integrity ( pi ) initiatives are designed to combat fraud , waste , and abuse .

this includes processes directed at reducing improper payments , as well as activities to prevent , detect , investigate , and ultimately prosecute health care fraud and abuse .

more specifically , pi ensures that correct payments are made to legitimate providers for appropriate and reasonable services for eligible beneficiaries .

the federal government provides the majority of medicaid spending to combat fraud and abuse , as part of an enhanced fmap contribution .

the federal match for administrative expenditures does not vary by state and is generally 50% ; however certain administrative functions have a higher federal match , including two program integrity expenditures .

operation of required medicaid management information systems ( mmis ) , and operation of state medicaid fraud control units ( mfcu ) activities are matched at 75% , although the federal match is 90% for certain startup expenses .

in dra , congress provided new dedicated pi funding when it established a medicaid integrity program ( mip ) with an appropriation reaching $75 million annually to cover the cost of audits , overpayments identification , payment integrity and quality of care education , and other purposes .

congress provided an additional $25 million annually for five years beginning in fy2006 for medicaid activities of the health and human services office of inspector general ( oig ) , and an annual appropriation reaching $60 million to expand the medicare - medicaid data match project ( referred to as medi - medi ) that analyzes claims from both programs together in order to detect aberrant billing patterns .

medicare and medicaid pi activities traditionally have been mostly independent of each other with separate , though often similar , requirements for each program .

in addition , there have been limited requirements for coordination of medicare and medicaid pi activities .

as pi monitoring and prevention have advanced , there has been increased recognition of the need for closer coordination among entities involved in pi , as well as the need for more comparable rules and requirements applicable to medicare , medicaid , and chip .

the bill creates additional individual requirements to increase uniformity , and bolster medicare , medicaid and chip pi activities .

for instance , the bill has a new provision that would introduce additional provider screening requirements and screening fees that , with certain exceptions , are comparable for medicare and medicaid .

the bill also would create an integrated medicare and medicaid data repository to enhance program integrity data sharing that would be available to federal and state program integrity agencies .

moreover , a recovery audit contractor ( rac ) requirement , similar to medicare's rac program , would be established for medicaid ( described below ) .

in the supplemental appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-252 ) , congress directed the secretary to establish a medicaid improvement fund ( mif ) to be used by cms to improve the management of the medicaid program , including improved oversight of contracts and contractors and evaluation of demonstration projects .

mif funding was to be available in addition to existing cms budget authority and was to total $100 million in fy2014 , and $150 million in fys 2015-2018 .

the medicare , medicaid , and schip extension act of 2007 ( mmsea , p.l .

110-173 ) had revised funding for physician assistance and quality initiative and these funds were to be used for mif activities .

the bill would rescind any unobligated mif funds ( as of the date of enactment ) for fys 2014 through 2018 ( which were to total $700 million ) .

secretary would be required to promulgate regulations to ensure that all states develop service systems that are designed to: ( 1 ) allocate resources for services in a manner that is responsive to the changing needs of beneficiaries receiving non - institutionally - based long - term care services and supports and that maximizes their independence ; ( 2 ) provide the support for such beneficiaries to design an individualized self - directed , community - supported life ; ( 3 ) improve coordination among providers to achieve more consistent administration of policies and procedures across federally and state - funded programs .

among others .

established under the older americans act ( oaa ) , aging and disability resource centers ( adrcs ) provide information and assistance to elderly persons and individuals with physical disabilities , serious mental illness , and / or developmental / intellectual disabilities .

adrcs also serve as a single point of entry for enrollment in publicly - administered ltc services , including those funded by medicaid and oaa .

out of any funds in the treasury not otherwise appropriated , the bill would appropriate to the secretary , acting through the assistant secretary of aging , $10 million for each of fy2010 through fy2014 to carry out adrc initiatives .

the bill would express the sense of the senate that the 111 th congress should comprehensively address long - term services and supports in a way that guarantees elderly and disabled individuals the care they need , and that would make long term services and supports available in the community as well as in institutions .

some elderly and disabled individuals , referred to as dual eligibles , qualify for health insurance under both medicare and medicaid .

these dual eligible individuals qualify for medicare part a and / or parts b and d and , because they meet medicare eligibility requirements , and are eligible for medicaid because they have limited income and assets .

current federal law gives the secretary authority to waive selected medicaid and medicare requirements , as well as approve waivers to reach previously ineligible populations .

some projects have been approved that waive both medicare and medicaid rules to implement statewide initiatives to coordinate service delivery , benefit packages , and reimbursement for dual eligibles .

initially , waivers can be approved for periods ranging from two - to five - year periods and renewed for additional periods of up to five years .

the bill would authorize the secretary to initially approve medicaid waivers for up to five years .

this authority would apply to demonstrations as well as home - and community - based waivers for coordinating care of dual eligibles ( and for non dual eligible beneficiaries if they were included under the waiver ) .

in addition , the provision would give the secretary authority to approve medicaid waiver extensions for additional five - year periods when requested by states , unless the waivers did not met the conditions for the previous period , or it was no longer cost effective , efficient , or consistent with medicaid policy .

there are no specific requirements under medicare and medicaid rules for the programs to coordinate care for dual eligible individuals .

under the bill , the secretary would be required to establish a federal coordinated health care office ( chco ) within cms by march 1 , 2010 .

the chco director would be appointed by , and in the direct line of management to , the cms administrator .

the purpose of the chco would be to bring together officers and employees of the medicare and medicaid programs at cms to ( 1 ) integrate benefits and ( 2 ) improve care coordination .

the chco would have the following goals: 1. to provide dual eligible individuals full access to the benefits to which they are entitled under the medicare and medicaid programs ; 2. to simplify the processes for dual eligible individuals to access the items and services they are entitled to under the medicare and medicaid programs ; 3. to improve the quality of health care and long - term services for dual eligible individuals ; 4. to increase beneficiaries' understanding of , and satisfaction with , coverage under the medicare and medicaid programs ; 5. to eliminate regulatory conflicts between rules under the medicare , and medicaid programs ; 6. to improve care continuity and ensure safe and effective care transitions ; 7. to eliminate cost - shifting between the medicare and medicaid programs and among related health care providers ; and 8. to improve the quality of performance of providers of services and suppliers under the medicare and medicaid programs .

under the bill , the chco would have the following specific responsibilities: ( 1 ) to provide states , specialized medicare advantage plans for special needs individuals — special needs plans , and other entities or individuals qualified to develop programs that align medicare and medicaid benefits for dual eligible individuals ; ( 2 ) to support state efforts with education and tools to coordinate and align acute care and ltc services for dual eligible individuals with other items and services furnished under the medicare program ; ( 3 ) to support state and cms efforts to coordinate contracting and oversight for integrating medicare and medicaid programs ; ( 4 ) to consult with the medpac and macpac on enrollment and benefit policies for dual eligible individuals ; and ( 5 ) to study the provision of drug coverage for new full - benefit dual eligibles and to monitor and report on total annual expenditures , health outcomes , and access to benefits for all dual eligibles .

the bill's chco provision would require the secretary to submit a report to congress under the annual budget transmittal .

the report would be required to contain recommendations for legislation that could improve care coordination and benefits for dual eligible individuals .

the bill would add a federal initiative to collect and report quality of care data for adults enrolled in medicaid .

among several activities , the secretary would publish a recommended core set of adult health quality measures , including such measures in use under public and privately sponsored health care coverage arrangements , or that are part of reporting systems that measure both the presence and duration of health insurance coverage over time .

the secretary would be required to publish an initial core set of measures by january 1 , 2012 .

also , no later than january 1 , 2013 , the secretary , in consultation with the states , would be required to develop a standardized format for reporting information based on this initial core measurement set .

states would be encouraged to use these measures to voluntarily report such data .

as with existing law regarding quality of care reporting for medicaid children , before january 1 , 2014 , and every three years thereafter , the secretary would be required to submit a report to congress that describes the secretary's efforts to improve , for example , the duration and stability of coverage for adults under medicaid , the quality of care of different services for such individuals , the status of voluntary state reporting of such data , and any recommendations for legislative changes needed to improve quality of care provided to medicaid adults .

within one year after the release of the recommended core set of adult health quality measures , the secretary would also be required to establish a medicaid quality measurement program ( mqmp ) .

to this end , the secretary would be required to award grants and contracts for developing , testing , and validating emerging and innovative evidence - based measures applicable to medicaid adults .

not later than two years after the establishment of the mqmp , the secretary would be required to publish recommended changes to the initial core set of adult health quality measures based on the results of testing , validation , and the consensus process for development of these measures .

this bill would not restrict coverage under medicaid or chip to only those services that are evidence - based .

the bill also includes annual state reporting requirements to include , for example , state - specific adult health quality measures , including information collected as part of external quality reviews of managed care organizations and through benchmark plans ( if applicable ) .

the secretary would be required to collect , analyze and make publicly available the information reported by states , before september 30 , 2014 , and annually thereafter .

finally , to carry out these activities , the bill would appropriate $60 million for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014 .

these funds would remain available until expended .

chipra established a new federal commission called the medicaid and chip payment and access commission , or macpac .

this commission will review program policies under both medicaid and chip affecting children's access to benefits , including: ( 1 ) payment policies , such as the process for updating fees for different types of providers , payment methodologies , and the impact of these factors on access and quality of care ; ( 2 ) the interaction of medicaid and chip payment policies with health care delivery generally ; and ( 3 ) other policies , including those relating to transportation and language barriers .

the commission will make recommendations to congress concerning such payment and access policies .

macpac is similar to medpac which reviews medicare program policies .

beginning in 2010 , the commission will submit an annual report to congress containing the results of these reviews and macpac's recommendations regarding these policies .

the commission will also submit annual reports to congress containing an examination of issues affecting medicaid and chip , including the implications of changes in health care delivery in the u.s. and in the market for health care services .

macpac must also create an early warning system to identify provider shortage areas or other problems that threaten access to care or the health care status of medicaid and chip beneficiaries .

the bill would make a number of changes to the federal statute that established macpac .

for example , macpac's review and assessment of payment policies under medicaid and chip would be expanded to include how factors affecting expenditures and payment methodologies enable beneficiaries to obtain services , affect provider supply , and affect providers that serve a disproportionate share of low - income and other vulnerable populations .

additional topics that macpac would be required to review and assess would include policies related to eligibility , enrollment and retention , benefits and coverage , quality of care , and interactions between medicaid and medicare and how those interactions affect access to services , payments and dual eligibles .

macpac would also be required to report to congress on any medicaid and chip regulations that affect access , quality and efficiency of health care .

in carrying out its duties , macpac would be authorized to obtain necessary data from any state agency responsible for administering medicaid or chip , as a condition for receiving federal matching funds under either program .

the bill would require macpac to seek state input and review state data , and to consider state information in its recommendations and reports .

both macpac and medpac would be required to coordinate and consult with the federal coordinated health care office ( established under section 2081 of this bill ) before making recommendations regarding medicare beneficiaries who are dually eligible .

changes to medicaid policy affecting dual eligibles are the responsibility of the macpac .

for fy2010 , the bill would appropriate $11 million for macpac .

of this total , $9 million would come from the treasury out of any funds not otherwise appropriated , and $2 million would come from fy2010 chip funds , and would remain available until expended .

funding in subsequent years is not addressed in this provision .

this provision would be effective upon enactment .

the indian health service ( ihs ) , an agency in hhs , provides health care for eligible american indians / alaska natives through a system of programs and facilities located on or near indian reservations and in certain urban areas .

these programs , which may be operated by indian tribes ( its ) or tribal organization ( tos ) , are eligible to receive reimbursements from medicare , medicaid , chip , state programs and third parties such as private insurance .

american indians and alaska natives receiving services through ihs programs or at ihs facilities may not be charged premiums , cost - sharing or similar charges in medicaid .

by regulation ihs is the payer of last resort for contract health services ( i.e. , services that ihs , its , or tos may purchase , through contract , with providers in instances where the facility or program cannot provide the needed care ) .

under a newly permitted option enacted under the children's health insurance reauthorization act ( chipra , p.l .

111-3 ) , states may facilitate medicaid enrollment — including under certain conditions , automatically enrolling those eligible — by relying on a finding of eligibility from specified "express lane" agencies ( eg , those that administer programs such as temporary assistance for needy families , medicaid , chip , and food stamps ) .

ihs , its , tos , and urban indian organizations ( uios ) are not among the specified "express lane" agencies .

the bill would make a number of modifications related to ihs - eligible american indians and alaska natives eligible for , or enrolled in , medicaid and chip .

it would designate programs operated by ihs , an it , to or a uio as the payer of last resort for services provided to eligible american indians and alaska natives , including services covered by medicaid and chip .

it would add ihs , its , tos and uios to the list of agencies that could serve as "express lane" agencies .

in addition , the bill would prohibit cost - sharing for american indians and alaska natives enrolled in a qualified health plan offered through the exchange .

there is no requirement under current law for a medicare and medicaid innovation center within cms .

the ssa gives the secretary broad authority to develop research and demonstration projects to test new approaches to paying providers , delivering health care services , or providing benefits to medicare and medicaid beneficiaries .

this provision of the bill would require the secretary to establish by january 1 , 2011 , a medicare and medicaid innovation center within cms .

the innovation center would test innovative payment and service delivery models to reduce medicare , medicaid , and chip program expenditures , while preserving or enhancing the quality of care furnished to beneficiaries .

the secretary would be required to identify and select payment and service delivery models that also improve the coordination , quality , and efficiency of health care services .

in addition , the secretary would be required to select models that address a defined population for which there are deficits in care leading to poor clinical outcomes , and may include models which allow states to test and evaluate fully integrating care for beneficiaries eligible for both medicare and medicaid ( dual eligibles ) , including the management and oversight of all funds , as well as to test and evaluate all - payer payment systems that would include dual eligibles .

the secretary would have authority to limit testing of models to certain geographic areas .

further , the secretary would be required to conduct an evaluation of each model tested , and make the results of these evaluations publicly available .

the bill would authorize an appropriation of $5 million for the design , implementation , and evaluation of models for fy2010 ; $10 billion for fy2011 through fy2019 ; and $10 billion for each subsequent 10 fiscal year period beginning with 2020 .

beginning in 2012 , and at least every other year thereafter , the secretary would be required to submit to congress a report on the medicare and medicaid innovation center .

there are no requirements in current law for the comptroller general and the government accountability office ( gao ) to conduct a study and issue a report on causes of action .

under this provision , gao would be required to conduct a study to determine if the development , recognition , or implementation of guidelines or other standards under selected provisions in the bill would result in new causes of action or claims .

the gao study would include three medicaid - related and 11 other non - medicaid related provisions in the bill as shown in table 2 .

gao would be required to submit the study on causes of action to appropriate congressional committees within two years after enactment of the bill .

there is no related provision in current law .

the bill would require the secretary to provide guidance and relevant information to states and health care providers regarding preventive and obesity - related services that are available to medicaid enrollees , including obesity screening and counseling for children and adults .

each state would be required to design a public awareness campaign to educate medicaid enrollees regarding availability and coverage of such services .

the secretary would be required to report to congress on these efforts , beginning no later than january 1 , 2011 , and every three years thereafter , through january 1 , 2017 .

the provision would authorize to be appropriated such sums as necessary to carry out these activities .

section 1115 of the social security act authorizes the secretary to waive certain statutory requirements for conducting research and demonstration projects that further the goals of titles xix ( medicaid ) and xxi ( chip ) .

states submit proposals outlining the terms and conditions of the demonstration program to the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) for approval prior to implementation .

in 1994 , cms issued program guidance that impacts the waiver approval process and includes the procedures states are expected to follow for public involvement in the development of a demonstration project .

states were required to provide cms a written description of their process for public involvement at the time their proposal was submitted .

public involvement requirements for the waiver approval process continued through the early 2000s .

in a letter to state medicaid directors issued may 3 , 2002 , cms listed examples of ways a state may meet requirements for public involvement ( eg , public forums , legislative hearings , a website with information and a link for public comment ) .

the bill would impose statutory requirements regarding transparency in the application and renewal of medicaid and chip section 1115 demonstration programs that impact eligibility , enrollment , benefits , cost - sharing , or financing .

not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this subsection , the secretary would be required to promulgate regulations that provide for ( 1 ) a process for public notice and comment at the state level , including public hearings , sufficient to ensure a meaningful level of public input ; ( 2 ) requirements relating to ( a ) the goals of the program to be implemented or renewed under the demonstration project ; ( b ) the expected state and federal costs and coverage projections of the demonstration project ; and ( c ) the specific plans of the state to ensure that the demonstration project will be in compliance with title xix or xxi ; ( 3 ) a process for providing public notice and comment after the application is received by the secretary , that is sufficient to ensure a meaningful level of public input ; ( 4 ) a process for the submission to the secretary of periodic reports by the state concerning the implementation of the demonstration project ; and ( 5 ) a process for the periodic evaluation by the secretary of the demonstration project .

the secretary would be required to generate annual report to congress concerning actions taken by the secretary with respect to applications for demonstration projects under this section .

appendix a .

effective dates for referenced medicaid and chip provisions in the bill appendix b. glossary of term .

