in a 5-to - 4 ruling , the supreme court in citizens united v. f ederal election commission ( f ec ) lifted certain restrictions on corporate independent expenditures .

the decision invalidated two provisions of the federal election campaign act ( feca ) , codified at 2 u.s.c .

§ 441b .

it struck down the long - standing prohibition on corporations using their general treasury funds to make independent expenditures , and section 203 of the bipartisan campaign reform act of 2002 ( bcra ) , which amended feca , prohibiting corporations from using their general treasury funds for "electioneering communications. .

the court determined that these prohibitions constitute a "ban on speech" in violation of the first amendment .

in so doing , the court overruled its earlier holdings in austin v. michigan chamber of commerce , finding that the allegedly distorting effect of corporate expenditures provided no basis for allowing the government to limit corporate independent expenditures .

it also overruled the portion of its decision in mcconnell v. fec , upholding the facial validity of section 203 of bcra , finding that the mcconnell court relied on austin .

the court , however , upheld the disclaimer and disclosure requirements in sections 201 and 311 of bcra as applied to a movie regarding a presidential candidate that was produced by citizens united , a tax - exempt corporation , and the broadcast advertisements it planned to run promoting the movie .

according to the court , while they may burden the ability to speak , disclaimer and disclosure requirements "impose no ceiling on campaign - related activities. .

it does not appear that the court's ruling in citizens united affects the validity of title i of bcra , which generally bans the raising of soft , unregulated money by national parties and federal candidates or officials , and restricts soft money spending by state parties for "federal election activities. .

for a legal analysis of the supreme court's ruling , see crs report r41045 , the constitutionality of regulating corporate expenditures: a brief analysis of the supreme court ruling in citizens united v. fec , by [author name scrubbed] .

some legislation and proposals that have been discussed in response to the supreme court's ruling in citizens united v. fec would increase disclaimer requirements for political communications paid for by corporations .

the term "disclaimer" typically refers to sponsor identification that is included in the content of the advertisement .

for example , such proposals may require advertisements to include a statement by the president or chief executive officer of the corporation , identifying such individual by name and position , and indicating that the corporation that he or she heads paid for the ad and approved its contents .

in addition , such proposals may require inclusion of an image of the individual making the statement .

currently , the federal election campaign act ( feca ) requires that any public political advertising financed by a political committee include various disclaimers .

of particular relevance , it also requires that corporations and labor unions include disclaimers in any communication expressly advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate , any solicitation of contributions , or any other public political advertising , including electioneering communications , that are financed by corporations and labor unions .

feca defines "electioneering communication" as any broadcast , cable , or satellite communication that refers to a clearly identified federal candidate made within 60 days of a general election or 30 days of a primary .

for communications financed by corporations and labor unions , feca requires the disclaimer to clearly state the name and permanent street address , telephone number , or website address of the person who paid for the communication and state that the communication was not authorized by any candidate or candidate committee .

in radio and television advertisements , corporations and labor unions are required to include in a clearly spoken manner , the following audio statement: "________ is responsible for the content of this advertising," with the blank to be filled in with the name of the entity paying for the ad .

in addition , in television advertisements , the statement is required to be conveyed by an unobscured , full - screen view of a representative of the entity paying for the ad , in a voice - over , and shall also appear in a clearly readable manner with a reasonable degree of color contrast for a period of at least four seconds .

this requirement is often referred to as "stand by your ad. .

feca does not require disclosure for advertising that does not expressly advocate election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate , and that does not meet the criteria of an "electioneering communication. .

in mcconnell v. fec , by a vote of 8 to 1 , the supreme court upheld the facial validity of the disclaimer requirement in section 311 of bcra .

specifically , the court found that it "bears a sufficient relationship to the important governmental interest of 'shedding the light of publicity' on campaign financing. .

similarly , in citizen s united v. fec , by a vote of 8 to 1 , the court upheld the disclaimer requirement in section 311 as applied to a movie that citizens united produced regarding a presidential candidate and the broadcast advertisements it planned to run promoting the movie .

according to the court , while they may burden the ability to speak , disclaimer and disclosure requirements "impose no ceiling on campaign - related activities," and "do not prevent anyone from speaking. .

according to the court , the disclaimer requirements in section 311 of bcra "provid[e] the electorate with information," and "insure that the voters are fully informed" about who is speaking .

moreover , they facilitate the ability of a listener or viewer to "evaluate the arguments to which they are being subjected. .

at a minimum , the court announced , disclaimers make clear that an advertisement is not financed by a candidate or a political party .

as a result , it appears likely that enactment of increased disclaimer requirements for corporate - financed political advertisements would survive facial challenges to their constitutionality .

however , if a disclaimer requirement was so burdensome that it impeded the ability of a corporation to speak — for example , a requirement that a disclaimer comprise an unreasonable amount of time — a court might conclude that it is a violation of a corporation's free speech rights under citizens united .

some have proposed requiring the identities of certain donors to § 501 ( c ) organizations be publicly disclosed , either through traditional disclosure mechanisms or the disclaimer provisions discussed above .

the organizations described in irc § 501 ( c ) have federal tax - exempt status .

they include § 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) social welfare organizations , § 501 ( c ) ( 5 ) labor unions , and § 501 ( c ) ( 6 ) trade associations .

under current law , feca requires the public disclosure of certain donors to entities , including § 501 ( c ) organizations , that make independent expenditures and electioneering communications .

in general , the identification of donors to such entities is subject to disclosure if their donations exceed a threshold amount and are made to further the entity's campaign activity .

in certain situations , the identity of any donor whose contribution exceeds the threshold amount may be subject to disclosure , regardless of whether it was made to further the activity .

the organization may avoid disclosing these donors by establishing a separate account to pay for the activities , which will result in only the donors to that account being publicly disclosed .

some might argue that compelled donor disclosure chills the organization's and donors' first amendment rights .

in citizens united , the court upheld disclosure requirements as applied to the movie that citizens united produced and the broadcast advertisements it planned to run promoting the movie .

the court explained that while they may burden the ability to speak , the requirements "impose no ceiling on campaign - related activities," and "do not prevent anyone from speaking. .

at the same time , such requirements would be unconstitutional as applied to an organization if there is a reasonable probability that its donors would be subject to threats , harassment , or reprisals .

as mentioned , some have suggested mandating the public disclosure of certain donors to § 501 ( c ) organizations beyond that required by current law .

additionally , some have proposed expanding feca's disclaimer requirements so that large donors to § 501 ( c ) organizations would be named in the organization's political advertisements .

some of these proposals would differ from the existing provisions described above in that they would require public disclosure of certain donors regardless of the purpose for which the money was donated or used , without providing a mechanism by which the organization could limit such disclosure to only those donors whose contributions were intended to be used for political purposes .

some have raised the possibility that there might be constitutional limitations on the ability of congress to require disclosure of donors who have not necessarily donated specifically for political activity , particularly if there is no mechanism by which such disclosure could be limited .

in other words , some might argue that the differences between the proposals and existing law could be constitutionally significant .

how a court would analyze such an argument might be uncertain .

it seems any requirement would be subject to "exacting scrutiny , which requires a substantial relation between the disclosure requirement and a sufficiently important governmental interest. .

here , some might argue , for example , that the relationship between ( 1 ) the compelled disclosure of donors who gave money for reasons not necessarily related to campaign activity and ( 2 ) the government's interest to provide information to the electorate or avoid corruption or the appearance of corruption is insufficient to withstand judicial scrutiny .

proponents of such an argument might point to the fact that § 501 ( c ) organizations engage in a panoply of activities outside the election context and campaign activity cannot , by law , be their primary activity .

thus , donors who make non - earmarked contributions are supporting the entirety of the organization's activities , and some might question whether the government can require the public disclosure of their identities simply because the organization happens to engage in limited amounts of campaign activity .

such an argument might be extended to the disclaimer proposals as well .

on the other hand , it is unclear whether this argument has constitutional merit .

as discussed above , the court has generally looked favorably on disclosure and disclaimer requirements , and there may be other factors that support the constitutionality of the proposals .

for example , while the § 501 ( c ) organizations we are concerned with here are limited in the amount of campaign activity they may participate in , they are permitted to engage in an unlimited amount of lobbying .

thus , a court might look at the full spectrum of the organization's activities when determining whether a donor disclosure requirement is sufficiently related to the government's informational interest .

a court might also consider the extent to which the requirement furthers donor protection interests ( i.e. , whether donors' interests are presumably aligned with the organization's activities or donors are on notice that their donations might be disclosed ) .

additionally , particular proposals might contain limitations or protections that could be important to a court's analysis .

there is congressional interest in amending federal securities laws to require a corporation to provide notice to shareholders of corporate political spending and / or to require that shareholders authorize corporate political spending .

for example , a very general description of such a bill is a proposal requiring that no publicly traded company which must file annual and other reports with the securities and exchange commission may make any political expenditure in excess of a certain amount in a fiscal year without first obtaining the authorization of a majority of the shareholders .

congress does not appear to have enacted legislation which provides shareholders with voting authority concerning specific corporate expenditures .

these matters have traditionally been left for individual corporations to handle .

most decisions involving corporate expenditures are made by corporate executives and boards of directors .

under the business judgment rule , if there is a reasonable basis that a corporate transaction was made in good faith , management will typically be immunized from liability .

arguably , the business judgment rule applies to decisions of management concerning corporate political expenditures .

however , this tradition of leaving corporate expenditure decisions to corporate executives does not mean that congress is without constitutional authority to enact legislation requiring shareholder approval of corporate political expenditures .

the constitution's commerce clause may arguably provide congress with authority to enact legislation of the type in question .

no case specifically on point may be cited as precedent for upholding such legislation , but courts have cited the commerce clause as providing congress with constitutional authority to enact various kinds of broad legislation concerning corporations .

for example , several cases were brought challenging the constitutionality of the securities act of 1933 and the securities exchange act of 1934 .

the cases upheld the constitutionality of these major federal securities laws on the basis of congress's power under the commerce clause .

although these cases are approximately 70 years old , their holdings arguably remain within the philosophy of later interpretations by courts of the commerce clause .

the securities act of 1933 ... does not attempt to regulate or prohibit the sale of securities in intrastate commerce .

it merely provides as a condition precedent to the use of the mails and the facilities of interstate commerce that the issuer file a registration statement containing a true and complete statement of the information required by section 7 of the act , 15 u.s.c.a .

§ 77g , in order to protect the public against imposition and fraud in the sale of securities through the use of the mails or the facilities of interstate commerce... .

it is well settled that congress may enact reasonable regulations to prevent the mails and the facilities of interstate commerce from being used as instruments of fraud and imposition .

the type of legislation described above would not prohibit corporate spending on political advertising ; rather , it would require that shareholders give their approval of the spending .

it may be argued that shareholders , as owners of a corporation , have virtually an inherent right , though perhaps not necessarily the expertise , to direct spending by executives and boards of directors and that legislation of the type in question would affirm this right .

legislation requiring voting by shareholders on proposed corporate political advertising could arguably be drafted in such a way as to act as a kind of impediment to the corporation's free speech as set out in citizens united .

for example , if a proposal required that a corporation submit to shareholder vote each specific expenditure for political advertising and that the vote must occur within an unreasonable period of time , a court might conclude that the legislation is a violation of the corporation's free speech rights as described by citizens united .

the practicalities of when to require these votes and the enforcement of this kind of legislation may need to be carefully considered in order not to run afoul of corporate freedom of speech rights defined by the supreme court in citizens united .

the supreme court in citizens united struck down an attempt to limit first amendment rights to political speech based on the speaker's "form" as a corporation .

however , its doing so does not necessarily mean that the ability to make campaign expenditures , or otherwise engage in political speech , cannot be restricted based upon the speaker's foreign status .

certain federal laws already categorize some corporations incorporated within the united states as "foreign" because of circumstances related to their ownership and control and impose significant restrictions upon them .

congress could explore similar legislation in response to the citizens united decision .

because of the lack of direct precedent , it is unclear how far congress could go in this regard .

efforts by the federal government to restrict private , nongovernmental entities from using their own ( non - federal ) resources to engage in independent political advocacy or other political communications as a condition to receiving , or because the entity receives , some federal funding by way of grants or contracts would raise significant first amendment concerns .

congress may certainly limit , regulate , or condition the use of the funds it appropriates , and there are now under federal law and regulation several prohibitions and multiple restrictions on the use by private recipients of federal funds or federal subsidies for political or advocacy purposes .

when the government goes beyond restrictions and conditions on the use of the funds it appropriates , however , ( or goes beyond attempts to control or "define" the content of a government program ) , and seeks to institute a direct suppression of independent political advocacy by private entities as a condition to receive ( or as a consequence of receiving ) federal funds , then such legislation must be examined under the heightened scrutiny of first amendment principles .

the supreme court has noted that restrictions on otherwise constitutionally protected activities could not be "justified simply because" persons were receiving federal funds , nor was "a lesser degree of judicial scrutiny ... required simply because government funds were involved. .

some have proposed that congress enact an excise tax on the corporate campaign - related expenditures permitted under citizens united .

as discussed below , there are several existing taxes that apply to tax - exempt organizations , including those that are incorporated .

for purposes of this discussion , it is assumed that any proposed tax would apply to both for - profit and non - profit corporations , and , in the case of incorporated tax - exempt organizations , be in addition to the existing taxes .

it is also assumed that the expenditures would be non - deductible under irc § 162 ( e ) as a trade or business expense .

congress has broad powers to tax under the constitution .

in general , tax distinctions and classifications are constitutionally permissible so long as "they bear a rational relation to a legitimate governmental purpose. .

the rational basis standard is a low level of review by a court .

in the tax context in particular , courts typically show great deference in recognition of "the large area of discretion which is needed by a legislature in formulating sound tax policies. .

at the same time , not all exercises of congress's taxing power receive such deference .

sometimes , tax provisions are subject to higher levels of scrutiny .

for example , tax provisions based on the content of speech are , like non - tax provisions , subject to strict scrutiny .

a provision subject to this highest level of scrutiny must be necessary to serve a compelling government interest and be narrowly drawn to achieve that end .

this is a heavy burden for the government to meet .

the decision by congress to impose a tax on certain corporate expenditures would typically appear to be within its broad taxing powers and subject to minimal review by a court .

it could , nonetheless , be argued that a more rigorous analysis should apply when , as here , the tax is related to the exercise of a constitutional right .

any analysis of whether congress could enact an excise tax on corporate political expenditures is severely limited by the fact that it does not appear there is case law analyzing the constitutionality of a similar tax .

even so , it appears an excise tax could potentially raise significant constitutional concerns since , depending on the particulars of a specific proposal , it could be characterized as a penalty on protected speech .

the supreme court has upheld provisions that provide disfavorable tax treatment to a taxpayer's campaign activities under the rationale that there is no requirement for the federal government to subsidize the constitutional rights of taxpayers .

in cammarano v. united states , the court upheld the validity of a tax regulation that disallowed a business deduction for lobbying expenditures .

the taxpayers had been denied a deduction for amounts paid to a professional organization to lobby against a state initiative that would have had dire consequences for their business .

they argued the disallowance violated the first amendment , relying on a previous case , speiser v. randall .

in speiser , the court had struck down a state property tax exemption that required taxpayers take a loyalty oath on the grounds that the state's tax administration procedures did not afford adequate due process .

in striking down the provision that was clearly "aimed at the suppression of dangerous ideas," the court emphasized its chilling effect on the proscribed speech and equated it to a fine for engaging in that type of speech .

in cammarano , the court rejected the claim that speiser was controlling , reasoning that the nondiscriminatory disallowance of a deduction for lobbying expenditures was different because , unlike the provision in speiser , it was not intended to suppress dangerous ideas .

instead , the court explained , the taxpayers "are not being denied a tax deduction because they engage in constitutionally protected activities , but are simply being required to pay for those activities entirely out of their own pockets , as everyone else engaging in similar activities is required to do under" the tax laws .

the court further explained that the disallowance "express[ed] a determination by congress that since purchased publicity can influence the fate of legislation which will affect , directly or indirectly , all in the community , everyone in the community should stand on the same footing as regards its purchase so far as the treasury of the united states is concerned. .

in a subsequent case , regan v. taxation with representation of washington , the court addressed a similar issue in upholding the federal law that limits the lobbying of § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations to "no substantial part" of their activities .

the court rejected the argument that the limitation infringed on the organization's first amendment rights .

rather , the court , noting it had held in cammarano that the first amendment does not require the federal government to subsidize lobbying , explained that "congress has merely refused to pay for the lobbying out of public moneys" and stated that it "again reject[s] the notion that first amendment rights are somehow not fully realized unless they are subsidized by the state. .

an excise tax on corporate campaign expenditures would not , in general , appear to be supported by the non - subsidization rationale discussed in cammarano .

instead , depending on the specifics of the proposal , a court might find the tax to be a restriction on speech , perhaps comparably onerous to the prohibition struck down in citizens united , which would then place a heavy burden on the government to justify the provision .

it is not possible to say how a court would analyze a proposal ; however , characteristics that might affect the analysis could include the rate of tax ( eg , a high rate might look more like a restriction or de facto prohibition ) ; the scope of taxpayers subject to the tax ( eg , a court might look less favorably at a tax limited to certain taxpayers ) ; the scope of activities subject to tax ( eg , a generally applicable tax might be less scrutinized than one that applies only to campaign expenditures ) ; and the purpose of the tax ( eg , a court might look differently at a tax enacted as part of a campaign finance regulatory regime than one with other regulatory or traditional revenue raising purposes ) .

proponents of an excise tax on corporate campaign expenditures might point to the existence of several taxes that apply to tax - exempt organizations making political expenditures for support of the idea that congress could enact such a tax ; for example: irc § 527 ( f ) imposes a tax on § 501 ( c ) organizations that make expenditures for influencing elections or similar activities .

the tax is imposed at the highest corporate rate on the lesser of the expenditures or the organization's net investment income .

irc § 4955 imposes a tax on § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations making campaign expenditures .

these organizations are prohibited under the tax laws from making these types of expenditures .

the tax equals 10% of the expenditures , with an additional 100% tax imposed if the expenditures are not corrected in a timely manner .

irc § 4945 imposes a similar tax on the political expenditures of private foundations , although it covers a broader range of activities , some of which fall outside the § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) campaign intervention prohibition .

private foundations are § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations that receive contributions from limited sources .

due to fear of abuse , they are subject to stricter regulation than other § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations .

irc § 6033 imposes a proxy tax on tax - exempt organizations that fail or choose not to notify their members of the non - deductible portion of dues used for political purposes .

irc §§ 4911 and 4912 impose a tax on § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations that have lobbying expenditures exceeding certain limits .

it could be argued that the § 527 ( f ) tax and § 6033 proxy tax are similar to a corporate campaign expenditure tax in that all three would tax the political expenditures of entities which are otherwise permitted to engage in the activities .

the other taxes might be characterized as penalty taxes , and thus could support an argument that an excise tax would be permissible even if it had some penalizing features .

however , as discussed below , there are characteristics of the existing taxes that might undermine an attempt to draw support from them for an excise tax on corporate campaign expenditures .

it could be argued that the § 527 ( f ) tax and § 6033 proxy tax could be upheld , in at least some contexts , under the non - subsidization rationale expressed in cammarano .

while they may look like taxes imposed on entities engaging in protected speech , it might be more appropriate in certain situations to characterize them as the mechanism to avoid federal subsidization of political activities .

this is because the effect of both is that the organizations are not exempt from federal income tax on otherwise exempt income to the extent funds are used for certain political activities .

thus , the two taxes are arguably the functional equivalents of a disallowed deduction under § 162 ( e ) , although this comparison might not support the taxes in all circumstances .

such an argument would not appear to apply to the proposal to tax corporate campaign expenditures .

the taxes imposed under §§ 4955 , 4945 , 4911 , and 4912 could be characterized as penalty taxes on § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations for engaging in campaign and lobbying speech , thus suggesting that the subsidization rationale cannot fully justify their imposition .

the taxes imposed under §§ 4955 , 4911 , and 4912 are imposed on activities that § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations are restricted under the tax laws from engaging in .

assuming these limitations are constitutional , the taxes may be an appropriate mechanism for enforcing them .

if the limitations were found to be unconstitutional , then that might call into question the constitutionality of the taxes as well .

the § 4945 tax is different in that it also applies to certain expenditures that are otherwise permitted under the tax laws .

thus , to the extent the § 4945 tax is imposed on such activities , it might be characterized as penalizing behavior that is otherwise lawful , and therefore might be compared to a proposal to tax corporate campaign expenditures .

however , the two circumstances might be distinguished .

private foundations are heavily regulated due to fear of abuse , and thus the § 4945 tax could be seen as a part of an overall regulatory scheme , separate from campaign finance .

whether a comparable rationale would exist for a proposal to tax corporate campaign expenditures would appear to depend on the specific proposal and its context .

finally , one could point to the fact that the existing taxes apply to tax - exempt organizations , thus perhaps permitting the argument that any burden on their speech could be avoided by restructuring their activities .

it seems difficult to fully extend a similar rationale to a tax on corporate campaign expenditures .

proposals to enact public financing for congressional candidate campaigns have been introduced in the 111 th congress .

public financing programs are generally voluntary and traditionally offer grants or matching funds in exchange for candidates agreeing to limit spending .

it appears that legislation establishing such public financing programs , requiring compliance with spending limits , would pass constitutional muster on the condition that they are voluntary .

in the 1976 landmark case of buckley v. valeo , the supreme court held that spending limitations violate the first amendment because they impose direct , substantial restraints on the quantity of political speech .

the court found that expenditure limitations fail to serve any substantial government interest in stemming the reality of corruption or the appearance thereof , and that they heavily burden political expression .

reaffirming buckley , in citizens united v. fec , the court reiterated this determination finding that truly independent expenditures , with no prearrangement and coordination with a candidate , not only lessen the value of the expenditure to the candidate , but also mitigate any danger that expenditures will be made as a quid pro quo for improper commitments from the candidate .

as a result , spending limits may only be imposed if they are voluntary .

in buckley , the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of the voluntary public financing program for presidential elections .

the court concluded that presidential public financing was within the constitutional powers of congress to reform the electoral process , and that public financing provisions did not violate any first amendment rights by abridging , restricting , or censoring speech , expression , and association , but rather encouraged public discussion and participation in the electoral process .

according to the court: congress may engage in public financing of election campaigns and may condition acceptance of public funds on an agreement by the candidate to abide by specified expenditure limitations .

just as a candidate may voluntarily limit the size of the contributions he chooses to accept , he may decide to forgo private fundraising and accept public funding .

although public financing proposals contain an incentive for compliance with spending limits — the receipt of public monies or other benefits — it does not appear that such incentives jeopardize the voluntary nature of the spending limitation .

that is , a candidate could legally choose not to comply with the spending limits by opting not to accept the public benefits .

therefore , it appears that a proposal establishing a voluntary public finance program for congressional candidates , requiring compliance with spending limits , would likely be upheld as constitutional .

in citizens united v. fec , the supreme court invalidated two provisions of the federal election campaign act ( feca ) , codified at 2 u.s.c .

§ 441b , finding that they were unconstitutional under the first amendment .

it struck down the long - standing prohibition on corporations using their general treasury funds to make independent expenditures , and section 203 of the bipartisan campaign reform act of 2002 ( bcra ) , which amended feca , prohibiting corporations from using their general treasury funds for "electioneering communications. .

bcra defines "electioneering communication" as any broadcast , cable , or satellite communication that refers to a clearly identified federal candidate made within 60 days of a general election or 30 days of a primary .

the court determined that these prohibitions constitute a "ban on speech" in violation of the first amendment .

as a result of the court's decision being one of constitutional interpretation — not statutory interpretation — amending the constitution is an option for overturning the ruling directly .

in order to restore feca provisions that were in effect prior to the court's ruling , it appears that a proposal to amend the constitution would need to allow , at a minimum , enactment of legislation that prohibits corporations and labor unions from using their general treasury funds to make expenditures for communications that expressly advocate election or defeat of a clearly identified federal candidate and for electioneering communications .

in the 111 th congress , proposals have been introduced that would amend the constitution .

in accordance with article v of the constitution , such joint resolutions would require approval by two - thirds of each house , would become effective upon ratification by the legislatures of three - fourths of the states , and specify that approval is required within seven years from the date of submission .

proposals to amend the constitution vary .

some would provide congress with the expansive power to regulate the raising and spending of money in federal elections , including setting limits on expenditures made in support of or opposition to federal candidates .

such an amendment to the constitution would not only appear to allow congress to enact legislation restricting corporate and labor union expenditures , but also limiting independent expenditures by candidates , political parties , political action committees ( pacs ) , and individuals .

in contrast , other proposals take a more direct approach and would expressly prohibit corporations and labor unions from using general treasury funds for advertisements in connection with a federal office campaign , regardless of whether the advertisement expressly advocates the election or defeat of a clearly identified federal candidate .

in addition , as citizens united appears to invalidate state laws that restrict corporate expenditures — in addition to the federal statute — some proposals to amend the constitution would also provide states with the power to enact laws regulating corporate expenditures in connection with state elections .

