the idea of human spaceflight beyond earth orbit has captivated many americans for more than half a century .

as u.s. space policy has evolved , new opportunities have emerged , and new challenges have arisen .

from 2004 to 2010 , the priorities of the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) were governed by the vision for space exploration .

the vision was announced by president bush in january 2004 and endorsed by congress in the 2005 and 2008 nasa authorization acts ( p.l .

109-155 and p.l .

110-422 ) .

it directed nasa to focus its efforts on returning humans to the moon by 2020 and some day sending them to mars and "worlds beyond. .

the resulting efforts are now approaching major milestones , such as the end of the space shuttle program and design review decisions for the new spacecraft intended to replace the shuttle .

in may 2009 , the obama administration announced plans for a high - level independent review of the future of human space flight , chaired by norman r. augustine .

major components of the fy2010 nasa budget request were placeholders , to be revised following the results of this review .

the augustine committee released its final report in october 2009 .

the report identified serious barriers to the implementation of the vision and proposed several alternatives .

committees in the house and senate held hearings to consider the proposals .

the administration did not submit a revised fy2010 budget for nasa .

in december 2009 , congress appropriated fy2010 funds for nasa at approximately the level in the president's original request .

the appropriations conference report ( h.rept .

111-366 ) stated that the augustine committee's report raises issues requiring thoughtful consideration by the administration and the congress... .

it is premature for the conferees to advocate or initiate significant changes to the current program absent a bona fide proposal from the administration and subsequent assessment , consideration and enactment by congress... .

it is the expressed hope of the conferees that the administration will formulate its formal decision soon , submit its recommendations for congressional review and consideration , and budget the necessary resources .

in february 2010 , as part of its fy2011 budget , the administration proposed major changes to the vision , including the elimination of a human return to the moon as nasa's primary goal , the cancellation of nasa's constellation spacecraft development program , a new effort to encourage the private sector to develop commercial crew launch services , and increased emphasis at nasa on technology development and science .

the 111 th congress considered these proposals but ultimately did not pass a regular fy2011 appropriations bill for nasa .

under the continuing appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-242 as amended by p.l .

111-322 ) , nasa is operating at fy2010 funding levels through march 4 , 2011 .

because the continuing resolution does not explicitly remove it , a restriction in the fy2010 appropriations act that requires nasa to continue the constellation program remains in effect .

the 111 th congress did pass a comprehensive nasa reauthorization bill , the nasa authorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-267 ) .

this act mandates several major changes in direction for nasa .

for example , it calls for the development of a new , crew - capable , heavy - lift rocket , and it provides for the development of commercial services to transport nasa crews into low earth orbit .

in the near term , nasa's ability to implement these changes may be constrained by operating under the continuing resolution .

the nasa inspector general has estimated that if the continuing resolution is extended through the end of fy2011 , without changes to the requirement to continue constellation , nasa will likely have to spend $575 million during fy2011 on activities that it would otherwise no longer pursue .

in the longer term , fiscal constraints may also create barriers , if they result in future appropriations that do not match the growing nasa budgets envisioned by the 2010 authorization act .

as congress considers these broad space policy challenges , the major issues it faces can be summarized as three broad questions: what is nasa for ? .

different analysts and policy makers give different answers to this question: making scientific discoveries , developing technologies with economic benefits , enhancing national security , enhancing international prestige , even fulfilling human destiny in space .

how should these competing goals be prioritized ? .

what should nasa do ? .

in order to accomplish its broad goals , how should nasa balance its major programs in human spaceflight , robotic spaceflight , aeronautics research , and education ? .

in the human spaceflight program , which is larger than all the others put together , should the agency's goal be exploration of the moon , mars , or some other destination ? .

what should the top priorities be for nasa's science and aeronautics programs ? .

how ? .

once these questions are decided , how should their answers be implemented ? .

what new space vehicles are needed ? .

should they be government - owned or commercial ? .

what should be done with existing programs , such as the space shuttle and the international space station ? .

this report analyzes these questions and some possible answers .

it also addresses a number of cross - cutting issues , such as nasa's interactions with other federal agencies and the growing role of the commercial space industry .

during the eisenhower administration , after the soviet union's launch of the first artificial satellite , sputnik , but before the establishment of nasa , the president's science and advisory committee identified four "principal reasons for undertaking a national space program": "the compelling urge of man to explore and to discover" ; "defense ... to be sure that space is not used to endanger our security ... [and to] be prepared to use space to defend ourselves" ; to "enhance the prestige of the united states ... and create added confidence in our scientific , technological , industrial , and military strength" ; and "scientific observation and experiment which will add to our knowledge and understanding of the earth , the solar system , and the universe. .

to these objectives , analysts today add the potential for technologies developed for the space program to have direct and indirect ( "spinoff" ) economic benefits ; the opportunity to use space activities as a tool of international relations , through collaboration on projects such as the international space station ; and the ability of the space program to inspire students and promote education in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) .

these goals form a foundation for u.s. space policies , but policy makers differ in how they should be balanced against each other .

is the urge to discover a sufficient reason to explore space , or must exploration also meet needs here on earth ? .

should economic benefits be an explicit focus for nasa or just a positive side effect ? .

to what extent should improving stem education be a nasa function , as opposed to a consequence of its other functions ? .

should the emphasis of international space programs be competition or cooperation ? .

the priorities that congress assigns to these objectives may determine how it balances the competing demands of nasa's programs .

for example , if congress believes that national prestige is a high priority , it could choose to emphasize nasa's high - profile human exploration activities , such as exploring mars or establishing a moon base .

if scientific knowledge is a high priority , congress could emphasize unmanned missions such as the hubble telescope and the mars rovers .

if international relations are a high priority , congress could encourage joint space activities with other nations .

if economic benefits are of interest , congress could focus on technological development , linking nasa programs to the needs of business and industry .

a report by the national academies proposed goals similar to those listed above and recommended three criteria to use in balancing their competing demands for resources: steady progress .

each major area should be maintained at a level that allows sustained long - term progress with intermediate goals achieved at a reasonable pace .

stability .

rapid downsizing and abrupt redirection should be avoided because they are disruptive , can take time to recover from , and can create risk as operations experience is lost .

robustness .

sufficient human resources and research infrastructure should be maintained so that the nation can ramp up selected activities quickly in response to changing national needs or scientific breakthroughs .

the academies report did not , however , actually employ these criteria to prioritize the goals it proposed .

based on this wide variety of objectives , nasa has established programs in human spaceflight , science , aeronautics , and education .

the largest and most visible effort , in human spaceflight , has faced considerable uncertainty about its proper scope and aims .

the content of the science , aeronautics , and education programs is less controversial but still faces questions about scope , balance , and other issues .

since its first launch in april 1981 , the space shuttle has been the only u.s. vehicle capable of carrying humans into space .

after a few remaining flights during 2011 , the space shuttle program is scheduled to end .

although some advocates and policy makers would like to extend the program , technical and management issues are making that ever more difficult as the scheduled termination approaches .

congress's attention is increasingly on managing the transition of the shuttle workforce and facilities and on addressing the projected multi - year gap in u.s. access to space between the last shuttle flight and the first flight of its successor .

the iss is composed of crew living space , laboratories , remote manipulator systems , solar arrays to generate electricity , and other elements .

launched separately , these elements were assembled in space .

rotating crews have occupied the iss , each for a period of four to six months , since november 2000 .

when the space station was first announced , its assembly was to be complete by 1994 .

in 1998 , when construction actually began , it was expected to be complete by 2002 , with operations through at least 2012 .

completion is now scheduled during 2011 .

in 2003 , nasa briefing charts showed operations possibly continuing through 2022 .

under the vision , announced in 2004 , u.s. utilization was scheduled to end after 2015 .

the nasa authorization act of 2010 extended u.s. utilization through at least fy2020 .

the framework for international cooperation on the iss is the intergovernmental agreement on space station cooperation , which was signed in 1998 by representatives of the united states , russia , japan , canada , belgium , denmark , france , germany , italy , the netherlands , norway , spain , sweden , switzerland , and the united kingdom .

the intergovernmental agreement has the status of an executive agreement in the united states , but is considered a treaty in all the other partner countries .

it is implemented through memoranda of understanding between nasa and its counterpart agencies: the russian federal space agency ( roskosmos ) , the japanese aerospace exploration agency ( jaxa ) , the canadian space agency ( csa ) , and the european space agency ( esa ) .

the united states also has an iss participation agreement with brazil , independent of the 1998 framework .

because of cost growth and schedule delays , the scope and capabilities of the iss have repeatedly been downsized .

the original concept was not just a laboratory , but also an observatory ; a transportation node ; a facility for servicing , assembly , and manufacturing ; and a storage depot and staging base for other missions .

by 1989 , only the laboratory function remained , and even that was smaller and less capable than in the original plans .

in 1993 , russia joined the space station partnership , a move that added foreign policy objectives to the program's goals .

by 2001 , following further downsizing , nasa saw three goals for the station: conducting world - class research , establishing a permanent human presence in space , and "accommodation of all international partner elements. .

following the announcement of the vision in 2004 , learning to live and work in space became a key justification for the iss program , and iss research was to be focused on the long - term effects of space travel on human biology .

concerned that the station's function as a research laboratory was being eroded , congress took several legislative actions .

the nasa authorization act of 2005 required nasa to allocate at least 15% of the funds budgeted to iss research to "life and microgravity science research that is not directly related to supporting the human exploration program. .

it also required nasa to submit a research plan for utilization of the iss .

issued in june 2006 , the plan described proposed r&d and utilization activities in each of six disciplinary areas .

it characterized the iss as a long - duration test - bed for future lunar missions ; a flight analog for future missions to mars ; a laboratory for research directly related to human space exploration , such as human health countermeasures , fire suppression , and life support ; and an opportunity to gain experience in managing international partnerships for long - duration space missions .

the plan stated that research not related to exploration would continue "at a reduced level. .

at about the same time , the national academies issued a review of nasa's plans for the iss .

this review noted "with concern" that the objectives of the iss "no longer include the fundamental biological and physical research that had been a major focus of iss planning since its inception. .

it concluded that "once lost , neither the necessary research infrastructure nor the necessary communities of scientific investigators can survive or be easily replaced. .

whatever spacecraft are ultimately used for access to the iss following the end of the space shuttle program , in the long term new vehicles will be needed to carry humans and cargo into space , both to low earth orbit and beyond .

under the constellation program , these vehicles would be the crew capsule orion , the ares i rocket to launch orion into low earth orbit , and the heavy - lift ares v rocket to launch cargo .

under the new direction established by the nasa authorization act of 2010 , they would be a multipurpose crew vehicle based on orion ; a new , crew - capable , heavy - lift rocket referred to in the act as the space launch system ; and commercial services to carry astronauts to and from low earth orbit .

 ( the multipurpose crew vehicle and space launch system would together provide a backup option in the event that those commercial services are not available when needed. ) .

a variety of alternatives to these plans have been proposed , particularly with respect to heavy - lift rockets .

until 2010 , the vision for space exploration established the moon as nasa's next goal for human exploration beyond low earth orbit , followed eventually by mars .

in considering possible modifications to the vision , space policy experts and other interested observers suggested various alternative goals .

for example , some proposed that mars should be the immediate objective , rather than returning to the moon first .

others suggested human missions to asteroids or other solar system destinations .

the augustine committee concluded that current technology is insufficiently developed to make a mars mission safe .

it found that mars is "unquestionably the most interesting destination in the inner solar system" and the "ultimate destination for human exploration" but "not the best first destination. .

a spacecraft that lands on either the moon or mars must overcome the lunar or martian "gravity well" before returning to earth .

the fuel required to accomplish this makes either destination challenging .

as potential alternatives , the augustine committee considered fly - by missions to either the moon or mars , missions that would orbit either the moon or mars , missions that would land on the moons of mars , and missions to near - earth objects such as asteroids or comets .

they also considered missions to various lagrange points .

lagrange points are special locations in space , defined relative to the orbit of the moon around the earth or the earth around the sun .

they are planned locations for future unmanned science spacecraft , and some scientists believe they will be important in determining routes for future interplanetary travel .

possible activities at each of these destinations are shown in figure 1 .

the administration's plan , first articulated in the president's speech in april 2010 , is for nasa's first destination beyond low earth orbit to be an asteroid , followed by an orbit of mars and subsequently a mars landing .

this plan appears to be consistent with the nasa authorization act of 2010 , which states that "a long - term objective for human exploration of space should be the eventual international exploration of mars. .

the act also , however , mandates a review by national academies of the goals , capabilities , and direction of human space flight .

given the costs and risks of human space exploration , congress could decide to curtail or postpone future human exploration missions and shift the emphasis of the nation's space program to other endeavors .

the cost of human exploration is substantial , and according to the augustine committee , it is not a continuum: there is an "entry cost" below which a successful program cannot be conducted at all .

congress could decide that this minimum cost is not affordable .

similarly , no matter how energetically nasa addresses safety concerns , human spaceflight is an inherently risky endeavor .

congress could decide that the potential benefits are insufficient to justify the safety risks .

several options are available as alternatives to human space exploration .

congress could seek to accomplish some of the same goals through other means , such as through robotic exploration .

it could focus on technology development , in the hope of developing new technology that makes human spaceflight safer and more affordable in the future .

it could focus on nasa's other activities , such as earth science and aeronautics .

given sufficient funding , of course , all these options are also available in conjunction with human exploration rather than as alternatives to it .

for example , the augustine committee acknowledged that robotic exploration is important as a precursor to human exploration .

in addition to the programmatic and prioritization issues that are the main focus of this report , nasa faces some cross - cutting challenges , such as acquisition and financial management , and issues involving its relationships with other agencies and the commercial space launch industry .

the nasa authorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-267 ) is discussed above in the section " human spaceflight: the 2010 authorization act " and elsewhere throughout this report .

appropriations for nasa are provided in the commerce , justice , science ( cjs ) appropriations bill .

for more information on fy2011 appropriations legislation , see crs report r41161 , commerce , justice , science , and related agencies: fy2011 appropriations .

like other agencies , nasa is currently operating at fy2010 funding levels under a continuing resolution , the continuing appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-242 as amended by p.l .

111-322 ) .

for fy2010 , the cjs bill was passed by the house and senate as h.r .

2847 .

for final passage , it was included in the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

for more information about fy2010 nasa appropriations , see crs report r40644 , commerce , justice , science , and related agencies: fy2010 appropriations .

for fy2009 nasa appropriations legislation during the 111 th congress , including passage of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) and the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) , see crs report rl34540 , commerce , justice , science and related agencies: fy2009 appropriations .

a number of other bills addressing specific topics related to nasa were introduced during the 111 th congress .

among these , p.l .

111-125 extended the current third - party liability indemnification for commercial launch services companies through 2012 .

p.l .

111-314 restated existing law relating to nasa and other space topics as a new , separate title of the u.s. code .

bills that did not become law included the following: h.r .

4804 and s. 3068 , which would have extended the space shuttle and iss programs , provided for the development of a national space transportation system , and authorized appropriations for certain nasa programs ; h.r .

1962 , which would have extended the space shuttle program to 2015 ; h.r .

3853 , which would have authorized grants to university consortia to establish centers in conjunction with nasa and industry ; h.r .

5614 , which would have required expenditure of appropriated fy2010 constellation funds on the constellation program , without terminating or descoping contracts ; and s. 3180 , which would have prohibited the use of the anti - deficiency act ( 31 u.s.c .

1341 ) as the basis for terminating or eliminating a constellation contract , program , project , or activity .

in conclusion , major space policy issues facing congress include the following: is there a national consensus for human exploration beyond earth orbit , despite the inherent risks and the substantial cost ? .

if so , what destination or destinations should nasa's human exploration program explore ? .

if human exploration beyond earth orbit is too costly or too dangerous , should nasa focus its efforts on human missions in earth orbit , robotic exploration , technology development , other activities such as science and aeronautics , or some combination of these ? .

when the space shuttle program ends during 2011 , how should the transition of shuttle workforce and facilities be managed ? .

now that u.s. use of the international space station has been extended to at least 2020 , how can the iss be managed and utilized most effectively ? .

what can be done to ensure that new spacecraft for human exploration , both government - owned and commercial , are developed effectively , despite budget constraints ? .

how should nasa's multiple objectives be prioritized ? .

what is the proper balance between human spaceflight , science , aeronautics , and education programs , and how can the balance be maintained if the cost of the larger , more prominent programs grows ? .

