in 1986 , the harbor maintenance tax ( hmt ) was enacted to fund u.s. army corps of engineers' ( usace or the corps ) activities related to the routine operation and maintenance ( o&m ) of harbors , namely the dredging of harbor channels to their authorized depths and widths .

this tax is assessed on the value of imported and domestic cargo handled at ports at the current rate of 0.125% ( $1.25 per $1,000 in cargo value ) , which in recent years has raised over $1 billion annually .

u.s. waterborne exporters no longer pay the tax because a 1998 u.s. supreme court ruling found it unconstitutional .

importers generate about 95% of the tax revenue .

the tax revenues are deposited into the harbor maintenance trust fund ( hmtf ) from which congress annually appropriates funds for harbor maintenance .

in recent years , hmtf annual expenditures have remained relatively flat while hmt collections have increased due to rising import volume ( except in 2009 when collections declined along with import volume ) .

consequently , a large "surplus" in the hmtf has developed .

despite the surplus , the busiest u.s. harbors are not being fully maintained , according to the corps .

full channel dimensions are , on average , available less than about a third of the time at the 59 highest use u.s. harbors .

under - maintained channels in busy u.s. ports could increase the risks of ship groundings or collisions , resulting in spilled cargo or fuel oil .

they also could raise the cost of shipping , requiring ships to carry less cargo to reduce their draft or wait for high tide before transiting a harbor .

to rectify this situation , some industry stakeholders seek to enact a "spending guarantee" to spend down the surplus in the hmtf .

however , examining where trust fund monies have been spent indicates that little or no shipping is taking place at many of the harbors and waterways that shippers are paying to maintain .

some of these harbors or waterways are among the most expensive to maintain in the country and collectively they represent a significant portion of total hmtf expenditures .

thus , in addition to possibly increasing hmtf expenditures , policymakers may consider whether current expenditures are being efficiently and equitably utilized .

given the amount of hmt collections not spent on harbors and the amount spent on harbors with little or no cargo , a rough estimate is that less than half and perhaps as little as a third of every hmt dollar collected is being spent to maintain harbors that shippers frequently use .

economic and equity issues related to hmt expenditures and collections are the main focus of this report .

before analyzing these issues , the report reviews the legislative history of the tax and legal challenges to it , discusses the advantages and disadvantages of alternative funding mechanisms , and describes the commercial context of current dredging activity .

the last section identifies legislation related to harbor maintenance funding .

the revenues collected from the hmt are deposited into the hmtf .

the hmtf balance is expected to be over $5 billion at the end of fy2010 , as shown in figure 1 .

currently , revenue deposited into the hmtf exceeds transfers out of the fund , which are approved by congress annually .

interest on collections has been over $100 million in recent fiscal years .

hmtf expenditures fall under the discretionary spending budget ceilings .

congress appropriates funds for the usace to perform navigation operation and maintenance at individual harbors .

the amounts expended in a given year at harbors that qualify for recovery from the hmtf are reimbursed to the general fund .

the hmtf balance increased in fy1999 as a result of the energy and water development appropriations act of fy1999 ( p.l .

105-245 ) , which did not require the recovery of corps of engineers o&m expenditures from the fund for that year .

although a decrease in international trade reduced hmt collections by about $375 million in fy2009 , the current hmtf balance , in conjunction with the revenue stream from the remaining hmt collections and interest payments , is considered sufficient to recover expenditures for the foreseeable future .

because the hmtf is not a separate , or "off - budget," account within the federal budget , the "surplus" in the hmtf has in effect already been spent on general government activities .

in the 111 th congress , several bills were introduced to either change the tax rate or how revenues from the tax are spent .

h.r .

3486 , h.r .

638 , s. 551 , and s. 1509 would repeal the tax on domestic waterborne non - bulk cargo and cargo imported from canada through the great lakes for the purported purpose of mitigating highway congestion by diverting shipments from truck to water modes .

groups supporting this legislation contend that in addition to the hmt rate , the administrative burden of filing the tax discourages potential waterborne shippers , because they do not pay a separate tax when shipping by truck or rail .

others question to what extent this is true , however .

most truck shippers are not located on waterways and therefore would require a truck move to and from the loading and discharge ports to utilize waterborne transportation .

these truck and cargo transferring costs could be a significant cost impediment for truck shippers to utilize waterborne transportation , regardless of the hmt .

h.r .

3447 would do away with the requirement that hmtf spending be appropriated by congress giving the usace more autonomy over the amount spent yearly on harbor maintenance .

h.r .

4844 / s. 3213 would provide a "spending guarantee" modeled after the airport and airway trust fund .

the intent is to match annual spending levels with annual hmt collections .

opponents of these proposals argue that they would inhibit congress' ability to adjust funding priorities from year to year .

h.r .

2355 would increase the tax rate to 0.4375% ( $4.38 per $1,000 in cargo value ) and expand use of the fund for landside port improvements in addition to the waterside maintenance performed by the corps .

increasing the capacity of highways and railroads leading to seaports has been an issue as congress debates reauthorization of surface transportation funding programs , but minus a federal fuels tax increase , a major stumbling block has been how to increase federal funds for surface transportation improvements .

the obama administration , in its fy2010 budget submission , requested that a pilot project be created to examine the feasibility of having local users finance the maintenance dredging of channels with little or no commercial traffic .

congress reduced the amount of funding for this program from $1.5 million to $1.4 million .

the administration requested an additional $1.5 million for fy2011 and indicated that a report documenting the pilot's program findings would be prepared .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) provided $4.6 billion for the usace civil works program , of which $2.3 billion was appropriated for operation and maintenance .

a corps recovery act spending plan indicates that $670 million in o&m work will be derived from the hmtf .

