a major global donors' conference was held march 31 , 2010 , in new york .

donors pledged over $5 billion for the first 18 months of haiti's reconstruction .

the united states pledged $1.2 billion .

the haitian government presented an action plan for reconstruction and development , and a post disaster needs assessment that estimated the total value of recovery and reconstruction needs to be $11.5 billion .

the obama administration requested $2.8 billion in fy2010 supplemental funding for relief and reconstruction support for haiti .

extra - constitutional rule will begin after may 10 , when most parliamentarians' terms expire ; president préval will probably rule by decree after that .

haiti passed a state of emergency law on april 20 giving the president broad powers .

the international community is urging haiti to hold legislative and presidential elections in november 2010 .

humanitarian assistance is focused on providing waterproof emergency shelter , improving sanitation and meeting the basic needs of the displaced and other vulnerable haitians .

the relief effort is expected to last for many months .

most u.s. military forces will withdraw from haiti by about june 1 , 2010 .

the largest earthquake ever recorded in haiti devastated parts of the country , including the capital , on january 12 , 2010 .

the quake , centered about 15 miles southwest of port - au - prince , had a magnitude of 7.0 .

a series of strong aftershocks have followed .

the damage was severe and catastrophic .

thousands of buildings collapsed , leaving unknown numbers of people trapped , and hundreds of thousands of people homeless in the streets .

estimates of casualties are constantly being updated .

according to the secretary - general of the united nations , "[o]f haiti's 9 million people , initial reports suggest roughly a third may be affected by the disaster. .

the inter - american development bank ( idb ) issued a study on february 11 estimating the damage caused by the earthquake to be at least $8 billion , and as high as $14 billion .

one of the report's authors , economist andrew powell , said that , "this disaster , given the size of haiti ... is the most devastating catastrophe that a country has experienced possibly ever. .

the report compared the damage to other catastrophes , finding , for example , that the earthquake's damage amounted to 117% of haiti's annual economic output , while the 2004 tsunami damage amounted to 2% of indonesia's annual economic output .

the haiti post disaster needs assessment , conducted by haiti and international institutions , reported similar findings , estimating the total value of recovery and reconstruction needs to be $11.5 billion .

all of this damage was sustained in a country that the united nations had already designated as one of the 50 "least developed countries" in the world , facing a higher risk than other countries of failing to come out of poverty , and therefore needing the highest degree of attention from the international community .

recovery efforts have been made extremely difficult by the loss of personnel and infrastructure that would be part of a recovery effort .

among the missing and dead were haitian government officials and international aid personnel , including many u.n. personnel .

housing , hospitals , schools , and many government buildings collapsed .

basic services such as electricity and water were almost completely disrupted .

major transportation routes were damaged and / or blocked .

the port - au - prince airport control tower was destroyed ; the airport continued to function , and air traffic control authority was quickly transferred to u.s. personnel with portable radar .

on february 18 , commercial air traffic in and out of port - au - prince resumed .

as of early march , relief flights into haiti had dropped from a peak of 160 flights per day to an average of 75 .

the main port suffered heavy damage ; u.s. troops are repairing the port facilities .

the port is expected to handle 1,500 containers of relief supplies once it is fully repaired .

the use of airfields and ports in the dominican republic , with humanitarian corridors over land , have also eased the burden on haitian facilities .

haitian government officials continue to function in makeshift conditions .

the roof of the presidential palace collapsed and the president's private residence was also destroyed .

president préval was initially unable to communicate with his cabinet and has been working out of a small room in a police headquarters .

the parliament building collapsed , with some members trapped inside and others killed .

the parliament has convened in the national police academy .

twenty - eight of 29 ministry buildings were destroyed .

the united nations , which already had a strong presence in haiti , is at the forefront of on - the - ground response for security and humanitarian assistance , and suffered heavy losses as well .

its headquarters collapsed , and 101 u.n. personnel are confirmed dead and 6 others remain unaccounted for .

the head of the u.n. stabilization mission in haiti ( minustah ) , special representative hedi annabi , and his deputy , luiz carlos da costa , were among the dead .

u.n. secretary general ban ki - moon sent assistant secretary general edmond mulet to haiti on january 13 to direct the u.n.'s immediate response efforts ; mulet is a former special representative of the secretary general for minustah .

prior to the earthquake , the international community was providing extensive development and humanitarian assistance to haiti .

with that assistance , the haitian government had made significant progress in recent years in many areas of its development strategy , including security ; judicial reform ; macroeconomic management ; procurement processes and fiscal transparency ; increased voter registration ; and jobs creation .

it had also made progress in providing broader access to clean water and other services .

parliamentary elections scheduled for february 2010 have been delayed .

there is tentative agreement that haiti will hold joint parliamentary and presidential elections in november 2010 .

president préval's term will end in february 2011 , and he is not eligible to run for reelection .

the destruction of haiti's nascent infrastructure and other extensive damage caused by january's earthquake will set back haiti's development significantly .

u.n. special envoy and former president bill clinton said that haiti's long - term development plans "will need to be amended ... but they cannot be abandoned. .

soon after the earthquake , the government of haiti and the international donor community held meetings and conferences to begin planning a long - term strategy for haitian recovery .

a major global donors' conference was held march 31 , 2010 , in new york at which 48 countries , multilateral institutions , and a coalition of non - governmental organizations pledged $5.3 billion for the first 18 months of haiti's reconstruction , part of nearly $10 billion pledged toward long - term reconstruction efforts .

the idb damage assessment stated that donor coordination will be key in any reconstruction effort .

the report further noted that there are different models for coordination , but that however it is coordinated , "[a] single executing agency with appropriate powers , transparency and accountability to the haitian government and donors would be helpful" in achieving the needed coordination on the ground .

to that end , haiti and the international donor community have established a multi - donor trust fund to monitor , coordinate , and distribute funds .

the obama administration is requesting $2.8 billion in fy2010 supplemental funding to cover costs associated with relief and reconstruction support for haiti .

the u.s. pledge of $1.2 billion made at the donors conference is included in that request .

in the immediate wake of the earthquake , president préval described conditions in his country as "unimaginable," and appealed for international assistance .

the country's top priority was to conduct search and rescue operations for survivors .

other material priorities included an offshore vessel medical unit and electricity generation capability .

the government also requested communications equipment so that government officials could better function and coordinate response efforts .

as those immediate needs are met and the humanitarian relief operation continues , the government is struggling to restore the institutions needed for it to function and to address long - term reconstruction and development planning .

"the first thing is political stability," said préval .

"secondly , we hope the international community will help us in the short - term , mid - term , and long - term. .

prior to this disaster , the world bank and others were working with the haitian government to incorporate disaster risk management into haiti's overall development strategy and to develop its capacity for disaster response .

the capacity was still in its early stages , however , and the focus of much of its risk management efforts was not geared toward earthquakes , but toward hurricanes , which are the most common cause of natural disasters on the island .

the last major earthquake in haiti was 150 years ago , in 1860 .

some haitians complain that they have seen or heard little of president préval since the earthquake .

the perception that the haitian government was not doing enough contributed to calls by some haitians , both in haiti and the united states , for the united states to take control of haiti in place of the current government in the days following the disaster .

the destruction of buildings , equipment , and loss of skilled personnel has drastically reduced the ability of the government to respond rapidly .

according to the haitian chamber of commerce , the earthquake destroyed approximately 25,000 public and commercial buildings .

twenty - one out of 22 ministry buildings were destroyed .

along with the buildings , government records were destroyed ; re - establishing and expanding transparency in government spending will be particularly challenging .

these losses , plus the difficulty of delivering and transporting material supplies , will hinder delivery of services .

the already significant need for services is now vastly expanded .

haitian ministries are addressing issues such as long - term housing for those left homeless by the earthquake as they operate out of makeshift offices .

haitian authorities and international relief agencies are delivering food and water to hundreds of makeshift camps in port - au - prince .

the government provided free transportation to evacuate people from the capital to cities not damaged by the earthquake .

interior minister paul antoine bien - aime indicated that as many as 482,000 people may be relocated outside port - au - prince .

the haitian government is sending officials to small cities to help officials in those communities establish priorities .

other elements of the government are working along with international actors .

the haitian national police are contributing to maintaining security , for example , and haitian air traffic controllers are working along with u.s. controllers at the port - au - prince airport .

the haitian government , the united nations , and donor representatives met in haiti on january 14 to coordinate their efforts , and have continued to do so at various conferences .

eighteen haitian senators elected two commissions on january 28 to monitor aid and manage agreements with aid organizations .

the u.n. security council created the u.n. stabilization mission in haiti ( minustah ) on april 30 , 2004 , having determined that the situation in haiti continued to be a threat to international peace and security in the region and acting under chapter vii of the u.n. charter .

as a u.n. - conducted peacekeeping operation , minustah was given a mandate under three broad areas: a secure and stable environment , the political process , and human rights .

on october 13 , 2009 , the council extended its mandate until october 15 , 2010 , "with the intention of further renewal. .

the council monitors the activities of minustah through semiannual reports made by the u.n. secretary - general and his special representative , and also not later than 45 days before expiration of its mandate .

on january 19 , 2010 , the u.n. security council increased the overall force levels of minustah "to support the immediate recovery , reconstruction and stability efforts. .

the council decided that "minustah will consist of a military component of up to 8,940 troops of all ranks and of a police component of up to 3,711 police and that it will keep the new levels of troops and police in minustah under review as necessary. .

the limits had been set at 6,940 for the military component and 2,211 for the police component .

as of april 13 , 2010 , the military component of minustah totaled 8,306 troops , including four engineering companies , and 2,178 police officers .

on april 28 , 2010 , the u.n. security council met to consider the situation in haiti , especially the april 2010 report of secretary - general ban ki - moon on minustah .

this was his first report since september 1 , 2009 and covered up to april 15 , 2010 , with a focus on events since the earthquake .

ban noted , in his report , that his special representative will continue to oversee the activities of the whole united nations system and , within means and capabilities , ensure the full support of the minustah military , police and logistics components to humanitarian and recovery efforts .

ban proposed that minustah "assume the lead role in coordinating international electoral assistance in order to ensure its efficiency and avoid the duplication of efforts. .

ban observed that a "major focus of effort will be timely preparations for the 2010 presidential , legislative and municipal elections. .

in addition , he stated that minustah "will reconfigure the military component within the existing troop ceiling to provide additional military engineers on a surge basis. .

ban also recommended that the council increase the minustah police component , adding 680 police personnel to the force levels already authorized by the council in january 2010 .

as of may 3 , 2010 , the council has not acted in response to the report of the secretary - general .

the headquarters of the u.n. stabilization mission in haiti ( minustah ) was demolished in the earthquake , with 101 u.n. staff confirmed dead .

these included the special representative of the secretary - general and head of minustah hedi annabi and his deputy , luiz carlos da costa .

on march 31 , 2010 , secretary - general ban announced the appointment of edmond mulet , as his special representative ( srsg ) for haiti and head of minustah .

since january 14 , 2010 , mr. mulet had been acting srsg and head of minustah .

on april 29 , 2010 , ban announced the appointment of kevin kennedy ( united states ) as deputy special representative for haiti and deputy head of minustah , succeeding mr. da costa , and nigel fisher ( canada ) as deputy special representative , ad interim , for haiti , succeeding kim bolduc ( canada ) .

on march 24 , 2010 , president obama , in a supplemental budget request to congress on haiti , requested in the state department's contributions to international peacekeeping activities ( cipa ) account a total of $96.5 million for u.s. assessed contributions to minustah .

this was to fund the increase in assessments resulting from the security council's increase in force levels on january 19 , 2010 .

the march 24 supplemental request also included , under foreign operations , in the international narcotics control and law enforcement affairs ( incle ) account , $45,000,000 to support u.s. personnel to minustah: the "secondment of 50 police advisers , five corrections advisers , and one drug specialist. .

these funds would increase the u.s. police and corrections officer contribution to minustah from 50 and 5 to 80 and 10 , respectively .

a great many international actors are also providing relief to haiti , either through financial contributions to the government of haiti or aid organizations or by directly providing relief supplies and emergency personnel .

latin american countries have responded to haiti's crisis with immediate provision of emergency supplies and personnel and pledges of financial and other assistance for its long - term recovery .

members of the organization of american states ( oas ) pledged humanitarian , financial and other support to haiti .

the oas group of friends of haiti met on january 14 to coordinate search and rescue efforts , prompt donations , and discuss ways to promote recovery .

the 15-member caribbean community ( caricom ) , of which haiti is also a member , was working in haiti prior to the earthquake .

afterwards , it mobilized its disaster emergency response system to assist haiti , and several members have sent emergency supplies or promised financial assistance .

the caribbean disaster emergency management agency assembled a response team to assess conditions in haiti as well .

many countries in the region already have peacekeeping troops in haiti serving with minustah .

brazil leads the u.n. peacekeeping mission , and had 1,284 uniformed personnel already serving there as of december 2009 .

many countries in the region have made bilateral cash or in - kind contributions as well .

 ( see "regional donors to haiti relief effort," in appendix f .

 ) the dominican republic , which shares the island of hispaniola with haiti but did not suffer heavy damage from the earthquake , responded swiftly and generously .

the two countries have a long history of hostility toward one another , but presidents préval and fernandez have worked in recent years toward having a more cooperative relationship , and this has been reflected in the dominican response .

haiti's neighbor was the first country to send relief supplies and personnel , and has facilitated aid delivery through use of its airports , roads , and port .

it has stopped repatriation of undocumented haitians , and opened its border to injured haitians , thousands of whom have been treated in both public and private hospitals .

fernandez organized a preparatory meeting for donors to discuss future aid to haiti the week after the earthquake , and the dominican republic hosted a technical meeting prior to the march 31 donor conference .

many members have already expressed a strong desire to support haiti and provide it with substantial assistance .

the 111 th congress gave bipartisan support to assist the préval government during its first session , and has continued to respond in that spirit to the crisis generated by the january earthquake .

committees in the senate and house have held hearings on haiti .

both members and witnesses stressed the need for a massive , coordinated international effort not only for immediate humanitarian needs , but also for long - term development .

moving forward , they said , strategies must consider new approaches , aim to create a more sustainable haiti , and increase haitian capacity to utilize foreign aid effectively and to provide services and direct its own economy .

p.l .

111-8 .

in the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 , section 7045 makes the government of haiti eligible to purchase u.s. defense articles and services for its coast guard .

it also obligates funds for ( 1 ) haiti under titles iii and vi of this act ; health care , nutrition , sanitation , education , and shelter for migrant workers and others .

it prohibits the use of specified funds under this act for the transfer of u.s. weapons , ammunition , or other lethal property to the haitian national police until the secretary certifies to the appropriations committees that any members of the haitian national police alleged to have committed serious crimes , including drug trafficking and human rights violations , have been suspended .

introduced february 23 , 2009 , signed into law march 11 , 2009 .

p.l .

111-117 .

in the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 , sec .

7045 ( b ) deals expressly with haiti , stating that , ( 1 ) the government of haiti shall be eligible to purchase defense articles and services under the arms export control act ( 22 u.s.c .

2751 et seq .

 ) , for the coast guard ; ( 2 ) of the funds appropriated by this act under titles iii , bilateral economic assistance , and iv , international security assistance , not less than $295,530,000 shall be made available for assistance for haiti ; and ( 3 ) none of the funds made available by this act under the heading "international narcotics control and law enforcement" may be used to transfer excess weapons , ammunition or other lethal property of an agency of the united states government to the government of haiti for use by the haitian national police until the secretary of state reports to the committees on appropriations that any members of the haitian national police who have been credibly alleged to have committed serious crimes , including drug trafficking and violations of internationally recognized human rights , have been suspended .

haiti is included in sec .

7045 ( c ) , as part of the caribbean basin security initiative .

the section reads as follows: of the funds appropriated under the headings 'development assistance,' 'economic support fund,' 'international narcotics control and law enforcement,' and 'foreign military financing program' in this act , not less than $37,000,000 should be made available for assistance for the countries of the caribbean basin , to provide equipment and training to combat drug trafficking and related violence and organized crime , and for judicial reform , institution building , education , anti - corruption , rule of law activities , and maritime security , of which not less than $21,100,000 should be made available for social justice and education programs to include vocational training , workforce development and juvenile justice activities: provided , that none of the funds made available under this subsection shall be made available for budget support or as cash payments .

the act calls on the secretary of state to provide a detailed spending plan to the committees on appropriations no later than 45 days after this act is enacted , for funds appropriated or otherwise made available for the countries of the caribbean basin , with concrete goals , actions to be taken , budget proposals , and anticipated results .

introduced july 22 , 2009 , signed into law on december 16 , 2009 .

p.l .

111-126 .

the act to accelerate the income tax benefits for charitable cash contributions for the relief of victims of the earthquake in haiti , allows taxpayers who donate to haiti earthquake relief between january 11 , 2010 , and march 1 , 2010 , to claim those contributions on their 2009 tax return .

introduced january 19 , 2010 , signed into law on january 22 , 2010 .

p.l .

111-127 .

the emergency aid to american survivors of the haiti earthquake act amends title xi of the social security act ( ssa ) to increase the funding cap under the u.s. repatriation program to $25 million for fy2010 for temporary assistance to u.s. citizens ( and their dependents ) returning from foreign countries in the event of destitution , illness , war , threat of war , invasion , or similar crisis ; amends ssa title xix ( medicaid ) to provide $65 million in additional funding for the qualified individual ( qi ) program which pays the medicare part b premium costs for low - income seniors .

reduces a corresponding amount otherwise available to the medicaid improvement fund for fy2014 .

introduced january 25 , 2010 , signed into law january 27 , 2010 .

p.l .

111-158 .

debt relief for earthquake recovery in haiti act of 2010 .

amends the international financial institutions act to direct the secretary of the treasury to instruct the u.s. executive directors at the international monetary fund ( imf ) , the international bank for reconstruction and development , the inter - american development bank , and other multilateral development institutions to: ( 1 ) cancel all debts owed by haiti to such institutions ; ( 2 ) suspend haiti's debt payments to such institutions until the debts are canceled completely ; and ( 3 ) provide additional assistance from such institutions to haiti in grant form in order to avoid additional debt accumulation .

introduced february 2 , 2010 .

signed into law on april 26 , 2010 .

h.r .

144 .

the haitian protection act of 2009 would require the secretary of homeland security to designate haiti as a country whose qualifying nationals may be eligible for temporary protected status .

introduced january 6 , 2009 ; referred to the house judiciary committee's subcommittee on immigration , citizenship , refugees , border security , and international law february 9 , 2009 .

h.r .

264 .

the save america comprehensive immigration act of 2009 would amend the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) to provide increased protections and eligibility for family - sponsored immigrants , including to authorize adjustment of status for certain nationals or citizens of haiti .

introduced january 7 , 2009 , referred to house judiciary ; house homeland security ; house oversight and government reform committees ; referred to the subcommittee on immigration , citizenship , refugees , border security , and international law february 9 , 2009 .

h.r .

417 .

the next steps for haiti act of 2009 would authorize the director of foreign assistance , in consultation with the government of haiti and haitian civil society organizations , to establish the haiti professional exchange program to assign qualified haitian americans and others to provide technical assistance to help haiti improve in areas vital to its growth and development , including education , energy , environment , health care , infrastructure , security , transportation , and disaster preparedness .

directs the secretary of state to implement a student loan forgiveness program for program participants .

introduced and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs january 9 , 2009 .

h.r .

1567 .

the haitian refugee immigration fairness act ( hrifa ) improvement act of 2009 would amend the 1998 hrifa to ( 1 ) require determinations with respect to children to be made using the age and status of an individual on october 21 , 1998 ( enactment date of the hrifa of 1998 ) ; ( 2 ) permit an application based upon child status to be filed by a parent or guardian if the child is present in the united states on such filing date ; and ( 3 ) include document fraud among the grounds of inadmissibility which shall not preclude an otherwise qualifying haitian alien from permanent resident status adjustment .

it would also permit new status adjustment applications to be filed for a limited time period .

introduced march 17 , 2009 , referred to the house judiciary committee's subcommittee on immigration , citizenship , refugees , border security , and international law on april 27 , 2009 .

h.r .

3077 .

the global food security act of 2009 , partner legislation with s. 384 , authorizes the president to provide assistance under this act or the foreign assistance act of 1961 for unexpected urgent food assistance needs .

establishes a united states emergency rapid response to food crisis fund to carry out such purposes .

introduced june 26 , 2009 .

h.r .

4206 .

the haiti reforestation act of 2009 seeks to authorize the secretary of agriculture to provide assistance to the government of haiti .

the purpose of the act is to end the deforestation in haiti within five years and to restore the tropical forest cover to its state in 1990 within a 30-year time frame .

the legislation was both introduced and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs on december 3 , 2009 .

h.r .

4468 haiti action initiative and tax incentive act of 2010 .

treats cash contributions made during january 2010 for the relief of earthquake victims in haiti as having been made on december 31 , 2009 , for purposes of the tax deduction for charitable contributions .

introduced on january 19 , 2010 and referred to the house committee on ways and means .

h.r .

4577 .

emergency health services for haitian earthquake victims act of 2010 .

introduced and referred to the house committee on energy and commerce february 3 , 2010 .

h.r .

4603 .

haitian orphan placement effort act or the hope act – would direct the secretary of homeland security ( dhs ) to expand the humanitarian parole policy for certain haitian orphans ; would apply on a case - by - case basis to children who were legally confirmed as orphans eligible for inter - country adoption by the government of haiti before january 12 , 2010 ; would authorize the placement of haitian children granted humanitarian parole into the united states in an unaccompanied refugee minor program if a suitable family member is not available to provide care .

introduced february 4 , 2010 and referred to the house committee on the judiciary .

h.r .

4616 .

haitian emergency life protection act of 2010 .

would temporarily expand the v nonimmigrant visa category to include haitians whose petition for a family - sponsored immigrant visa was approved on or before january 12 , 2010 .

introduced on feb. 5 , 2010 and referred to the house committee on the judiciary .

referred to the subcommittee on immigration , citizenship , refugees , border security and international law on april 26 , 2010 .

h.r .

4952 .

the haiti act seeks to establish the office of the special coordinator for assistance to haiti and to establish the office of the special inspector general for assistance to haiti .

introduced and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs on march 25 , 2010 .

h.r .

4961 .

the haitian private sector encouragement act of 2010 intends to provide for the establishment of the haitian - american enterprise fund .

introduced and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs on march 25 , 2010 .

h.r .

5006 .

the white house conference on haiti act of 2010 will require the president to call a white house conference on haiti .

introduced and referred to the committee on foreign affairs as well as the committee on rules for consideration on april 13 , 2010 .

h.r .

5160 .

the haiti economic lift program act of 2010 seeks to extend the caribbean basin economic recovery act , to provide customs support services to haiti , among other goals .

introduced and referred to the house committee on ways and means on april 28 , 2010 .

passed house under suspension on may 5 , 2010 .

h.r .

5171 .

the partnership with america's rapid rebuilding of haiti act of 2010 allows qualified and available united states construction workers and appropriate equipment to be sent to haiti to assist haitians in the rebuilding of their country after the devastating january 12 , 2010 , earthquake , as requested by the government of haiti .

introduced and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs on april 28 , 2010 .

h.con.res .

17 .

the resolution addresses the humanitarian assistance provided to caribbean countries affected by past hurricanes and tropical storms .

it acknowledges the affected countries' efforts to aid their citizens in recovery .

the resolution also expresses support of the international assistance received by the dominican republic , haiti , jamaica , the bahamas , cuba and turks and caicos .

referred to the house committee on foreign affairs january 9 , 2009 .

h.con.res .

165 .

supports the yielding of temporary protected status for haitian nationals who currently reside in the united states .

introduced july 17 , 2009 ; referred to the subcommittee on immigration , citizenship , refugees , border security , and international law on august 19 , 2009 .

h.res .

1021 .

expressing condolences to and solidarity with the people of haiti in the aftermath of the devastating earthquake of january 12 , 2010 .

introduced january 20 , 2010 and agreed to january 21 , 2010 .

h.res .

1048 .

a resolution commending the efforts and honoring the work of the men and women of usns comfort and the united states navy in the immediate response to those affected by the january earthquake .

introduced january 27 , 2010 and agreed to in the house on february 23 , 2010 .

h.res .

1066 .

a resolution recognizing the efforts of the u.s. armed forces , local first responders , and other members of operation unified response for their swift and coordinated action in light of the devastation caused by the earthquake .

introduced on february 3 , 2010 and agreed to on february 23 , 2010 in the house .

h.res .

1159 .

a resolution supporting efforts to address the crisis faced by haitian orphans following the earthquake .

introduced and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs on march 10 , 2010 .

h.res .

1160 .

a resolution calling for the establishment of a haiti marshall plan committee to coordinate aid and development initiatives from multilateral development banks , international financial institutions , u.s. bilateral aid programs , and major international charities and nongovernmental organizations in response to the earthquake .

introduced and referred to the committees on financial services and foreign affairs on march 10 , 2010 .

h.res .

1277 .

a resolution commending the efforts and honoring the work of the state of israel , its defense forces , and the israeli people for their efforts to provide relief to haiti in the aftermath of the earthquake in january , 2010 .

introduced and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs on april 20 , 2010 .

s. 2931 .

would accelerate the income tax benefits for charitable cash contributions for the relief of victims of the earthquake in haiti .

would treat cash contributions made after january 11 , 2010 , and before february 16 , 2010 , for the relief of earthquake victims in haiti as having been made on december 31 , 2009 , for purposes of the tax deduction for charitable contributions .

introduced january 20 , 2010 , and read twice and referred to the committee on finance .

s. 2936 .

haiti assistance income tax incentive act .

would treat cash contributions made after january 11 , 2010 , and before march 1 , 2010 , for the relief of earthquake victims in haiti as having been made on december 31 , 2009 , for purposes of the tax deduction for charitable contributions .

would deem a contribution as meeting the recordkeeping requirements of the internal revenue code if the taxpayer produces a telephone bill showing the name of the donee organization and the date and amount of the contribution .

introduced january 20 , 2010 , read twice and referred to the committee on finance .

s. 2961 .

the haiti recovery act would urge the secretary of the treasury to direct the u.s. executive director to each international financial institution to advocate: ( 1 ) the cancellation of all remaining debt obligations of haiti , including obligations incurred after the date of the enactment of this act and before february 1 , 2012 ; ( 2 ) the provision of debt service relief for all of haiti's remaining payments ; and ( 3 ) that new assistance to haiti should be primarily grants rather than loans .

would urge the secretary to: ( 1 ) instruct the u.s. executive director of the international monetary fund ( imf ) to advocate the use of certain proceeds to provide debt stock relief , debt service relief , and grants for low - income countries that are eligible for the poverty reduction and growth facility or any other programs to assist low - income countries , including haiti ; ( 2 ) support the creation of an inter - american development bank trust fund for haiti that would leverage u.s. contributions and promote bilateral donations for the purpose of investing in haiti's infrastructure ; and ( 3 ) direct the u.s. executive director of the inter - american development bank to increase earnings transfer to the fund for special operations , which finances programming in haiti and other weak economies in the western hemisphere .

would urge the secretary and the secretary of state to use all appropriate diplomatic influence to secure cancellation of all remaining bilateral debt of haiti .

introduced , read twice and referred to the committee on foreign relations january 28 , 2010 .

placed on the senate legislative calendar under general orders , calendar no .

276 and later held at the desk on march 9 , 2010 .

s. 2978 .

the renewing hope for haitian trade and investment act of 2010 would: direct the secretary of homeland security ( dhs ) , acting through the commissioner for u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , to commit sufficient cbp resources to: ( 1 ) enhance commercial assistance to promote trade among haiti , the dominican republic , and the united states ; ( 2 ) facilitate the preclearance of valid cargo from haiti to the united states ; ( 3 ) promote the efficient and secure movement of articles entering the united states under the caribbean basin economic recovery act ( cbera ) ; and ( 4 ) provide technical assistance and training to haiti's customs service to improve production validation and compliance and understanding of u.s. customs procedures , such as the electronic visa information system ; amend cbera to extend , in each succeeding one - year period through fy2013 ( transition period ) , the duty - free treatment of certain imported knit apparel articles made in one or more caribbean basin trade partnership act ( cbtpa ) beneficiary countries from yarns wholly formed in the united states ; extend the value - added rule of origin for certain apparel and other textile articles imported from haiti .

extend , for the initial applicable one - year period , and each one - year period thereafter through fy2022 , the duty - free treatment of apparel articles imported directly into the united states from haiti or the dominican republic in amounts not to exceed specified percentages of the aggregate square meter equivalents of all apparel articles imported into the united states in the most recent 12-month period ; extend , through december 20 , 2013 , the preferential treatment of wire harness automotive components manufactured in haiti and imported into the united states , provided haiti meets certain economic and political eligibility requirements ; establish the haiti recovery and investment task force to promote foreign investment in haiti ; direct the comptroller general to report to congress on the effectiveness of the trade preferences provided under the haitian hemispheric opportunity through partnership encouragement act of 2006 ( hope act ) , as amended , as well as recommendations for improving such preferences .

introduced , read twice and referred to the committee on finance feb. 2 , 2010 .

s. 2998 .

the haitian emergency life protection act of 2010 would amend the immigration and nationality act with respect to v - visa non - immigrants ( spouses and minor children of lawful permanent residents who come to the united states to wait for completion of the immigrant visa process ) .

this would include unmarried sons and daughters of such lawful permanent residents ; haitian nationals whose petition for a family - sponsored immigrant visa was approved on or before january 12 , 2010 ; would authorize the department of state to use secondary evidence to verify eligibility for such status or for immediate relative status ; would sunset the provisions of this act two years after its enactment .

introduced february 4 , 2010 , read twice and referred to the committee on the judiciary .

s. 3202 .

the haitian - american enterprise fund act would promote the strengthening of the haitian private sector .

introduced and referred to the senate committee on foreign relations on april 14 , 2010 .

s. 3275 .

the haiti economic lift program act of 2010 would extend the caribbean basin economic recovery act , to provide customs support services to haiti .

introduced , read twice , and referred to the committee on finance on april 28 , 2010 .

s.con.res .

61 .

a concurrent resolution expressing the sense of congress that general aviation pilots and industry should be recognized for the contributions made in response to haiti earthquake relief efforts .

introduced on april 27 , 2010 and referred to the house committee on transportation and infrastructure on may 3 , 2010 .

s.res .

414 .

a resolution expressing the sense of the senate on the recovery , rehabilitation , and rebuilding of haiti following the humanitarian crisis caused by the january 12 , 2010 earthquake in haiti .

introduced february 9 , 2010 and on february 24 , 2010 , placed on senate legislative calendar under general orders .

calendar no .

275 .

on march 4 , 2010 , the resolution was agreed to in senate without amendment and with a preamble by unanimous consent .

s. 3317 .

the haiti empowerment , assistance , and rebuilding act of 2010 would authorize appropriations of $3.1 billion over five years in addition to amounts otherwise available for assistance for haiti .

this would include authorizing $1.5 billion for fy 2010 , and $0.5 billion per year for fy2011 through fy2014 .

the bill would make it u.s. policy , in partnership with the government of haiti and in coordination with the international community , to support the sustainable recovery and rebuilding of haiti .

it would establish a senior coordinator for haiti within the department of state who would advise and coordinate all u.s. government policies related to haiti .

it would also direct the usaid administrator , with input provided by the coordinator , to submit to congress a multi - year strategy to provide assistance in support of haiti's reconstruction .

introduced and referred to senate committee on foreign relations on may 5 , 2010 .

appendix a .

exposed population appendix b. haiti population movement appendix c. emergency shelter gap: april 19 , 2010 appendix d. u.s. earthquake assistance to haiti appendix e. the u.s. government emergency response mechanism for international disasters the united states is generally a leader and major contributor to relief efforts in response to humanitarian disasters .

the president has broad authority to provide emergency assistance for foreign disasters and the u.s. government provides disaster assistance through several u.s. agencies .

the very nature of humanitarian disasters — the need to respond quickly in order to save lives and provide relief — has resulted in a rather unrestricted definition of what this type of assistance consists of at both a policy and an operational level .

while humanitarian assistance is assumed to provide for urgent food , shelter , and medical needs , the agencies within the u.s. government providing this support typically expand or contract the definition in response to circumstances .

funds may be used for u.s. agencies to deliver services or to provide grants to international organizations ( ios ) , international governmental and non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , and private or religious voluntary organizations ( pvos ) .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) is the u.s. government agency charged with coordinating u.s. government and private sector assistance .

it also coordinates with international organizations , the governments of countries suffering disasters , and other governments .

the office of foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) in usaid's bureau for democracy , conflict and humanitarian assistance ( dcha ) provides immediate relief materials and personnel , many of whom are already abroad on mission .

it is responsible for providing non - food humanitarian assistance and can quickly assemble disaster assistance response teams ( darts ) to assess conditions .

ofda has wide authority to borrow funds , equipment , and personnel from other parts of usaid and other federal agencies .

usaid has two other offices that administer u.s. humanitarian aid: food for peace ( ffp ) and the office of transition initiatives ( oti ) .

usaid administers emergency food aid under ffp ( title ii of p.l .

480 ) and provides relief and development food aid that does not have to be repaid .

oti provides post - disaster transition assistance , which includes mainly short - term peace and democratization projects with some attention to humanitarian elements but not emergency relief .

the department of defense ( dod ) overseas humanitarian , disaster and civic aid ( ohdaca ) funds three dodd humanitarian programs: the humanitarian assistance program ( hap ) , humanitarian mine action ( hma ) program , and foreign disaster relief and emergency response ( fdr / er ) .

ohdaca provides humanitarian support to stabilize emergency situations and deals with a range of tasks including providing food , shelter and supplies , and medical evacuations .

in addition the president has the authority to draw down defense equipment and direct military personnel to respond to disasters .

the president may also use the denton program to provide space - available transportation on military aircraft and ships to private donors who wish to transport humanitarian goods and equipment in response to a disaster .

generally , ofda provides emergency assistance for 30 to 90 days after a disaster .

the same is true for department of defense humanitarian assistance .

after the initial emergency is over , assistance is provided through other channels , such as the regular country development programs of usaid .

the state department also administers programs for humanitarian relief with a focus on refugees and the displaced .

the emergency refugee and migration account ( erma ) is a contingency fund that provides wide latitude to the president in responding to refugee emergencies .

assistance to address emergencies lasting more than a year comes out of the regular migration and refugee account ( mra ) through the population , migration and refugees ( prm ) bureau .

prm assists refugees worldwide , conflict victims , and populations of concern to the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) , often extended to include internally displaced people ( idps ) .

humanitarian assistance includes a range of services from basic needs to community services .

appendix f. operation unified response: u.s. military units participating major commands u.s. southern command http: / / www.southcom.mil / appssc / index.php u.s. air mobility command http: / / www.amc.af.mil u.s. air force special operations command http: / / www.afsoc.af.mil / u.s. navy expeditionary combat command http: / / www.necc.navy.mil ground units 82 nd airborne division brigade combat team http: / / www.bragg.army.mil / 82dv / 22 nd marine expeditionary unit http: / / www.lejeune.usmc.mil / 22ndmeu / naval units ss cape may — heavy - lift ship ss cornhusker state — crane ship uss bataan — amphibious assault ships uss fort mchenry , uss carter hall — dock landing ships usns comfort — hospital ship usns grasp — salvage ship usns sacagewea – dry cargo ship usns big horn – replenishment oiler 6 u.s. coast guard cutters appendix g. donor contributions and pledges to haiti in response to the january 12 , 2010 , earthquake appendix h. how to search for or report on individuals in haiti regarding u.s. citizens in haiti the u.s. embassy in port au prince has set up a task force at the embassy that is taking calls as conditions permit .

the embassy is working to identify u.s. citizens in haiti who need urgent assistance and to identify sources of emergency help .

u.s. citizens in haiti are urged to contact the embassy via e - mail ( [email address scrubbed] ) to request assistance .

u.s. citizens in haiti can call the embassy's consular task force at 509-2229-8942 , 509-2229-8089 , 509-2229-8322 , or 509-2229-8672 .

the department of state has also created a task force to monitor the emergency .

people in the united states or canada with information or inquiries about u.s. citizens in haiti may reach the haiti task force at 888-407-4747 , or by e - mail at [email address scrubbed] .

the task force phone number for those outside the united states and canada is 202-501-4444 .

in order to expedite requests for information about persons in haiti , the following information is needed: full name date of birth citizenship time date place of last known location any contact information , such as a cell phone number or hotel / church number where the person could be reached the person's e - mail address passport information , if known it is also important to provide the requestor's contact information , including phone numbers , relationship to the person about whom the inquiry is being made , and any special or emergency circumstances .

the following website provides information for calls regarding the welfare of american citizens in haiti: http: / / haiti.usembassy.gov / service / emergency - contact.html .

the international committee of the red cross also has a directory for missing and located persons in haiti at http: / / www.familylinks.icrc.org / wfl / wfl_hti.nsf / bottin ? openview .

haitian citizens in the u.s. haitian citizens in the u.s. trying to locate people in haiti can register their names with the international committee for the red cross at http: / / www.icrc.org / web / doc / siterfl0.nsf / htmlall / familylinks - haiti - eng ? opendocument .

they can also call the haitian embassy in washington , dc , at 202-332-4090 , or the haitian consulate in new york city at 305-859-2003 .

the miami herald provides a page to help families connect with family members at http: / / www.miamiherald.com / news / americas / haiti / connect / #vmix_media_id=9304036 .

haitian citizens in the united states may also consult the directory on the international committee of the red cross website for missing relatives , friends , and colleagues at http: / / www.familylinks.icrc.org / wfl / wfl_hti.nsf / bottin ? openview .

u.s. citizens with pending adoption cases in haiti u.s. department of homeland security secretary napolitano has announced a humanitarian parole policy for two categories of haitian children in the process of being adopted by american citizens .

this policy is explained at http: / / www.uscis.gov / portal / site / uscis / menuitem.5af9bb95919f35e66f614176543f6d1a / ? vgnextoid=9c22546ade146210vgnvcm100000082ca60arcrd&vgnextchannel=68439c7755cb9010vgnvcm10000045f3d6a1rcrd .

u.s. citizens with adoptions pending should send detailed information to the u.s. department of homeland security ( usdhs ) / u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) at [email address scrubbed] .

this e - mail address is intended only for submitting documents for pending adoption cases .

additional information may be found at the uscis website at http: / / www.uscis.gov .

the department of state has a dedicated website to intercountry adoptions at http: / / adoption.state.gov / news / children_affected_by_natural_disasters_conflict.html .

the department of state also hosts a dedicated blog about intercountry adoptions at http: / / blogs.state.gov / index.php / site / entry / haiti_earthquake_and_intercountry_adoption .

it has also established an e - mail address for questions at askci@state.gov .

the following information will need to be included in any inquiries addressed to either the department of homeland security or the department of state: subject line: "haitian adoption information" full name and contact information ( including e - mail address ) of parents full name ( s ) of child ( ren ) date ( s ) of birth of child ( ren ) ( if possible ) a brief summary of the status of the case name and contact information for the orphanage for more information on the u.s. government's response to haiti's most vulnerable children , people may contact [email address scrubbed] or 202-712-0550 .

appendix i .

how to contribute to relief efforts how to make donations according to inter action and other relief agencies , the best way to help is to donate financially to organizations responding to a disaster .

cash allows relief professionals to procure exactly what is needed in a disaster situation and ensure that donations are culturally , dietetically , and environmentally appropriate .

cash donations do not use up other scarce resources , such as transportation , staff time or warehouse space .

as needed , cash can also be transferred quickly to where it is needed , helping bolster the economy of the disaster - stricken region .

the white house suggests that those wishing to make a donation to relief efforts may contribute online through http: / / clintonbushhaitifund.org ; text "quake" to 20222 to charge a $10 donation to the clinton bush haiti fund ( the donation will be added to your cell phone bill ) ; or text "haiti" to 90999 , and $10 will be given automatically to the red cross , charged to your cell phone bill .

those wishing to donate may also visit interaction , at http: / / www.interaction.org , to contribute to other non - governmental organizations .

the department of state suggests that those who have significant in - kind contributions to make , such as a plane , a cargo ship , a team of doctors , portable generators , or large - scale water purification equipment , go to http: / / www.usaid.gov / helphaiti / .

usaid , through the non - profit organization , aidmatrix foundation , inc. , at http: / / www.aidmatrixnetwork.org / fema / publicportal / listofneeds.aspx ? portalid=133 , provides a searchable database to connect donors with needs .

the lists of needs may be filtered by category , ngo , or item description .

a second option allows the donor to submit details of in - kind donations , and aidmatrix will use the information to confirm the need with an ngo .

those who have significant in - kind contributions to make , such as a plane , a cargo ship , portable generators , or large - scale water purification equipment , may also access aidmatrix at http: / / www.aidmatrixnetwork.org / fema / publicportal / newdonation.aspx ? portalid=133 .

usaid recently released guidelines for doing business with usaid in haiti .

the following links provide information for grants , contracts , and unsolicited proposals: for contracting opportunities , fedbizzopps , at http: / / www.fbo.gov .

for grants opportunities , http: / / www.grants.gov .

unsolicited proposals guidelines , http: / / www.usaid.gov / business / business_opportunities / .

appendix j .

links for further information u.s. government agencies u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) http: / / www.usaid.gov / helphaiti / usaid aidmatrix: in kind donations http: / / www.aidmatrixnetwork.org / fema / publicportal / listofneeds.aspx ? portalid=133 usaid humanitarian assistance to haiti for the earthquake and earthquake affected areas maps http: / / www.usaid.gov / helphaiti / documents / 02.15.10-usaid - dchahaitiearthquakemapbook34.pdf u.s. department of defense http: / / www.defense.gov / home / features / 2010 / 0110_haiti / major military support for haiti at a glance http: / / www.defense.gov / home / features / 2010 / 0110_haiti / military - support.html u.s. department of health and human services http: / / www.hhs.gov / haiti / centers for disease control guidance for relief workers and travelers to haiti for earthquake response http: / / wwwnc.cdc.gov / travel / content / news - announcements / relief - workers - haiti.aspx u.s. department of homeland security http: / / www.dhs.gov / journal / theblog / 2010 / 02 / guardians - report - in - from - haiti - video.html u.s. department of state http: / / www.state.gov / p / wha / ci / ha / earthquake / index.htm u.s. department of state embassy , port - au - prince http: / / haiti.usembassy.gov / u.s. geological survey http: / / earthquake.usgs.gov / earthquakes / eqinthenews / 2010 / us2010rja6 / white house: help for haiti http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / blog / 2010 / 01 / 13 / help - haiti information on the haitian earthquake haiti earthquake damage map http: / / www.reliefweb.int / rw / fullmaps_am.nsf / eca57e2740e7a919412569cf003180fa / 0573522688593a18c12576aa00483368 / $file / 100112_07.45nyt_haiti_epicenter.pdf haiti earthquake intensity map http: / / www.reliefweb.int / rw / fullmaps_am.nsf / lufullmap / a4228b2905dcffe6c12576ab0028581b / $file / map.pdf ? openelement haiti earthquake 2010 , multidisciplinary center for earthquake and engineering research ( mceer ) http: / / mceer.buffalo.edu / research / reconnaissance / haiti1-12-10 / default.asp other resources center for international disaster information ( cidi ) http: / / www.cidi.org / news / haiti - quake.htm earthquake engineering research institute ( eeri ) http: / / www.eqclearinghouse.org / 20100112-haiti / european commission for humanitarian aid ( echo ) http: / / ec.europa.eu / echo / aid / caribbean_pacific / haiti_earthquake_en.htm interaction http: / / www.interaction.org / crisis - list / earthquake - haiti inter american development bank http: / / www.iadb.org / haiti / index.cfm ? lang=en&id=6407 international monetary fund http: / / www.imf.org / external / country / hti / index.htm organization of american states: pan american disaster foundation http: / / www.panamericanrelief.org / pan american health organization http: / / new.paho.org / disasters / index.php ? option=com_content&task=view&id=1088&itemid=1 red cross movement the american red cross http: / / www.redcross.org the international federation of red cross and red crescent societies http: / / www.ifrc.org the haitian red cross http: / / www.ifrc.org / address / ht.asp the international committee of the red cross http: / / www.icrc.org / web / eng / siteeng0.nsf / htmlall / haiti relief web http: / / www.reliefweb.int / rw / dbc.nsf / doc108 ? openform&emid=eq - 2010-000009-hti&rc=2 united nations united nations children's fund ( unicef ) http: / / www.unicef.org / infobycountry / haiti_newsline.html united nations habitat ( un - habitat ) http: / / www.unhabitat.org / content.asp ? cid=7780&catid=5&typeid=6&submenuid=0 united nations news center http: / / www.un.org / apps / news / infocusrel.asp ? infocusid=91&body=haiti&body1= united nations office for the coordination of human affairs ( ocha ) http: / / www.reliefweb.int / rw / rwfiles2010.nsf / filesbyrwdocunidfilename / muma - 84tw2f - full_report.pdf / $file / full_report.pdf united nations stabilization mission in haiti ( minustah ) http: / / www.un.org / en / peacekeeping / missions / minustah / united nations world food program ( wfp ) http: / / www.wfp.org / stories / haiti - wfp - bring - food - devastating - quake world bank http: / / web.worldbank.org / wbsite / external / countries / lacext / haitiextn / 0,,menupk:338184~pagepk:141159~pipk:141110~thesitepk:338165,00.htm .

