the small business administration ( sba ) administers programs that support small businesses , including loan guarantees to lenders to encourage them to provide loans to small businesses "that might not otherwise obtain financing on reasonable terms and conditions" and grants to nonprofit organizations to provide marketing , management , and technical training assistance to small business owners .

historically , one of the justifications presented for funding the sba's loan guarantee programs has been that small businesses can be at a disadvantage , compared with other businesses , when trying to obtain access to sufficient capital and credit .

it has been argued that this disadvantage is particularly acute for startups and microbusinesses ( firms with fewer than five employees ) : traditional lending institutions , such as banks and investors , are unlikely to offer loans and investment capital to microfirms due to a variety of reasons .

one barrier to microlending is a concern that startups and smaller enterprises are risky investments since growing businesses typically exhibit erratic bursts of growth and downturn .

the perceived risk of these types of companies reduces the chances of a microbusiness to obtain financing .

another issue is that microbusinesses by and large require smaller amounts of capital , and thus banks or investment companies often believe that it is not efficient use of their time or resources , nor will they receive a substantive return on investment from such a small loan amount .

an urban institute survey of sba 7 ( a ) , 504 / certified development company ( 504 / cdc ) , small business investment company ( sbic ) , and microloan borrowers conducted in 2007 found that microloan borrowers reported having the most difficulty in finding acceptable financing elsewhere .

less than one - third ( 31% ) of microloan borrowers reported that they would have been able to find acceptable financing elsewhere , compared with 35% of sbic borrowers , 40% of 7 ( a ) borrowers , and 48% of 504 / cdc borrowers .

since its inception in 1953 , the sba has provided loan guarantees to encourage lenders to issue small businesses loans .

interest in creating a separate loan program to address the specific needs of startups and microbusinesses increased during the 1980s , primarily due to the growth and experience of microlending institutions abroad and evidence concerning private lending practices that led congress to conclude that a new loan program was necessary "to reach very small businesses that were not being served by traditional lenders of sba's credit programs. .

to address the perceived disadvantages faced by very small businesses in gaining access to capital , congress authorized the sba's microloan lending program in 1991 ( p.l .

102-140 , the departments of commerce , justice , and state , the judiciary , and related agencies appropriations act , 1992 ) .

the program became operational in 1992 .

its stated purpose is to assist women , low - income , veteran ... and minority entrepreneurs and business owners and other individuals possessing the capability to operate successful business concerns ; to assist small business concerns in those areas suffering from a lack of credit due to economic downturns ; ... to make loans to eligible intermediaries to enable such intermediaries to provide small - scale loans , particularly loans in amounts averaging not more than $10,000 , to start - up , newly established , or growing small business concerns for working capital or the acquisition of materials , supplies , or equipment ; [and] to make grants to eligible intermediaries that , together with non - federal matching funds , will enable such intermediaries to provide intensive marketing , management , and technical assistance to microloan borrowers .

the sba's microloan lending program was authorized initially as a five - year demonstration project .

it was made permanent , subject to reauthorization , in 1997 ( p.l .

105-135 , the small business reauthorization act of 1997 ) .

congressional interest in the microloan program has increased in recent years , primarily because microloans are viewed as a means to assist very small businesses , especially women - and minority - owned startups , obtain loans that enable them to create jobs .

job creation and preservation , always a congressional interest , has taken on increased importance given continuing concerns about job growth .

this report describes the microloan program's eligibility standards and operating requirements for lenders and borrowers and examines the arguments presented by the program's critics and advocates .

it also examines changes to the program authorized by p.l .

111-240 , the small business jobs act of 2010 , p.l .

115-141 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , and p.l .

115-232 , the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 .

p.l .

111-240 authorized the secretary of the treasury to establish a $30 billion small business lending fund ( sblf ) to encourage community banks to provide small business loans ( $4.0 billion was issued ) , a $1.5 billion state small business credit initiative to provide funding to participating states with small business capital access programs , and about $12 billion in tax relief for small businesses .

it also authorized changes to the sba's loan guaranty programs , including increasing the microloan program's loan limit for borrowers from $35,000 to $50,000 , and the aggregate loan limit for intermediaries after their first year of participation in the program from $3.5 million to $5 million .

it also authorized the sba to waive , in whole or in part through fy2012 , the nonfederal share requirement for loans to the microloan program's intermediaries and for grants made to microloan intermediaries for small business marketing , management , and technical assistance for up to a fiscal year .

p.l .

115-141 , among other provisions , relaxed requirements on microloan intermediaries that prohibited them from spending more than 25% of their technical assistance grant funds on prospective borrowers and more than 25% of those grant funds on contracts with third parties to provide that technical assistance .

the act increased those percentages to 50% ( originally in h.r .

2056 , the microloan modernization act of 2017 , and s. 526 , its companion bill in the senate ) .

also , p.l .

115-232 , among other provisions , increased the microloan program's aggregate loan limit for intermediaries after their first year of participation in the program from $5 million to $6 million ( originally in h.r .

2056 , the microloan modernization act of 2017 , and s. 526 , its companion bill in the senate ) .

this report also discusses several bills introduced during the 114 th and 115 th congresses .

for example , during the 114 th congress , s. 1445 , the microloan act of 2015 , would have removed the requirements that no more than 25% of microloan technical assistance grant funds may be used to provide information and technical assistance to prospective borrowers or on third - party contracts to provide that assistance .

it would have also eliminated the microloan program's minimum state allocation formula .

h.r .

2670 , the microloan modernization act of 2015 , and s. 1857 , the senate companion bill , would have increased the microloan program's aggregate loan limit for intermediaries after their first year of participation in the program from $5 million to $6 million , increased the program's repayment terms from not more than 6 years to not more than 10 years for loans greater than $10,000 , and required the sba administrator to establish a rule enabling intermediaries to apply for a waiver of the requirement that no more than 25% of microloan technical assistance grant funds may be used to provide information and technical assistance to prospective borrowers .

the house passed h.r .

2670 on july 13 , 2015 .

s. 2850 , the microloan program modernization act of 2016 , would have increased the microloan program's aggregate loan limit for intermediaries after their first year of participation in the program from $5 million to $6 million and , among other provisions , eliminated the requirements that intermediaries spend no more than 25% of microloan technical assistance grant funds on technical assistance to prospective borrowers and no more than 25% of those funds on third party contracts for technical assistance .

during the 115 th congress , h.r .

2056 , the microloan modernization act of 2017 , and s. 526 , its companion bill in the senate would , as introduced , increase the microloan program's aggregate loan limit for intermediaries after their first year of participation in the program from $5 million to $6 million and , among other provisions , eliminate the requirement that intermediaries spend no more than 25% of microloan technical assistance grant funds on technical assistance to prospective borrowers and no more than 25% of those funds on third - party contracts for technical assistance .

h.r .

2056 and s. 526 were amended in committee to require intermediaries to spend no more than 50% of microloan technical assistance grant funds on technical assistance to prospective borrowers and no more than 50% of those funds on third - party contracts for technical assistance .

the house bill , as amended , was favorably reported by the house committee on small business on july 12 , 2017 , and agreed to by the house on july 24 , 2017 , by voice vote .

the senate bill was favorably reported by the senate committee on small business and entrepreneurship on march 19 , 2018 .

as mentioned previously , the 50% thresholds were included in p.l .

115-141 and the increase from $5 million to $6 million for the microloan program's aggregate loan limit for intermediaries after their first year of participation was included in p.l .

115-232 .

unlike the sba's 7 ( a ) and 504 / cdc loan guarantee programs , the sba microloan program does not guarantee loans .

instead , it provides direct loans to qualified nonprofit intermediary microloan lenders who , in turn , provide "microloans" of up to $50,000 to small business owners , entrepreneurs , and nonprofit child care centers .

there are currently 144 active microloan intermediaries serving 49 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico .

critics of the sba's microloan program argue that it is duplicative of other available programs , expensive relative to alternative programs , and subject to administrative shortfalls .

the program's advocates argue that it provides assistance that "reaches many who otherwise would not be served by the private sector or even the sba's 7 ( a ) loan program" and "has provided an important source of capital for low - income women business owners and minority borrowers. .

as mentioned previously , during the 111 th congress , p.l .

111-240 , the small business jobs act of 2010 , increased the microloan program's loan limit for borrowers from $35,000 to $50,000 , and increased the loan limit for microloan intermediaries after their first year of participation in the program from $3.5 million to $5 million .

it also temporarily allowed the sba to waive , in whole or in part through fy2012 , the nonfederal share requirement for loans to the microloan program's intermediaries and for grants made to microloan intermediaries for small business marketing , management , and technical assistance under specified circumstances ( eg , the economic conditions affecting the intermediary and the intermediary's performance ) for up to a fiscal year .

no bills were introduced during the 112 th congress concerning the microloan program .

during the 113 th congress , h.r .

3191 , the expanding opportunities to underserved businesses act , would have increased the microloan program's loan limit for borrowers from $50,000 to $75,000 .

s. 2487 , the access to capital , access to opportunity act , would have increased that limit to $100,000 .

s. 2693 , the women's small business ownership act of 2014 , and its house companion bill , h.r .

5584 , would have increased the microloan program's aggregate loan limit for intermediaries after their first year of participation in the program from $5 million to $7 million .

these bills would have also removed the requirements that no more than 25% of microloan technical assistance grant funds may be used to provi de information and technical assistance to prospective borrowers or on third - party contracts to provide the assistance .

during the 114 th congress , as mentioned earlier , s. 1445 , the microloan act of 2015 , would have removed the requirements that no more than 25% of microloan technical assistance grant funds may be used to provide information and technical assistance to prospective borrowers or on third - party contracts to provide the assistance .

it would have also eliminated the microloan program's minimum state allocation formula .

h.r .

2670 , the microloan modernization act of 2015 , and its companion bill in the senate ( s. 1857 ) would have increased the microloan program's aggregate loan limit for intermediaries after their first year of participation in the program from $5 million to $6 million , increased the program's repayment terms from not more than 6 years to not more than 10 years for loans greater than $10,000 , and require the sba administrator to establish a rule enabling intermediaries to apply for a waiver of the requirement that no more than 25% of microloan technical assistance grant funds may be used to provide information and technical assistance to prospective borrowers .

the house passed h.r .

2670 on july 13 , 2015 .

s. 1857 was reported by the senate committee on small business and entrepreneurship on july 29 , 2015 .

s. 2850 , the microloan program modernization act of 2016 , would have increased the microloan program's aggregate loan limit for intermediaries after their first year of participation in the program from $5 million to $6 million ; eliminated the requirements that intermediaries spend no more than 25% of microloan technical assistance grant funds on technical assistance to prospective borrowers and no more than 25% of those funds on third - party contracts for technical assistance ; required the sba to study and report on the operations of a representative sample of microloan intermediaries and other intermediaries and make recommendations on how to reduce costs associated with intermediaries' participation in the program and to increase intermediary participation in the program ; and required the government accountability office to study and report on the sba's oversight of the program , sba's processes to ensure intermediary compliance with program rules and regulations , and the program's overall performance .

during the 115 th congress , p.l .

115-141 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , relaxed the requirements that intermediaries spend no more than 25% of microloan technical assistance grant funds on technical assistance to prospective borrowers and no more than 25% of those funds on third - party contracts for technical assistance by increasing those percentages to 50% .

these provisions were originally in h.r .

2056 , the microloan modernization act of 2017 , and s. 526 , its companion bill in the senate ( as amended in committee ) .

p.l .

115-232 , the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 , among other provisions , increased the microloan program's aggregate loan limit for intermediaries after their first year of participation in the program from $5 million to $6 million .

these provisions were originally in h.r .

2056 , the microloan modernization act of 2017 , and s. 526 , its companion bill in the senate .

during the 111 th congress , congressional debate concerning proposed changes to the sba's loan guaranty programs , including the microloan program , centered on the likely impact the changes would have on small business access to capital , job retention , and job creation .

as a general proposition , some , including president obama , argued that economic conditions made it imperative that the sba be provided additional resources to assist small businesses in acquiring capital necessary to start , continue , or expand operations and create jobs .

others worried about the long - term adverse economic effects of spending programs that increase the federal deficit .

they advocated business tax reduction , reform of financial credit market regulation , and federal fiscal restraint as the best means to assist small business economic growth and job creation .

in terms of specific program changes , the provisions enacted in p.l .

111-240 ( allowing the sba to temporarily waive the microloan program's nonfederal share matching requirements , increasing the loan limit for borrowers from $35,000 to $50,000 , and increasing the loan limit for intermediaries after their first year of participation in the program from $3.5 million to $5 million ) , p.l .

115-141 ( relaxing restraints on the use of technical assistance grants ) , and p.l .

115-232 ( increasing the loan limit for intermediaries after their first year of participation in the program from $5 million to $6 million ) are all designed to achieve the same goal: create jobs by enhancing micro borrowers' access to capital and technical training assistance .

determining how specific changes in federal policy are most likely to lead to job creation is a challenging question .

for example , a 2008 urban institute study concluded that differences in the term , interest rate , and amount of sba financing "was not significantly associated with increasing sales or employment among firms receiving sba financing. .

however , they also reported that their analysis accounted for less than 10% of the variation in firm performance .

the urban institute suggested that local economic conditions , local zoning regulations , state and local tax rates , state and local business assistance programs , and the business owner's charisma or business acumen also "may play a role in determining how well a business performs after receipt of sba financing. .

as the urban institute study suggests , given the many factors that influence business success , measuring the sba's microloan program's effect on job retention and creation is complicated .

that task is made even more challenging by the absence of performance - oriented measures that could serve as a guide .

the sba's office of inspector general has recommended that the sba adopt performance - oriented measures , specifically recommending that the sba track the number of microloan borrowers who remain in business after receiving a microloan to measure the extent to which the microloan program contributed to their ability to stay in business .

it has also recommended that the sba require intermediaries to report the technical assistance provided to each microloan borrower and "use this data to analyze the effect technical assistance may have on the success of microloan borrowers and their ability to repay microloans. .

other performance - oriented measures that congress might also consider include requiring the sba to survey microloan borrowers to measure the difficulty they experienced in obtaining a loan from the private sector ; the ease or difficulty of finding , applying , and obtaining a microloan from an intermediary ; and the extent to which the microloan or technical assistance received contributed to their ability to create jobs or expand their scope of operations .

