congress enacted the wild and scenic rivers act of 1968 ( wsra ) as part of a myriad of environmental conservation legislation enacted in the 1960s and 1970s .

the act provides protection to certain rivers within the united states in order to balance the tendency toward development of the nation's rivers for industry or recreation .

the act declares it to be the policy of the united states that certain rivers that possess "outstandingly remarkable scenic , recreational , geologic , fish and wildlife , historic , cultural , or other similar values , shall be preserved in free - flowing condition. .

the act further provides that "the established national policy of dam and other construction be complemented by a policy that would preserve other selected rivers ... in their free - flowing condition to protect the water quality of such rivers and to fulfill other vital national conservation purposes. .

in order to protect rivers according to the purpose of the act , the wsra uses water rights to maintain flows and restrictions on development of federal projects to preserve the natural path of the rivers .

this report analyzes the federal government's authority under the wsra to maintain and preserve designated rivers .

it examines the use of federal water rights under the act to ensure instream flows and the prohibitions on development of rivers for federal projects .

congress has continually made additions to the list of protected rivers under the wsra .

the 112 th congress may consider legislation involving designation of certain river segments as well .

furthermore , congressional interest in the protections offered by the wsra may arise from other legislative proposals , such as energy development projects that may conflict with the purposes of the wsra .

the wsra created a national wild and scenic rivers system comprised of rivers meeting certain criteria outlined by the act .

eligibility for inclusion in the system depends on the nature of the river itself , although other bodies of water may be protected by the act .

the wsra defines river as "a flowing body of water or estuary or section , portion , or tributary thereof , including rivers , streams , creeks , runs , kills , rills , and small lakes. .

the act permits a river area to be included in the wild and scenic rivers system if it is a free - flowing stream and the related adjacent land area possesses one or more of the following values: scenic , recreational , geologic , fish and wildlife , historic , cultural , or other similar values .

a river is "free - flowing" if it exists or flows "in natural condition without impoundment , diversion , straightening , rip - rapping , or other modification of the waterway. .

a river may be included even if it had previously been developed beyond its free - flowing condition upon restoration to such condition .

a river may be included in the wild and scenic rivers system even if minor structures such as low dams or diversion works already exist along the section of the river proposed for inclusion , but the act specifically states that future construction of such structures is not condoned by the act .

the purpose of the wild and scenic rivers act is to preserve rivers "in free - flowing condition to protect the water quality of such rivers and to fulfill other vital national conservation purposes. .

to protect the flow of the river , the act provides for the assumption or creation of federal water rights sufficient to carry out the purposes of the act .

in addition to using reserved water rights to protect the flows of designated rivers , the wsra provides protection for a designated river by limiting the licensing of dams , reservoirs and other water project works on , or adversely affecting , protected segments .

the wsra prohibits the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) from licensing "the construction of any dam , water conduit , reservoir , powerhouse , transmission line , or other project works under the federal power act ... on or directly affecting any river" designated as part of the national wild and scenic rivers system .

likewise , no other federal agency may "assist by loan , grant , license , or otherwise in the construction of any water resources project that would have a direct and adverse effect on the values for which [a designated] river was established. .

the prohibitions on water and power projects are very broad in the wsra .

the prohibitions generally limit federal agencies from recommending authorization of such projects , or appropriations to begin construction on such projects , that would have an adverse affect on the purpose of the designation .

the restrictions placed on ferc and other federal agencies regarding rivers designated under the wsra extend to rivers designated as potential additions to the wild and scenic rivers system , at least to some degree .

the same prohibition on licenses for construction or assistance for construction applies for a period of three complete fiscal years following any congressional action that designates a river as a potential addition .

however , if , during that period , the relevant administering agency determines that the river should not be included in the wild and scenic rivers system and provides appropriate notice to congress , the project agency may proceed with project plans .

the act does not prohibit "licensing of , or assistance to , developments below or above a wild , scenic or recreational river area or on any stream tributary thereto which will not invade the area or unreasonably diminish the scenic , recreational , and fish and wildlife values present in the area on the date of designation" as an addition or potential addition to the wild and scenic rivers system .

