in the 2010 census , as in prior decennial censuses , the total population of the united states was counted , including u.s. citizens , lawfully present aliens , and unauthorized aliens .

some have asked whether aliens , particularly those in the country unlawfully , should be excluded from the census count .

it appears one concern is that these individuals are included in the data used to apportion house seats among the states and determine voting districts within them , which some perceive as unfair to states or districts with small alien populations .

one question raised by this idea is whether the exclusion of aliens could be done by amending the federal census statutes ( title 13 of the u.s. code ) , or whether such action would require an amendment to the constitution .

the constitution requires a decennial census to determine the "actual enumeration" of the "whole number of persons" in the united states .

the data must be used to apportion the number of house seats among the states .

while not required by the constitution , the data are used for other purposes as well , including by the states to determine voting districts within a state .

the constitution expressly vests congress with the authority to conduct the census "in such manner as they shall by law direct. .

congress has delegated this responsibility to the secretary of commerce and , within the department of commerce , to the bureau of the census .

the census bureau counts the total resident population of the states , with each individual counted at his or her "usual residence. .

this includes both citizens and aliens .

there is no legal requirement that the census bureau collect information regarding citizenship status .

the 2010 census form sent to all households did not include questions regarding citizenship status or place of birth .

the commerce secretary has used his discretion to ask for such information on the american community survey ( acs ) , which is sent monthly to a sampling of households .

historically , questions regarding citizenship status have not been consistently included in the census population surveys .

at least two early censuses ( 1820 and 1830 ) included a category for foreigners not naturalized , and later censuses asked about place of birth .

in modern times , the census questionnaire sent to all households has not included such questions , although the questionnaire sent to a sampling of households ( the "long form," which has been replaced by the acs ) has asked for such information .

from time to time , congress has considered legislation that would exclude all aliens or only unauthorized aliens from being included in the census to apportion house seats among the states .

a discussion of selected legislation from congresses before the 112 th and 111 th congresses is included in the appendix .

as of the date of this report , no legislation regarding the exclusion of aliens from the census data for house apportionment has been introduced in the 112 th congress .

since the data for the house apportionment among the states had to be submitted to congress and certified by december 31 , 2010 , legislation addressing the most recent apportionment would be moot .

however , in the event that the ongoing issue of the presence of unauthorized aliens in the united states remains unresolved by congressional legislation or executive agency action , the issue of whether to exclude unauthorized aliens from census data for apportionment may arise with regard to guidelines for future decennial censuses and apportionments .

legislation from the 111 th may provide models for future legislation .

in the 111 th congress , several bills were introduced that would have amended the federal census statutes to explicitly address the treatment of unauthorized aliens .

the fairness in representation act ( h.r .

3797 and s. 1688 ) would have required the commerce secretary to include some means ( eg , a checkbox ) for respondents to indicate they are u.s. citizens or lawfully present in the country on the census forms sent to all households .

additionally , the commerce secretary would have been required to make adjustments to the data to prevent unauthorized aliens from being counted for apportioning house seats among the states .

an amendment introduced by senator vitter to the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act , 2010 ( s.amdt .

2644 to h.r .

2847 ) would have cut off funding for the census unless the census form included questions on u.s. citizenship and immigration status .

the amendment would not have required the information be used for any purpose ( i.e. , to disregard certain individuals from the apportionment calculation ) .

the amendment was subsequently ruled to be non - germane .

h.j.res .

11 proposed an amendment to the constitution so that only u.s. citizens would be counted in the apportionment calculation .

specifically , it would have amended the constitution to read "representatives shall be apportioned among the several states according to their respective numbers , which shall be determined by counting the number of persons in each state who are citizens of the united states. .

on the other side of the issue , the every person counts act ( h.r .

3855 ) would have prohibited the census bureau from asking about u.s. citizenship or immigration status .

while the constitution permits congress to conduct the census "in such manner as they shall by law direct," the census cannot be done in a way that is constitutionally impermissible .

thus , one question raised by the above legislation is whether it is consistent with the constitutional requirements for the decennial census .

it seems clear that congress could , under its broad constitutional authority to conduct the census , statutorily require the commerce secretary to collect information regarding citizenship status .

the constitutionality of the other provisions in the legislation would appear to depend on whether the constitution requires that all aliens must be included in the census count for any reason .

if so , then it would appear that any exclusion would have to be done by constitutional amendment .

on the other hand , if the constitution requires such individuals to be excluded from the census count , then congress could not prohibit the commerce secretary from asking questions about citizenship and immigration status .

as mentioned above , it appears some are concerned that aliens , particularly those individuals in the country unlawfully , are included in the data used to apportion house seats among the states and determine voting districts within the states .

the next section analyzes whether congress could statutorily exclude aliens from the census count for these purposes or whether any such exclusion would have to be done by constitutional amendment .

the constitution requires a decennial census to determine the "actual enumeration" of the "whole number of persons" in the united states .

the data must be used to apportion the house seats among the states , although there is no constitutional requirement it be used to determine voting districts within the states .

the term "whole number of persons" appears broad enough to include all individuals , regardless of citizenship status , and thus would appear to require the entire population be included in the apportionment calculation .

as such , a constitutional amendment , such as that found in h.j.res .

11 in the 111 th congress , would likely be necessary in order to exclude any individuals from the census count for the purpose of apportioning house seats .

from time to time , congress has considered legislation that would exclude all aliens or only unauthorized aliens from being included in the census to apportion the house seats among the states .

such legislation would have either amended the census clause of the constitution or enacted or amended federal census statutes .

generally , the legislation providing only for statutory exclusions of aliens from the census failed because members recognized the potential unconstitutionality of these statutory restrictions .

however , congress has also consistently not adopted resolutions to amend the constitution to exclude aliens , with members citing various reasons , including the reversal of constitutional tradition .

some proponents of excluding aliens from the apportionment census have asserted that the framers of the constitution did not understand the term "persons" necessarily to include aliens and point to the first census statute in 1790 , which refers to "inhabitants," to support this contention .

since some of the members of the first congress had been members of the constitutional convention a few years earlier , proponents argue that they must have known the intent of the constitutional convention in the census clause and would not have enacted an unconstitutional census statute .

the proponents further argue that the term "inhabitants" in the first census statute was understood to refer to u.s. citizens only and not to foreigners / aliens , citing contemporaneous dictionary definitions .

however , there is no direct evidence that this was the intention and , in fact , the early censuses apparently included aliens .

the 1790 , 1800 , and 1810 censuses included categories for free white males , free white females , other free persons , and slaves .

free white persons were categorized further by age .

the 1820 census was the first to include a subcategory for "foreigners not naturalized. .

instructions to the federal marshals conducting the 1820 census noted that the data for this subcategory was not supposed to be added to the total data for free persons subcategorized by race and age , because they were already included as free persons .

these instructions appear to imply that the earlier censuses included free foreigners as well as free citizens in the data for free persons and that the new subcategory of information was not adding persons who would not have been counted under existing subcategories in earlier censuses .

in 1866 , congress considered constitutional amendments that would have limited the apportionment and census to voters or citizens .

such amendments were considered in the context of the civil rights amendments ( ultimately resulting in the thirteenth , fourteenth and fifteenth amendments ) being debated after the civil war .

the fourteenth amendment revised the apportionment clause , deleting the phrase counting three - fifths of slaves and instead requiring that the whole number of persons in each state must be counted , excluding indians not taxed .

however , if male inhabitants who were 21 years old and u.s. citizens were disenfranchised by a state for reasons other than participation in the confederate rebellion or a crime , the population count of that state for purposes of apportionment would be reduced by the ratio of these disenfranchised male citizens to the total number of male citizens in that state .

this was intended to discourage former slave states from disenfranchising former slaves and other african americans .

a similar proposal would have counted the "whole number of persons except those to whom civil or political rights or privileges are denied or abridged by the constitution or laws of any state on account of race or color. .

some versions of this type of proposal would not have excluded indians not taxed , while others kept the language excluding indians not taxed .

during consideration of the civil rights amendments , an alternate type of proposal to amend the constitutional requirements for apportionment and the census would have counted only voters in each state to discourage former slave states from disenfranchising former slaves and other african americans .

however , this proposal was deemed flawed because it would also penalize other states by not including aliens / non - citizens in the census count for apportionment , since generally aliens were not permitted to vote in most states .

opponents also noted that this proposal would depart radically from the counting of all persons required by the original census clause .

another criticism was that suffrage would be cheapened because states would reduce or eliminate legitimate conditions for voter eligibility in an attempt to increase the number of voters .

some proposals to count voters or electors would have excluded citizens who had been disenfranchised as former confederate rebels , while others would have included such citizens .

some voter - based apportionment census proposals were brought up for floor votes and failed .

for proponents , the type of proposals that evolved into the fourteenth amendment had the advantage of not penalizing states that were not former slave states , but had high numbers of aliens .

meanwhile , this type of legislation would still effectively discourage former slave states from disenfranchising former slaves , since such disenfranchised persons would not be counted at all , a significant reduction from being counted at a three - fifths ratio .

in the late 1920s and early 1930s , the issue of counting aliens was raised as congress considered legislation for the 1930 census and related apportionment of the house of representatives .

apportionment was such a contentious issue following the 1920 census that the requisite decennial apportionment of the house of representatives was never completed .

the apportionment had been directly legislated by congress until the 1920 census .

after the breakdown in the process , congress legislated a formula for calculating and allocating the representatives among the states , thus eliminating the partisan negotiations that had hampered earlier apportionments and impeded / prevented apportionment in the 1920s .

as congress considered the appropriate apportionment formula , it debated whether to amend the constitution to exclude aliens from the census data used for the apportionment .

a 1929 senate legislative counsel opinion analyzing such proposals concluded that "there is no constitutional authority for the enactment of legislation excluding aliens from enumeration for purposes of apportionment of representatives among the states. .

while acknowledging that no case law had ruled on the issue of the meaning of "persons" in the census clause , the opinion found that according to rules of statutory construction , "persons" had at all times been understood to include aliens .

additionally , the reference in the fourteenth amendment to excluding indians not taxed would be unnecessary if "persons" referred only to citizens , and the fourteenth amendment would not have explicitly referred later in the same clause to the number of male inhabitants who were citizens and 21 years old .

with regard to the original apportionment and census language , the opinion contrasted the use of the word "person" with the use of the word "citizen" for particular reasons in other parts of the original constitution .

proposals to exclude aliens by statute alone failed as unconstitutional .

proposals to amend the constitutional language also failed .

in 1940 , when asked by a colleague whether the census for apportionment must count aliens unlawfully present in the united states , representative celler asserted that a constitutional amendment would be required to exclude even unlawfully present aliens from the census .

earlier congressional debates apparently do not discuss unauthorized aliens , but rather consider the constitutionality and / or policy of excluding lawful aliens .

in the late 1970s and the 1980s , congress considered immigration legislation that became the immigration reform and control act of 1986 , which legalized certain unauthorized aliens and strengthened immigration laws to prevent immigration fraud , provide greater protections for temporary foreign workers and prevent displacement of u.s. workers , etc .

in the period before and after the enactment of this legislation , congress also considered proposals to exclude aliens from the census , including proposals specifically to exclude unauthorized aliens .

the latter proposals appear to be related to the proposals to legalize or strengthen enforcement against unauthorized aliens .

some members noted that unauthorized aliens needed to be included in the census in order to assess the potential impact of legalization .

a key legislative proposal in the late 1980s resembled the vitter amendment in the 111 th congress to prohibit the use of funds to include illegal aliens in the census for apportionment of the house of representatives .

this provision was sponsored by senator shelby as amendments to the bill for appropriations to the departments of commerce , justice , and state ( cjs appropriations bill ) and the senate - passed version of the immigration act of 1990 .

although such provisions were passed by the senate in these bills , they ultimately were not enacted .

house proponents of this proposal failed in their attempt to have the house instruct its conferees for the cjs appropriations bill to retain the senate provision in their negotiations ; there had been no such provision in the house - passed version .

the house conferees objected to the provision and it was dropped .

however , the house floor debate on instructions to the conferees was echoed by the debates in the 111 th congress .

