increasing pressures on the quantity and quality of available water supplies are raising interest in — and concern about — changing operations at corps facilities to meet municipal and industrial ( m&i ) demands .

corps m&i reallocations at lake lanier ( ga ) are central to an ongoing tri - state conflict involving alabama , florida , and georgia .

furthermore , the agency is studying whether to reallocate storage to m&i use at dams in numerous states ( eg , colorado , kentucky , and georgia ) , and corps data indicate that more reallocation requests are forthcoming .

a reallocation embodies tradeoffs ; shifting storage to m&i use from a currently authorized purpose ( eg , hydropower or navigation ) changes the types of benefits produced by a dam and the stakeholders served .

the federal role in m&i water supply development is constrained , with states and local entities having the prominent role .

congress recognized state primacy in developing m&i supplies in the water supply act of 1958 ( 1958 wsa ; p.l .

85-500 ; 72 stat .

319 ; 43 u.s.c 390b ) as follows: it is hereby declared to be the policy of the congress to recognize the primary responsibilities of the states and local interests in developing water supplies for domestic , municipal , industrial , and other purposes and that the federal government should participate and cooperate with states and local interests in developing such water supplies in connection with the construction , maintenance , and operation of federal navigation , flood control , irrigation , or multiple purpose projects .

therefore , although the federal government has made significant investments in water resources infrastructure , these investments primarily have been to support flood control , navigation , irrigation , multipurpose dams ( including hydropower ) , and diversion facilities .

the largest federal projects were constructed by the department of the interior's bureau of reclamation under the reclamation act of 1902 and subsequent project authorizations known as reclamation law , and by the department of defense's army corps of engineers ( hereafter referred to as the corps ) through myriad rivers and harbors , flood control , and water resources development act ( wrda ) legislation .

since the 1960s , construction of large federal dams has slowed markedly , in response to their high cost , their ecological and social impacts , and the availability of appropriate sites .

reservoir planning in recent decades largely has focused on balancing competing objectives in operating existing reservoirs ( as opposed to planning new projects ) , and in some cases on managing for new objectives .

a total of 135 corps reservoirs have roughly 11 million acre - feet ( af ) of storage designated for m&i water .

most of the m&i water stored is authorized under project - specific authorities .

however , 44 reservoirs derive all or part of their m&i storage authority from the 1958 wsa ( see table 1 for a list of the reservoirs ) .

the 1958 wsa is the basis for less than 640,000 af of the corps' m&i storage .

table 1 shows that the corps has reallocated more than 50,000 af of storage space for m&i use at only one reservoir , lake texoma ( tx / ok ) .

the corps has used its discretionary authority to perform four reallocations at lake texoma — one for 84,099 af and three smaller reallocations , for a total of 103,003 af .

other texoma reallocations have been made with specific congressional approval .

the 84,099 af reallocation from hydropower to m&i use was approved in a 1985 corps document that included a compensation arrangement for lost hydropower , which had been negotiated among lake texoma stakeholders .

the corps found that the reallocation would neither significantly harm the lake's authorized purposes ( in part because of the compensation arrangement ) , nor require significant structural modifications .

the corps thus concluded that the transfer could be performed under the 1958 wsa without congressional approval , even though it exceeded the agency - established policy limiting reallocations without congressional approval to 50,000 af .

table 1 shows that the corps stayed below the 15% of usable storage criterion , except at cowanesque lake ( pa ) , where reallocated water supply represents almost 30% of storage .

the cowanesque lake case is unusual in that it represents a mix of project - specific reallocation direction from congress and use of the corps' discretionary authority under the 1958 wsa .

the cowanesque reallocation was mentioned in p.l .

99-88 , the supplemental appropriations act of 1985 , and was discussed as occurring under the corps' 1958 wsa discretionary authority in the accompanying h.rept .

99-236 .

as previously noted , the 1958 wsa indicates that the reallocation to water supply should not be made if it seriously affects authorized purposes or results in a major operational or structural change .

the corps is to evaluate these potential effects when studying whether to make or recommend to congress a reallocation .

whether the studies used to support the reallocations shown in table 1 sufficiently evaluated how an m&i reallocation may affect authorized purposes or may constitute a major operational change is a general concern raised by the 2009 court order's questioning of the corps evaluations related to lake lanier operations .

an evaluation of the sufficiency of corps reallocation analyses is beyond the scope of this crs report .

lake lanier is not in table 1 because the july 2009 court order found that the m&i uses exceeded the 1958 wsa authority .

similarly , lake cumberland ( ky ) is not included , although m&i withdrawals occur there , because these withdrawals have not been authorized .

enforcement action to stop the withdrawals at lake cumberland has not been taken .

how many other unauthorized withdrawals and operational actions that support m&i uses occur at other corps facilities is largely unknown ; many corps dams are decades old , often predating the 1958 wsa , and their operations have evolved incrementally over time .

to date , the corps' operation of lake lanier for m&i water supply has constituted the agency's most controversial provision of m&i water supply .

the 2009 court order raised numerous concerns , including the possibility that previous reallocations at other corps facilities could be disputed , and uncertainty about how future reallocation at corps facilities will be evaluated and performed .

thus far , most corps reallocations have taken place without the national attention or litigation of lake lanier , either using the corps' delegated authority or through specific congressional legislative direction .

as shown in table 1 , existing reallocations under the 1958 wsa , with few exceptions , were within the numeric criteria that the corps established for implementing its discretionary authority .

whether congress agrees with the corps' interpretation and use of its discretionary authority is a policy issue of increasing relevance as interest grows in m&i reallocation at federal facilities .

other issues raised by current use of the discretionary authority and reservoir operations include whether multiple reallocations in a single basin are to be treated separately or on a watershed basis , how much discretion the agency should have in making reallocation agreements with stakeholders , including financial charging and crediting arrangements , and how the agency should handle ongoing unauthorized withdrawals .

current policies on m&i reallocations at corps facilities reflect numerous decisions and tradeoffs that may be reexamined as more reallocations are requested .

for example , if reallocations to m&i are made , how is the transition to be carried out , given that stakeholders , such as recreation interests and hydropower customers , have developed around existing operations ? .

how should the federal government charge for the m&i storage space provided ? .

should the federal government credit for return flows ( i.e. , water not consumed by m&i uses that is returned to a corps reservoir ) ? .

m&i water supply at corps facilities also is part of several broader water policy questions for congress .

for example , what is the appropriate federal role in municipal water supply ? .

should that role change if a community's existing water supply is reduced by potential climate change effects , such as extended drought ? .

do current water resources infrastructure operations , laws , divisions of responsibilities , and institutions reflect the national interest and present challenges ? .

addressing these questions is complicated by the wide range of opinions on the proper response and the difficulty of enacting any change to how federal facilities are operated , other than incremental change or project - specific measures , because of the many affected constituencies .

