as congress considers clean energy legislation , one of the options for "green" electricity being discussed is the development of new hydropower resources .

many of these new resources are on small rivers and streams which may not have been considered as candidates for development due to the relatively small amount of electric power which could be produced .

hydropower currently accounts for about 6% of the electricity produced in the united states .

although most of the larger , more traditional hydroelectric resources have already been developed , a clean energy rationale for development of small hydropower ( i.e. , with a power generation capacity of between 1 and 30 megawatts ( mw ) ) resources may now exist .

characterizing small and low - head hydropower and discussing issues associated with further development of hydropower resources is the focus of this report .

the flow of water has been harnessed to produce electricity since the nineteenth century , and by the early part of the twentieth century , almost half of the electricity produced in the united states came from hydropower .

but increasing post - war electrical power needs out - stripped available hydro resources and led to the rise of power plants powered by steam from fossil and nuclear fuels .

most dams were built for purposes other than power generation , such as for flood control , crop irrigation , or storage of municipal water supplies .

while only about 2,400 of the existing 80,000 dams in the united states are used for hydropower , many of the non - power dams have a significant unharnessed hydropower potential .

the physical and operational attributes of a small or low - head hydropower project ( primarily its location and size ) will largely determine which state or federal regulations the project will be subject to .

how a hydropower project delivers its electricity ( including who the electric consumer ultimately is ) will determine other aspects of regulatory treatment .

many small and low - head hydropower projects may serve single , end - use customers , or may connect into distribution grid networks ( i.e .

distributed generation ) , and the rationale for some of these projects will be based more on providing power rather than producing power for sales revenues .

some of the larger small hydropower or low - head projects may connect directly to transmission grids .

building small or low - head hydropower close to existing electric distribution lines can reduce the costs of projects , especially if these facilities are to serve local loads .

larger hydropower facilities will likely connect to transmission lines , serving more remote loads or producing power for sale on the electricity grid , and may be subject to a greater regulatory burden .

some of the larger federal hydroelectric projects were originally designed with irrigation or flood control purposes as a primary goal .

the addition of power generation equipment was seen as a secondary benefit , with economic development as a motivating consideration for depressed regions of the united states .

rationale for public policy concerning hydropower is now growing to include provision of clean energy , much of this from renewable energy resources and technologies .

while the doe's energy information administration ( eia ) classifies hydro as a renewable energy resource , some environmental advocates do not consider "hydropower" as a desired resource because dams and reservoirs may have negative impacts on the environment .

run - of - river hydropower facilities can generate electricity by placing a small , mini - , or micro - turbine into a waterway , and do not necessarily require the construction of a large dam .

some hydropower turbine technologies do not need dams to operate , if the flow of water is large enough to turn the turbine .

site conditions will therefore dictate the economics of developing projects .

most of the technologies for high and medium head sites are fairly mature , but low head sites could benefit from innovation and optimization to develop technology that is suitable for the remaining low head resource .

this section will look at these smaller hydropower applications and some of the newer hydropower technologies .

new ideas are emerging for capturing energy from the flow of water .

this section will look at some of the new hydropower technologies designed for use in rivers or inland waterways .

power generation from rivers and streams is not without controversy , and the capability to produce energy from these sources will have to be balanced against environmental and other public interest concerns .

that balance can be aided by research into new technologies and forward - thinking regulations that encourage the development of these resources in cost - effective , environmentally friendly ways which recognize that such facilities , once built , can last for at least 50 years .

hydropower project development depends largely on the characteristics of a particular site .

the site will determine what type of improvements and structural works are necessary for a project .

much time and effort generally goes into pre - design evaluations of locations .

this is true regardless of the type of technology that will go into the site but for small and low - head hydro , the feasibility study alone may be a significant burden for a project to overcome .

many small and low - head hydropower plants will be run - of - river facilities and therefore will be dependent upon river or stream flows .

availability can therefore be an issue since water flow can vary at certain times due to seasonal drought or rainfall conditions .

as such , a plant's capacity factor ( i.e. , the ratio of the actual output of a power plant over a period of time and its output if it had operated at full capacity the entire time ) can be diminished .

power generation could conceivably stop altogether if water flows are inadequate .

hydropower project developers must comply with regulatory requirements .

for many small and low - head hydropower projects , the costs of meeting environmental regulations and connecting to the electric grid can constitute a considerable hurdle .

hydrokinetic projects are largely in a demonstration phase .

how they will perform technically , or whether they will have adverse impacts on aquatic environments or species is still being determined .

most independent energy projects are decided on the merits of both a technical and a financial returns analysis .

the biggest factor in favor of a hydropower project is the absence of fuel costs , a fact which is responsible for large scale hydro projects delivering some of the cheapest power when levelized costs are considered .

given the likely smaller size of projects relative to the costs of development for small and low - head hydro , incentive rates for electricity produced over time may help make a power - based project feasible .

as such , with clean energy policy as a driver , government incentives may be needed to help buttress the financial case .

further development of small and low - head hydropower on a wide scale will likely come only as a result of a national policy intended to promote clean energy goals .

