four species of nonindigenous asian carp are expanding their range in u.s. waterways , resulting in a variety of concerns and problems .

three species — bighead , silver , and black carp — are of particular note , based on the perceived degree of environmental concern .

current controversy relates to what measures might be necessary and sufficient to prevent movement of asian carp from the mississippi river drainage into the great lakes through the chicago area waterway system .

movement of asian carp into the great lakes is of concern because increased numbers of carp in the great lakes increase the risk that asian carp will establish reproducing populations in these waters .

congressional interest in the 115 th congress has focused on a draft feasibility study including proposed actions at the brandon road lock and dam to avoid the possibility of carp becoming established in the great lakes , as well as other actions to stem the further spread of asian carp upstream in the mississippi river basin .

the chicago area waterway system ( caws ) is a segment of the illinois waterway in northeastern illinois and northwestern indiana .

the illinois waterway is a 327-mile channel running from chicago to st. louis .

it is maintained at a minimum depth of 9 feet by the u.s. army corps of engineers ( hereinafter referred to as the corps ) .

it is the only navigable link between two of the largest freshwater drainage basins in the world , the great lakes and the mississippi river .

the caws portion of the illinois waterway includes modified rivers , locks , canals and other structures that control the flow of water through the chicago metropolitan area .

it has recently received attention for its potential to provide a pathway for asian carp to migrate from the mississippi river and its tributaries into the great lakes .

the system of projects comprising the caws is shown in figure 5 .

historically , an important geologic feature in the chicago area's watershed was the chicago portage .

the chicago portage separated the drainage basins of the mississippi river and the great lakes prior to modification of these waterways .

these bodies of water were first artificially connected for navigation in 1848 through a privately constructed 97-mile canal connecting the chicago river to the illinois river .

this canal , known as the illinois and michigan ( i&m ) canal , was maintained for commercial use from 1848 to 1933 .

it was eventually replaced by the network of canals and locks that comprises the caws .

canals within the caws today include the chicago sanitary and ship canal ( or cssc , completed in 1900 ) , the north shore channel ( completed in 1910 ) and the cal - sag channel ( completed in 1922 ) .

during construction of these canals , the flows of the chicago river and the calumet river were also permanently reversed away from lake michigan and toward the mississippi river drainage basin through structural modifications and pumping .

the altered flow of the rivers prevented sewage discharge into the canals from contaminating chicago's drinking water supply intakes on lake michigan .

in recent years , the locks of the caws have become a focal point for those debating how to prevent invasive species ( and specifically , asian carp ) encroachment between the great lakes and the mississippi river .

the corps operates multiple lock sites that connect the caws to the great lakes , including the o'brien lock and dam ( on the cal - sag channel ) and the chicago lock ( on the chicago river ; see figure 5 ) .

both of these locks include sluice gates operated by the metropolitan water reclamation district of greater chicago ( mwrd ) that can provide flood control in severe rainstorms .

the mwrd independently owns and operates a third site ( the wilmette pumping station ) on the north shore channel that directly connects the caws to the great lakes .

the corps also owns and operates the lock at lockport powerhouse and lock , which is southwest of chicago on the cssc .

due to its distance from the great lakes and the fact that the corp's electric fish barriers ( see below section " electric barriers " ) operate upstream on the cssc , this third lock has not been as prominent in recent invasive species debates .

the caws plays a significant role in the region's commercial and recreational navigation , although estimates of the full economic value of the locks within the caws ( in particular , o'brien lock ) vary widely .

the chicago lock , one of the country's busiest locks for traffic , handled 39,575 vessels and conducted 11,218 lockages in 2016 .

the o'brien lock handled 10,337 vessels and conducted 4,637 lockages in 2016 .

while most of the traffic on the chicago lock is recreational , the transit of commodity - laden commercial barges is higher at o'brien lock , which allows for shippers to offload onto deepwater vessels .

statistics from the corps indicate that approximately 4 million tons worth of commodities move through o'brien lock annually , including bulk quantities of sand and gravel , coal , and steel .

additional analysis , including a comparison of alternative means of freight transit , is necessary to fully understand the value of the locks to the region .

in response to an estimate by the corps that shippers saved approximately $192 million by using the o'brien and chicago locks in 2008 ( or an addition of approximately $27 per ton of freight shipped ) , the state of michigan commissioned a study which concluded that the locks are of considerably less value ( thus any closure of locks would have a minimal impact ) .

the 2010 michigan study estimated that a shift from barge to overland shipping would result in additional costs of approximately $64 million - $69 million annually , or approximately $10 per ton .

this study was criticized by the illinois chamber of commerce , which published several academic critiques of the michigan study , as well as a separate study estimating much higher costs associated with lock closure .

the illinois study estimated a total cost of $530 million - $580 million annually over the next eight years for lock closure , and a net cost to the chicago economy of $4.7 billion over a 20-year horizon .

the studies differ considerably due to the treatment of several important assumptions , including those related to indirect costs for the transition to overland shipping .

both studies have ramifications for proposals to close or alter the caws to prevent the spread of asian carp .

congress has directed the corps and other agencies to undertake specific actions to block the upstream passage of asian carp in the caws .

this work was largely conducted by the corps ( due to its role in maintaining the caws ) , with planning coordination and funding from other agencies .

the federal government has also been engaged in long - term , nationwide planning and management of asian carp under authorities codified in the nonindigenous aquatic nuisance prevention and control act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-646 , as amended ) and other statutes .

these actions were conducted by the aquatic nuisance species task force ( ans task force ) , chaired by the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) and the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , with support provided by various other agencies , including the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) , and the corps .

due to the increasing profile of asian carp and its potential establishment in the great lakes , efforts to impede the spread of asian carp have intensified over time .

the white house prioritized the issue in early 2010 with the white house commission on environmental quality ( ceq ) announcement of a forum of great lakes governors and a suite of new actions to control asian carp .

total federal funding for asian carp activities since the announcement of the framework has been approximately $463 million ( see table 3 ) , with almost half of this funding derived from the epa great lakes restoration initiative .

the apparent ecological and economic threat posed by the migration of asian carp into the great lakes via the caws has prompted litigation to prevent such risks .

several great lakes states , particularly michigan , have pursued a number of legal options , seeking court orders to restrict the entry of asian carp into lake michigan and the great lakes generally .

in december 2009 , michigan petitioned the u.s. supreme court to amend its 1967 decree regarding diversion of water between lake michigan and the illinois waterway , including the chicago sanitary and ship canal .

with the support of other great lakes state and regional governments , michigan sought an order from the court that would declare the operation of diversion facilities within the caws to be a public nuisance that threatened natural resources and allowed the introduction of invasive species into lake michigan .

michigan also requested that the court order illinois , the u.s. army corps of engineers , and the metropolitan water reclamation district of greater chicago to prevent the spread of asian carp into the lake by closing shipping locks and taking other necessary measures to prevent the carp from entering lake michigan .

without comment , the court denied michigan's requests .

in february 2010 , michigan renewed its motion and requested that the court reconsider an order to close the chicago - area locks based on new evidence showing asian carp to be present in lake michigan .

the court again denied michigan's motion without comment .

after a live asian carp was found beyond the electric barrier in the summer of 2010 , michigan , minnesota , ohio , pennsylvania , and wisconsin sued the u.s. army corps of engineers and the metropolitan water reclamation district of greater chicago ( mwrd ) in federal district court , seeking similar remedial measures as they requested in their attempt to amend the supreme court's 1967 decree .

the states sought an order compelling the corps and mwrd to abate the public nuisance created by the migration of asian carp into the great lakes , to minimize the risk of migration from the caws to lake michigan , and to implement permanent measures to separate illinois waters from lake michigan .

the court rejected each of the proposed remedial measures , noting a lack of consensus on the extent of the threat and the efficacy of the proposed solutions .

it held that the discovery of a live fish above the barrier did not prove that the barrier had failed and noted that the cause of the introduction of the fish to that particular section of the waterway was not known .

the court emphasized "its recognition that the potential harm in a worst case scenario is great" but concluded that "the level of certainty of harm is low based on the evidence adduced to date. .

in july 2014 , a federal appeals court again denied unanimously the states' motion .

for many decades , the united states and canada have conducted a major cooperative program to deal with the consequences arising from the introduction of the non - native sea lamprey , petromyzon marinus , to the great lakes .

through the great lakes fishery commission , the governments of the united states and canada , together with neighboring states and provinces , spend millions of dollars annually to control this invasive parasite and limit its damage to sport and commercial fisheries .

canada has assessed the risks posed by the introduction of asian carp , concluding that the risk of impact would be high in some parts of canada , including the southern great lakes basin , by the four species of asian carp .

canada is currently addressing these concerns through its participation in the bilateral great lakes fishery commission and the acrcc .

in 2015 , nine grass carp were found on the canadian side of the great lakes .

the great lakes water quality agreement ( agreement ) between the united states and canada , coordinated by epa , was renewed in 2012 , stating that the great lakes should be "free from the introduction and spread of aquatic invasive species" which negatively impact water quality , among other things .

the agreement commits to a triennial review of the state of the great lakes to analyze basin - wide environmental trends and ecosystem conditions .

the 2017 state of the great lakes report ranks the status of invasive species in the great lakes as poor with a deteriorating trend .

the report notes that , while the number of new invasive species to the ecosystem has slowed , at least 30% of the aquatic invasive species in the great lakes have significant environmental impact .

as previously mentioned , section 1039 of p.l .

113-121 directed the corps to implement additional measures to prevent aquatic nuisance species from bypassing the chicago sanitary and ship canal dispersal barrier project and to prevent aquatic nuisance species from dispersing into the great lakes .

congress has previously held several hearings on asian carp .

on february 9 , 2010 , the house transportation and infrastructure subcommittee on water resources and environment held a hearing on asian carp in the great lakes .

on february 25 , 2010 , the senate energy and natural resources subcommittee on water and power held a hearing to examine the science and policy behind efforts to prevent the introduction of asian carp into the great lakes .

on july 14 , 2010 , the senate energy and natural resources subcommittee on water and power held an oversight hearing to examine the federal response to the discovery of asian carp in lake calumet , illinois .

while no hearings have been held to date in the 115 th congress , appropriations concerns relating to asian carp have been discussed .

house and senate committee reports for the energy and water development appropriations bill for fy2018 provide guidance for use of corps funding related to asian carp prevention .

the senate report would direct the corps to provide quarterly updates to congress on federal efforts to prevent the spread of asian carp .

the house report would provide funds for existing electric barriers in the caws and provide semiannual progress updates to congress .

both reports also directed the corps to release the brandon road study in draft form .

one ongoing question for congress is whether to authorize the brandon road study's findings , and if so when this should occur .

in recent years , a finalized feasibility study by the corps and a report by the chief of engineers ( or "chief's report" ) recommending a project for construction have typically formed the basis for corps project construction authorizations in water resources development acts .

thus , formal authorization of the brandon road study's findings could encounter procedural hurdles in pursuing congressional authorization as long as the study remains in draft form .

bills introduced in the 115 th congress , h.r .

2983 and s. 1398 , would have required the corps to release a draft version of the glmris brandon road study , which was subsequently released in august 2017 .

other authorities have been enacted in prior congresses .

in the 112 th congress , division b , section 105 , of p.l .

112-74 authorized the corps of engineers to implement emergency measures to exclude asian carp from the great lakes , and section 1538 of p.l .

112-141 authorized expedited completion of parts of the glmris study ( see above section , " glmris study " ) .

in the 113 th congress , section 1039 of p.l .

113-121 directed the corps to establish formal emergency procedures to prevent the passing of asian carp beyond the brandon road lock and dam .

congress provided guidance for the brandon road study in the explanatory statement for p.l .

114-113 , directing the corps to expedite completion of the brandon road study .

