there has been an elevated level of drug trafficking - related violence within and between the drug trafficking organizations ( dtos ) in mexico — a country with which the united states shares a nearly 2,000-mile border .

estimates have placed the number of drug trafficking - related deaths in mexico between december 2006 ( when then - mexican president felipe calderón began his campaign against the dtos ) and december 2012 ( when the calderón administration ended ) at somewhere between 45,000 and 55,000 .

while estimates of drug trafficking - related violence vary by the source , some have estimated the death toll for 2012 alone at over 9,575 .

this violence has generated concern among u.s. policy makers that the violence in mexico might spill over into the united states .

u.s. federal officials have denied that the increase in drug trafficking - related violence in mexico has resulted in a spillover into the united states , but they acknowledge that the prospect is a serious concern .

as an extension of its counternarcotics policy , as well as in response to the possibility of violence spillover , the u.s. government is supporting mexico's crackdown campaign against dtos in mexico through bilateral security initiatives , including the mérida initiative .

it is also enhancing border security programs and working to reduce the movement of contraband ( drugs , money , and weapons ) in both directions across the southwest border .

when discussing drug trafficking - related violence in the united states , one important point to note is that the mere presence of mexican dtos in the united states is not in and of itself an indication of any spillover of mexican drug trafficking - related violence into the united states .

while their presence may be an indication of the drug problem in general , it does not necessarily reflect activity directly tied to the recent violence seen in mexico .

the dtos ( mexican and others ) have been developing sophisticated illicit drug smuggling and trafficking networks for years .

these activities engender violence and associated criminal activity , not just along the southwest border but in other areas throughout the country , such as along domestic interstate distribution networks and in major metropolitan areas .

the united states has experienced levels of drug trafficking - related crime for many years .

the immediate question confronting policy makers is whether the elevated violence between dtos in mexico impacts either the level or character of drug trafficking - related violence in the united states .

a related question is whether evidence of spillover violence would necessitate a policy response from congress that is qualitatively different from the current efforts to combat drug trafficking .

this report focuses on how policy makers would identify any spillover of drug trafficking - related violence into the united states .

it provides ( 1 ) an overview of mexican drug trafficking organization structures , how they conduct business , and the relationship between the drug trafficking organizations in mexico and their partnerships operating here in the united states ; ( 2 ) a discussion of the illicit drug trade between mexico and the united states , as well as a discussion of factors implicated in drug trafficking - related violence ; ( 3 ) an analysis of the possible nature of any spillover violence that may arise , as well as issues involved in accurately identifying and measuring such violence ; and ( 4 ) an evaluation of available crime rate data and a discussion of how this data may or may not reflect changes in drug trafficking - related crime .

this report does not include a discussion of illicit drug enforcement issues , nor does it include specific policy options that may be considered to stem a potential uptick in drug trafficking - related violence .

the nature of the conflict between the dtos in mexico has manifested itself , in part , as a struggle for control of the smuggling routes into the united states .

therefore , the prospects for spillover violence are most keenly anticipated in the southwest border ( swb ) region of the united states because the region represents the arrival zone for the vast majority of illicit drugs that are smuggled into the country .

the size , geography , and climate of the swb region have long presented unique challenges to law enforcement .

the southern border with mexico stretches nearly 2,000 miles in length , is sparsely populated in some areas , and is dotted with legitimate crossing points ( ports of entry ) — both large and small .

the national drug threat assessment , 2008 , summarized the illicit drug threat scenario along the swb in stark terms: the southwest border region is the most significant national - level storage , transportation , and transshipment area for illicit drug shipments that are destined for drug markets throughout the united states .

the region is the principal arrival zone for most drugs smuggled into the unites states ; more illicit drugs are seized along the southwest border than in any other arrival zone .

mexican dtos have developed sophisticated and expansive drug transportation networks extending from the southwest border to all regions of the united states .

they smuggle significant quantities of illicit drugs through and between ports of entry ( poes ) along the southwest border and store them in communities throughout the region .

most of the region's principal metropolitan areas , including dallas , el paso , houston , los angeles , phoenix , san antonio , and san diego , are significant storage locations as well as regional and national distribution centers .

mexican dtos and criminal groups transport drug shipments from these locations to destinations throughout the country .

the most recent threat assessment indicates that the mexican dtos pose the greatest drug trafficking threat to the united states .

demand for illicit drugs in the united states partly drives this threat .

in an illegal marketplace , where prices and profits are elevated due to the risks of operating outside the law , violence or the threat of violence becomes the primary means for settling disputes and maintaining a semblance of order — however chaotic that "order" might appear to the outside observer .

this was a fundamental conclusion reached by the national academy of sciences panel on the understanding and control of violent behavior .

because illegal drug markets operate outside the law , no courts or other forms of peaceful mediation exist for resolving disputes between drug producers , traffickers , and their customers .

as with other black markets , drug markets are necessarily governed by the threat of violence , which may lead to actual violence .

illegal drugs and violence , then , are linked primarily through the operations of underground drug markets .

drug trafficking - related violence in mexico has been elevated , particularly since 2007 , and in 2012 , there were over 9,575 drug trafficking - related murders in mexico .

mexican drug trafficking organizations are now at war with each other as well as with the police and military personnel who are attempting to enforce the drug laws in northern mexico along the u.s. border .

the dtos , as a result of enforcement actions in mexico , along with increasing border enforcement measures taken by the united states , are finding it more difficult and more costly to control the production zones and smuggling routes .

one of the consequences of this increasingly competitive environment is a rise in the level of violence associated with the illicit drug trade as the dtos struggle for control over territory , markets , and smuggling routes .

policy makers are thus confronted with the uncomfortable possibility that increased law enforcement ( which leads to increased difficulty and costs to control production zones and smuggling routes , and which in turn leads to the need to resolve disputes over such territories ) could result in increased drug trafficking - related violence .

this appears to be the situation that has developed in mexico .

this relationship gives rise to a number of important issues for policy makers .

one such matter is evaluating the relative costs and benefits of increased enforcement of the current drug policy against the potentially elevated levels of violence that such increased enforcement might engender .

could the drug trafficking - related violence currently evidenced in mexico reach a level that would prompt u.s. policy makers to consider policy actions that could alter the underpinnings of the illegal drug market ? .

it does not appear as if the violence has reached such a level as yet .

policy makers , however , have expressed significant concern over the possibility of the current violence in mexico spilling over into the united states .

when assessing the potential implications of increased violence in mexico as a result of the increasing tensions between the dtos located in mexico , one of the central concerns for u.s. policy makers is the potential for what has recently been termed "spillover" violence — an increase in drug trafficking - related violence in united states .

given this concern , it is critical to develop an understanding of what "spillover" is , what it might look like , how it might be measured , and what potential triggers for policy action can be identified from this analysis .

to date , congress has not adopted a formal definition of spillover violence .

several definitions and / or qualities of spillover violence have been provided by government officials , as well as experts and analysts .

for instance , according to the dea , the interagency community has defined spillover violence in the following manner: [s]pillover violence entails deliberate , planned attacks by the cartels on u.s. assets , including civilian , military , or law enforcement officials , innocent u.s. citizens , or physical institutions such as government buildings , consulates , or businesses .

this definition does not include trafficker on trafficker violence , whether perpetrated in mexico or the u.s .

this definition of spillover provides a relatively narrow scope of what may constitute spillover violence .

in particular , it excludes the category of violence — trafficker - on - trafficker violence — in which the vast majority of drug trafficking - related violence in mexico has occurred .

if policy makers and law enforcement are concerned that the drug trafficking - related violence , as seen in mexico , may spill over into the united states , they are necessarily concerned with this predominant category of trafficker - on - trafficker violence that is excluded from the interagency community's definition of spillover violence .

the boundaries of what may constitute spillover violence , as defined by the interagency community , thus makes the likelihood that the united states will experience this form of spillover violence relatively small .

further , by generally constraining the definition of spillover violence to those acts that target the government and innocent civilians , the type of violence necessary to constitute spillover ( according to the interagency definition ) may begin to resemble acts of terrorism .

if so , policy makers and experts may be challenged with discriminating between spillover violence and terrorism .

several experts and scholars have also discussed qualities of drug trafficking - related violence that may constitute spillover , including aspects of trafficker - on - trafficker violence .

such qualities are analyzed in the following section and may provide policy makers with additional definitions of spillover violence .

of note , this report does not address non - violent indicators — such as rising corruption of u.s. officials and law enforcement — that could be related to drug trafficking - related violence spillover .

this section of the report discusses some of the challenges facing policy makers when considering policy options dealing with drug control and border security issues in general .

these issues are discussed more generally because they provide the context within which any specific options for dealing with the potential spillover of drug trafficking - related violence will be determined .

these policy challenges include the complexity of the issue , defining goals and objectives , and measuring the problem .

mexico has experienced an elevated level of drug trafficking - related violence within and between the drug trafficking organizations ( dtos ) , and the number of drug trafficking - related deaths in mexico between december 2006 ( when then - mexican president felipe calderón began his campaign against the dtos ) and december 2012 ( when the calderón administration ended ) has been estimated at somewhere between 45,000 and 55,000 .

congress remains concerned with the possibility that the current drug trafficking - related violence in mexico may spill over into the untied states .

one of the primary challenges in assessing this violence is defining the term spillover .

while the interagency community has defined spillover violence as violence targeted primarily at civilians and government entities — excluding trafficker - on trafficker - violence — other experts and scholars have recognized trafficker - on - trafficker violence as central to spillover .

when defining and analyzing changes in drug trafficking - related violence within the united states to determine whether there has been ( or may be in the future ) any spillover violence , critical elements include who may be implicated in the violence ( both perpetrators and victims ) , what type of violence may arise , when violence may appear , and where violence may occur ( both along the southwest border and in the nation's interior ) .

at present , there is no comprehensive , publicly available data that can definitively answer the question of whether there has been a significant spillover of drug trafficking - related violence into the united states .

although anecdotal reports have been mixed , u.s. government officials maintain that there has not yet been a significant spillover .

crs analyzed violent crime data from the federal bureau of investigation's ( fbi's ) uniform crime report program in order to examine data that could provide insight into whether there has been a significant spillover in drug trafficking - related violence from mexico into the united states .

however , the overall violent crime data do not allow crs to determine the proportion of violent crimes that are related to drug trafficking or , even more specifically , the proportion of drug trafficking - related violent crimes that are attributable to spillover violence .

in its analysis , crs calculated the average violent crime rate across eight selected metropolitan statistical areas ( msas ) along the southwest border and 130 selected non - border msas — identified by the national drug intelligence center ( ndic ) as having the presence of mexican dtos — for each of the years 1999 through 2011 .

crs analysis suggests that the violent crime rate has not significantly increased in those areas where there is an identified presence of mexican dtos .

further , there appears to be no significant difference in the average violent crime rate in the selected border and non - border msas between the years 1999 and 2011 .

in conclusion , however , because the trends in the overall violent crime rate may not be indicative of trends in drug trafficking - related violent crimes , crs is unable to develop fact - based conclusions about trends in drug trafficking - related violence spilling over from mexico into the united states .

