for almost seven decades , the united states has played a leading role in global efforts to alleviate hunger and malnutrition and to enhance world food security through international food aid — primarily through either the donation or the sale on concessional terms of u.s. agricultural commodities .

since 2006 , u.s. food aid has averaged nearly $2.5 billion per year — accounting for over 7% of total u.s. foreign aid .

health , economic , and security - related assistance account for most of the outlays .

current u.s. food aid programs had their origins in 1954 with public law 83-480 , or "p.l .

480," as it was commonly known .

p.l .

83-480 has since been amended multiple times and renamed as the food for peace act ( ffpa ) .

one of the original purposes of "p.l .

480" in - kind food donations was to reduce large government stocks of program crops that had accumulated under u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) commodity price support programs while responding to humanitarian , economic development , and geopolitical goals in foreign countries .

since the end of the cold war , u.s. food assistance goals have shifted more toward emergency response and support for long - term agricultural development .

however , the united states continues to rely on domestic purchases of u.s. commodities as the basis for its food aid programs .

in contrast , most other countries operating international food aid programs have converted primarily to cash - based food assistance .

u.s. reliance on in - kind food aid has become controversial due to its identified inefficiencies and potential market distortions compared with cash - based assistance .

another concern regarding u.s. international food aid is how that food aid is delivered into foreign countries .

in - kind food aid shipments are subject to a set of requirements that potentially limit the flexibility of the u.s. response to emergency food crises .

u.s. laws require that all agricultural commodities be sourced from the united states ; at least 50% of u.s. food aid must be shipped on u.s. - flag vessels ; at least 20% , but not more than 30% , with a minimum of $350 million , of ffpa funding must be available for non - emergency food aid ; at least 75% of in - kind food transfers dedicated to non - emergency assistance must be in a processed , fortified , or bagged form ; at least 50% of any bagging must consist of whole - grain commodities bagged in the united states ; and at least 15% of non - emergency food aid funding must be made available to qualifying nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) for monetization — that is , the process of selling donated u.s. commodities in recipient - country markets to generate cash for development programs .

both the george w. bush and obama administrations have sought greater flexibility in the use of u.s. food aid funding , particularly for cash - based assistance , in order to respond with greater expediency , at lower cost , and with more interest in meeting cultural food preferences when responding to international food emergencies .

a majority of ngos working in the realm of international food assistance and development , as well as some members of congress , support the goals of these efforts .

u.s. commodity groups and food processors continue to advocate strongly for retention of in - kind transfers of u.s. commodities .

a vocal minority of ngos that benefit from the monetization of in - kind commodity transfers also support retention of in - kind transfers .

in addition , u.s. maritime interests are strong advocates for retention of agricultural cargo preference ( acp ) requirements associated with in - kind food aid .

this report includes three principal sections: the first section is a description of u.s. international food aid programs under current law ; the second section discusses several important policy issues related to u.s. international food aid ; and the third section describes administration and congressional proposals intended to change the nature of u.s. international food assistance .

the u.s. government provides international food aid through a variety of programs administered by either usda's foreign agricultural service ( fas ) or the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

table 1 lists each international food assistance program , the year it was enacted ( or first instituted in the case of the emergency food security program [efsp] ) , the statutory authority , and the administering agency .

the two implementing agencies , usda and usaid , are under different congressional jurisdiction for authorization , oversight , and appropriations .

table a - 1 ( at the end of this report ) provides a breakout of annual outlays by program since fy2006 .

average annual spending on u.s. international food aid programs increased gradually over the past six decades ( figure 1 ) .

during the fy2000 to fy2009 period ( table 2 ) , average food assistance outlays were approximately $2.2 billion annually , with ffpa title ii activities comprising the largest share ( 77% of outlays ) .

more recently , fy2010-fy2014 , new cash - based outlays under the efsp have supplemented traditional ffpa title ii program outlays to push total u.s. international food aid program spending up slightly to about $2.4 billion annually while lowering title ii's share to 65% .

when adjusted for inflation using year - 2013 dollars ( as shown in figure 2 ) , total u.s. food assistance outlays peaked in 1964 at $8.4 billion ( 2013 dollars ) then declined to a low of $1.54 billion ( 2013 dollars ) in 1996 .

in 2014 , u.s. food assistance outlays were at $2.5 billion ( 2013 dollars ) , thus having somewhat recovered from the 1990s level .

however , outlays remain well below the inflation - adjusted levels of the 1960s .

the following sections present some of the arguments both in favor of and against in - kind food aid as compared with cash - based food assistance and a suite of related issues — including agricultural cargo preference , monetization of non - emergency food aid , food aid quality , and how food aid fits within international trade agreements .

the ffpa title ii program has been embroiled in a long - running debate between successive administrations and congress over how title ii funds may be used .

both the george w. bush and obama administrations have sought greater flexibility in their use of title ii funds .

both administrations claimed that this flexibility would allow them to direct food to international points of crisis more quickly and at lower cost ( primarily as cash - based food assistance ) , thus helping to better respond to international emergencies while meeting u.s. foreign policy goals .

in contrast , congress has favored using title ii funds to purchase u.s. commodities , ship them on u.s. - flag vessels to foreign countries with food deficiencies , and then monetize the commodities by selling them in recipient country markets for local currency , which is subsequently used to fund food security and development activities .

ffpa programs are under the authority of the house and senate agriculture committees , which reauthorize ffpa programs in periodic farm bills .

proponents for change in u.s. food aid policy have expressed concerns that the agriculture committees are too close to u.s. commodity groups , food processors , and maritime interests , all of whom have a vested interest in the status quo .

recognizing this , most proposals for change have attempted to move ffpa program authority away from the agriculture committees and to the house foreign affairs committee and senate foreign relations committee , which have authority over u.s. foreign relations as well as most forms of international economic assistance and disaster response activities .

both the previous and current administrations ( in their annual budget requests ) have proposed changes to the structure and intent of u.s. international food assistance , especially involving ffpa title ii resources .

the 2014 farm bill made some modest changes to international food aid programs .

however , it did not adopt the larger obama administration fy2014 proposals ( described below ) .

in addition to administration proposals , some members of congress have introduced bills in both the house ( h.r .

1983 ) and senate ( s. 2421 ) in the 113 th congress and the senate ( s. 525 ) in the 114 th congress that proposed alterations to u.s. food aid programs — including shifting select food aid authorities away from the agriculture committees and their periodic farm bills and into the foreign assistance act , as well as the elimination of the requirements related to u.s. - only procurement of commodities , cargo preference , and monetization .

in 2007 , the bush administration proposed that congress provide authorization in the farm bill to use up to 25% of annual title ii funds ( approximately $300 million ) to procure food from selected developing countries near the site of a crisis .

the administration justified this proposal on the grounds that the u.s. response to food emergencies would be more efficient and cost - effective if commodities could be procured locally .

the administration's farm bill proposal cited instances in which the u.s. food aid response to emergencies would have been enhanced with this kind of authority , particularly for iraq in 2003 , the asian tsunami in 2004 , southern and west africa in 2005 , and east africa in 2006 .

the administration noted that "u.s. grown food will continue to play the primary role and will be the first choice in meeting global needs. .

local and regional purchases would be made only where the speed of the arrival of food aid is essential , according to usda .

these proposals did not advance in congress .

in its fy2014 budget request , made in advance of the 2014 farm bill , the obama administration proposed changes to the structure and intent of u.s. international food assistance , especially involving ffpa title ii resources .

these changes included ( 1 ) shifting funds from the ffpa , as authorized by the farm bill , to three usaid accounts — international disaster assistance ( ida ) , development assistance ( da ) , and emergency food assistance contingency fund ( efac ) , described below — authorized in foreign assistance legislation ; ( 2 ) eliminating the monetization procedure ; ( 3 ) providing greater flexibility to procure commodities in local and regional markets overseas ; and ( 4 ) reducing the volume of commodities subject to cargo preference legislation .

the administration proposed to replace funding previously requested for ffpa title ii , estimated at $1.47 billion annually , with an equivalent amount divided among the three usaid foreign assistance accounts as follows: shift $1.1 billion to ida for emergency food response .

this shift would have augmented ida's emergency food security program for cash - based food security assistance .

the total available for ida emergency food security assistance after such a shift would be $1.4 billion .

shift $250 million to da for a community development and resilience fund ( cdrf ) .

the cdrf would address chronic food insecurity in areas of recurrent crises such as in the horn of africa or the west african sahel .

the cdrf also would receive $80 million of da from usaid's bureau of food security , which administers the feed the future program .

total funding for this program after such a shift would be $330 million .

shift $75 million to efac .

the newly created efac would serve as a fund to provide emergency food assistance for unexpected and urgent food needs .

according to usaid , the type of food assistance intervention — in - kind versus cash - based food assistance — depends on overall program goals , cost , and several factors related to the affected region .

these factors include food insecurity causes , the severity of the food crisis , timeliness of response , the functioning of markets , security conditions , and local diet preferences .

usaid argued that the proposed shifts would result in gains of flexibility , timeliness , and efficiency in the provision of emergency food aid .

these gains would allow u.s. international food assistance to reach at least 2 million to 4 million more people each year with equivalent funding .

rather than a commodity - only response , usaid would be able to select from a menu of options that could include local or regional procurement in countries or regions where food aid emergencies are occurring and other forms of cash - based assistance , like food vouchers or cash transfers .

cdrf would continue to engage pvos as implementing partners of non - emergency development programs .

in addition , usaid argued that the $330 million in the cdrf would be the equivalent of the non - emergency funding guarantee in the ffpa because of cost savings associated with the end of monetization .

according to usaid , the food aid reform proposal would guarantee that in fy2014 no less than 55% of the requested $1.4 billion for emergency food assistance would be used for procurement , transport , and related costs of u.s. commodities .

going forward , usaid said that u.s. commodities would continue to make up a significant portion of purchases , especially for many processed foods and bulk commodity procurements , which might not be available elsewhere in the world .

further , inflation concerns or food price volatility may make u.s. commodities a more feasible option in certain situations .

in addition , $25 million of "efficiency savings" would be devoted to an increase for the maritime security program ( msp ) , administered by marad , thus serving as a partial offset for reduced u.s. food aid shipments .

increasing the direct subsidies to the maritime sector with additional msp funding was intended to help retain militarily useful u.s. - flag vessels and facilitate the retention of mariners in the workforce .

critics of the administration's food aid proposal included the alliance for global food security and the u.s. maritime sector .

in early 2013 , prior to the release of the administration's fy2014 proposal , a group of 70 organizations — representing maritime interests , commodity groups , and the alliance — who support the current food aid program wrote the president a letter urging continuation of the ffpa and other u.s. food aid programs in their current form based on in - kind shipments and monetization .

then , in response to the administration fy2014 budget request , the alliance sent another letter recommending the continuation of the current in - kind food aid procurement system and monetization .

however , the alliance said it agreed with the use of ida funds ( including increased funding "as needed" ) for lrp or cash - based assistance pending arrival of either pre - positioned ffpa commodities or deliveries of u.s. commodities .

the alliance contends that monetization provides benefits other than the cash generated to finance pvo projects .

those include increased economic activity that helps alleviate credit , hard currency , or small - volume constraints that limit procurement of sufficient food supplies on international markets .

the alliance recommended using usaid's development assistance ( da ) funds to support ffpa title ii development programs where monetization is not feasible or appropriate .

as mentioned earlier , usa maritime also opposed transforming the current food aid programs from a commodity - based to a cash - based program .

it argued that the proposed food aid changes would jeopardize future funding by losing its current support network of farmers , international relief and development organizations , ports , and inland and ocean transporters .

although the 2014 farm bill made some modest changes to u.s. international food assistance , it did not adopt the administration's broader fy2014 proposals .

in a revised version of its international food aid proposals , the president's fy2015 budget requested that up to 25% of total title ii funding be available for cash - based interventions .

usaid claimed that the cost savings and improved timeliness associated with such a shift in use of title ii funds from shipping u.s. commodities on u.s. - flag vessels to cash - based assistance would allow usaid to reach an additional 2 million people .

as under its fy2014 budget request , the administration again proposed that $25 million of the "efficiency savings" obtained from the transfer of ffpa funds be devoted to an annual increase of the maritime security program ( msp ) , administered by marad , thus serving as a partial offset for reduced shipping related to smaller u.s. food aid shipments .

congress did not include the administration's proposals in its fy2015 appropriations .

in its fy2016 budget request , the administration repeated the proposed changes to u.s. international food aid made in its fy2015 budget request — allow up to 25% of total title ii funding to be available for cash - based interventions and increase annual msp funds by $25 million as a partial offset for reduced shipping related to smaller u.s. food aid shipments .

the administration's fy2017 budget request proposed $1.35 billion in title ii funding , of which 25% ( $337.5 million ) would be exempt from any u.s. purchase requirement and would instead be available as cash - based food assistance for emergencies .

both the house and senate bills would appropriate larger title ii funding for fy2017 — the house bill ( h.r .

5054 ) proposes $1.466 billion , while the senate bill ( s. 2956 ) proposes $1.6 billion — but without the in - kind purchase exemption .

the administration's fy2014 food aid proposal raised issues of congressional committee and subcommittee jurisdiction over food aid appropriations and authorizing legislation ( table 4 ) .

in the senate , food aid authorizing legislation currently is with the agriculture , nutrition , and forestry committee , while appropriations jurisdiction is with the agriculture appropriations subcommittee .

in the house , jurisdiction over authorizing legislation currently is with the agriculture committee , periodically shared with the foreign affairs committee .

appropriations are the purview of the agriculture appropriations subcommittee .

shifting food aid funding to programs authorized in foreign assistance legislation ( eg , ida and da ) as proposed by the administration suggested that responsibility for food aid appropriations might shift to the foreign operations appropriations subcommittees in both chambers .

similarly , authorizing legislation might become the responsibility of the house foreign affairs committee and senate foreign relations committee .

members introduced two bills to change u.s. international food aid programs during the 113 th congress ( h.r .

1983 and s. 2421 ) , although no action was taken on either .

the senate food aid bill has been reintroduced in a modified form in the 114 th congress as s. 525 .

in may 2013 , representative royce , chairman of the house foreign affairs committee , and then - ranking member bass , introduced a bill ( h.r .

1983 ) that would have altered u.s. food aid programs by eliminating monetization and the u.s. - only commodity purchase requirement .

it would have transferred the title ii non - emergency program authority away from farm legislation and usda , and to the foreign assistance act , where it might allow usaid greater flexibility in responding to foreign emergency situations through local and regional purchase of food in a food - crisis area .

in addition , h.r .

1983 would have exempted ffpa title ii food assistance from cargo preference requirements .

the 113 th congress took no action on h.r .

1983 .

in june 2014 , then - ranking member corker and senator coons from the foreign relations committee introduced a bill , s. 2421 , that also proposed eliminating monetization , cargo preference requirements ( but only as they relate to ffpa food assistance ) , and the u.s. - only commodity purchase requirement .

it would have transferred the title ii program authority away from farm legislation and usda , and to the foreign assistance act .

s. 2421 also proposed retaining the funding allocation for non - emergency assistance to between 20% to 30% of ffpa funds , but not less than $375 million for any fiscal year .

finally , s. 2421 included a "sense of congress" provision recognizing the "critical" role the merchant marines play in maintaining u.s. defense capability .

the 113 th congress took no action on s. 2421 .

in february 2015 , chairman corker and senator coons reintroduced their food - aid bill in the new 114 th congress as s. 525 .

similar to their 2014 reform bill ( s. 2421 ) , s. 525 proposes eliminating monetization , cargo preference requirements , and the u.s. - only commodity purchase requirement but only for ffpa title ii program activity .

as with s. 2421 , s. 525 does not address cargo preference requirements as they relate to other food aid programs .

as such , the current requirement for agricultural cargo preference , as well as current practices of reliance on in - kind commodity transfers with subsequent monetization , would remain relevant for these food aid programs .

instead , s. 525 would allow ffpa title ii funds to be used for both in - kind and cash - based assistance — whichever is deemed by usaid as the preferred option for the given situation .

to accomplish this , the bill would transfer the title ii program authority away from farm legislation and usda , to the foreign assistance act and usaid .

finally , s. 525 proposes lowering the authorized annual appropriations level for title ii programs by $100,000 to $2.4 billion per fiscal year to reflect the efficiencies that would be gained from the increased flexibility in use of title ii funds .

the senators estimate that their proposed changes would supplement existing funds by as much as $440 million annually through greater efficiencies in delivering aid .

as a result , u.s. food assistance could potentially reach an additional 8 million to 12 million people than under current programs .

s. 525 also proposes retaining the allocation for non - emergency assistance of between 20% to 30% of ffpa title ii funds , but not less than $375 million for any fiscal year .

finally , s. 525 includes a "sense of congress" provision that recognizes the "critical" role the merchant marines play in maintaining u.s. defense capability .

with respect to the cargo preference requirement change , s. 525 would allow usaid the flexibility to ship any u.s. - sourced commodities under ffpa title ii on vessels that are the most suitable to the task — that is , readily available and most cost - effective — irrespective of the vessel's registry .

on july 20 , 2016 , president obama signed into law the global food security act ( p.l .

114-195 ) .

the gfsa represents a codification of the obama administration's feed the future ( ftf ) program into the foreign assistance act ( faa ) of 1961 .

ftf is a u.s. international development program launched in 2010 that invests in food security and agricultural development activities in a select group of developing countries in an effort to reduce hunger , malnutrition , poverty , and food insecurity .

since its origin , ftf has expanded into a whole - of - government effort that coordinates previously existing u.s. agricultural development policies into a single framework .

the gfsa continues the ftf's global food security initiative under a "whole - of - government" strategy .

in gfsa ( section 5 ) the president is directed to develop a global food security strategy ( gfss ) by not later than october 1 , 2016 .

furthermore , the president is directed to coordinate — through a whole - of - government approach — the efforts of all relevant federal departments and agencies involved in the u.s. global food security initiative .

thus , the gfsa subsumes the usda in - kind food aid programs discussed in this report , along with those food - security - related programs of other federal agencies .

under ftf , u.s. international food assistance programs have often been run jointly or in close association with each other when occurring in common regional settings .

the gfsa grants coordinating authority to the president for the gfss .

however , the gfsa includes a provision ( section 9 ) that specifically precludes the gfss from superseding or otherwise affecting the authority of usda to carry out its various food assistance programs .

the programs subject to this exclusion are explicitly listed in the gfsa , section 9 ( b ) , as the food for peace act ; food for progress , section 416 ( b ) ; mcgovern - dole food for education program ; local and regional procurement program ; bill emerson humanitarian trust ; and any other food and nutrition security and emergency and non - emergency food assistance program of usda .

the gfsa ( section 6 ) authorized appropriations of about $1.0 billion for each of fy2017 and fy2018 for those portions of the gfss that relate to the department of state and usaid .

in addition , the gfsa ( section 7 ) permanently authorized the emergency food security program ( efsp ) as part of the foreign assistance act ( faa ) of 1961 and authorized appropriations of nearly $2.8 billion for each of fy2017 and fy2018 for humanitarian assistance under efsp .

