most federal excise taxes do not apply in the united states virgin islands ( usvi ) and puerto rico ( pr ) or the other possessions .

an exception , however , is provided by section 7652 of the internal revenue code , which applies a special excise tax to items produced in pr or the usvi and shipped to the united states .

the tax is equal to any excise tax that would apply to an identical item produced in one of the 50 states or the district of columbia .

the tax was first imposed to ensure that producers in the possessions would not have a tax advantage over goods produced in the united states that are subject to excise taxes .

for example , rum that is produced in either the usvi or pr and that is sold in the states is subject to the same tax as rum produced in the states .

most of the revenue from the so - called equalization tax , however , is returned ( "covered over" ) by the federal government to the treasuries of pr and the usvi .

in addition , the caribbean basin economic recovery act of 1983 ( p.l .

98-67 ) provides that all revenue from federal excise taxes on rum imported into the united states from any source — including any foreign country — is remitted to the treasuries of pr and the usvi .

the cover - over provisions for rum extend as far back as 1917 for pr and 1954 for the usvi .

the covered - over revenue has never been designated for particular purposes by congress .

the territories have tended to dedicate some portion to fund marketing campaigns for the rum industry and general economic development .

annual cover - over revenues in fy2011 were $449.0 million for pr and $133.5 million for the usvi .

in the 112 th congress , legislation has been introduced to expand federal control over the use of covered - over revenue .

passage of h.r .

1883 ( or similar legislation , s. 986 ) would result in limits on puerto rico's and the usvi's ability to finance economic development projects with this revenue source .

the legislation is likely in response to recent economic development initiatives in the usvi financed in part by rum cover - over revenue .

the congressional debate on this legislation could also lead to debate on the broader issue of the cover - over program more generally .

in contrast , s. 3521 would simply extend the $13.25 cover - over through 2013 .

congress initiated the principles behind the rum cover - over program for puerto rico under the jones act of 1917 , even though , ironically , the same legislation prohibited the production and sale of alcohol .

the act stipulated , "providing that hereafter all taxes collected under the internal revenue laws of the united states on articles produced in porto rico [sic] and transported to the united states , or consumed in the island shall be covered over into the treasury of porto rico [sic]. .

the house and senate report language accompanying the jones act of 1917 both stated "it is believed to be just and fair that it [puerto rico] should receive the internal - revenue taxes collected upon its products , whether those products are used in porto rico [sic] or produced in porto rico [sic] and transported to and used in the united states. .

importantly , there is no mention of congressional intent with regard to spending of such covered - over revenue .

the revised organic act of 1954 ( p.l .

83-517 ) extended the rum cover - over program to the usvi ; following is the relevant legislative language: there shall be transferred and paid over to the government of the virgin islands from the amounts so determined a sum equal to the total amount of revenue collected by the government of the virgin islands during the fiscal year , as certified by the government comptroller of the virgin islands .

the money so transferred and paid over shall constitute a separate fund in the treasury of the virgin islands and may be expended as the legislature may determine... .

the next clause in the legislative language does provide that the president of the united states or his designated representative must approve of such expenditures before the cover - over revenue is obligated .

in the senate report language accompanying the revised organic act of 1954 , congress expressed a desire that the usvi use the covered - over revenue to loosen the dependence of the usvi on periodic appropriations from the u.s. government .

according to the report language , under a cover - over system , "the people of the virgin islands would have a far greater degree of control over their finances than under the present system. .

the report continues , recommending that "the people of the virgin islands bend their efforts to stimulating and increasing business in every way possible. .

again , congress does not outline specific uses for the covered - over revenue .

that same year , two rum manufacturers began production in the usvi , cruzan viral ltd. , and brugal .

as noted earlier , the caribbean basin economic recovery act of 1983 ( p.l .

98-67 ) provides that all revenue from federal excise taxes on rum imported into the united states from any source — including any other foreign country — is to be remitted to the treasuries of pr and the usvi .

this provision increased the amount covered over to pr by 17.0% in fy2009 and to the usvi by 7.8% in fy2011 .

the formula for dividing the "other" revenue between the usvi and pr is complicated but is roughly based on the relative market share of rum each possession produces .

in the report language accompanying the act , congress clarified that "the bill does not impose restrictions on the uses to which the government of the virgin islands or the government of puerto rico may put the revenues they receive under this provision. .

the law also stipulates that the pr share of excise tax on other rum shall not exceed 87.626889% and not fall below 51% .

accordingly , the usvi share cannot drop below 12.373111% or exceed 49% .

the floors are important because even if all rum production were to leave puerto rico or the usvi for another country , the possessions would still receive a significant share of cover - over revenue from "other" revenue as under the formula in p.l .

98-67 .

however , if production shifts between the two possessions , the "losing" possession would lose all of the revenue generated by the relocated rum production .

thus , the possession losing the rum producer would be better off if the rum producer relocated outside of pr , usvi , or the united states .

the deficit reduction act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-369 ) placed a cap on the rebate of excise taxes on rum and other distilled spirits .

the 1984 act increased the federal tax rate on spirits from $10.50 per proof - gallon to $12.50 ; subsequent legislation increased the rate to $13.50 per proof - gallon .

the 1984 act also provided , however , that the rebate to pr and the usvi would be calculated based on prior law's $10.50 rate .

in imposing the cap , congress stated that it did not wish to expand the rebate ( as would have occurred automatically with the tax - rate increase ) until it had addressed the question of whether the rebates were proper , given that similar cover - overs were not made to the 50 states .

the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( obra93 ; p.l .

103-66 ) temporarily increased the cap to $11.30 per proof - gallon , effective for shipments of rum and distilled spirits brought into the united states during the five - year period october 1 , 1993 , through september 30 , 1998 .

the increase was enacted in the context of a scaling - back by the act of the possessions tax credit .

with the expiration of obra93's temporary increase in the rebate's cap , the limitation returned to its previous $10.50 level .

the ticket to work and work incentives improvement act of 1999 ( p.l .

106-170 ) and the job creation and worker assistance act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-147 ) , however , provided temporary increases in the cap to $13.25 per proof - gallon through december 31 , 2003 .

in conjunction with the extension of a number of other tax provisions not related to the possessions , the working families tax relief act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-311 ) extended the $13.25 amount through 2005 .

the tax relief and health care act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-432 ) extended the $13.25 amount through 2007 .

on october 3 , 2008 , the tax extenders and alternative minimum tax relief act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) extended the cover - over through the 2008 and 2009 tax years .

in the 111 th congress , the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) extended the cover - over at $13.25 through 2011 .

the legislation was signed by the president on december 17 , 2010 , thus , the additional covered - over revenue will be remitted retroactively at the higher rate .

in the 112 th congress , legislation has been introduced to expand federal control over the use of covered - over revenue .

passage of h.r .

1883 ( or similar legislation , s. 986 ) would result in limits on puerto rico's and the usvi's ability to use covered - over revenue to subsidize the rum industry in the islands .

the legislation is likely in response to the recent economic development initiatives in the usvi financed in part by rum cover - over revenue .

the president's fy2013 budget proposal includes an extension of the $13.25 cover - over , as does s. 3521 .

the u.s. department of the treasury ( treasury ) collects federal excise tax revenue on rum exported to the united states from pr and the usvi and submits monthly reports of the amount collected to the u.s. department of the interior ( doi ) .

in september , pr and the usvi request prepayment from the doi based on revenue projections by the office of management and budget ( omb ) for the upcoming fiscal year .

the doi then requests that the treasury deposit the funds by september 30 into a designated escrow account for pr and the usvi .

on may 12 , 2011 , resident commissioner pedro pierluisi introduced h.r .

1883 , the investing in u.s .

territories , not corporations act of 2011 , legislation that would limit the amount of the subsidy to rum companies that is paid with covered - over revenue .

in addition , the legislation would restrict the allocation of the covered - over revenue .

the subsidy limit would prevent any possession from offering more than 15% of their covered - over revenue as an industrial subsidy for the rum industry .

the restriction seems intended to make it more costly for the usvi to provide incentives to rum producers that have relocated from puerto rico to the usvi .

resident commissioner pierluisi , in a news item that appeared on his congressional website , states that using funds provided under the federal cover - over program to give excessive subsidies to companies is completely indefensible .

it destroys the purpose and integrity of this important program , which was intended to help the territories provide essential government services , like health care , infrastructure development , education , and land conservation.… the legislation would allow the possessions to offer debt financed grants to rum producers in excess of the 15% limit as long as the debt were not repaid with cover - over revenues .

thus , any amount of cover - over revenue used to repay debt that was issued to subsidize rum producers would be included in the 15% limit .

the amount above the 15% limit would be subtracted from the cover - over payment for the next two years .

in the senate , s. 986 , introduced by senator menendez , includes the same provisions .

a second provision in the proposed bills would restrict the allocations of rum cover - over revenue to the usvi and puerto rico .

puerto rico's share of the cover - over revenue could never fall below 65% or rise above 70% .

the usvi share would then be bound between 30% and 35% .

under current law , there is no limit on the cover - over revenue generated by own - source rum exports .

in 2009 , roughly 88% of all cover - over revenue was returned to puerto rico as diageo produced captain morgan® rum in puerto rico .

the recent relocation of diageo operations from puerto rico to the usvi is anticipated to shift the relative market share significantly .

the 35% cap on usvi remittances , as proposed , would likely be significantly lower than actual market share .

a recent bond offering statement included an estimate that total cover - over revenues to the usvi would increase from to $278.8 million in 2013 .

the increase , due largely from new diageo rum shipments , would likely mirror a decrease in puerto rican shipments .

s. 3521 would extend the higher cover - over amount of $13.25 without any modifications to the allocation or restrictions on use of revenues .

h.r .

1883 and s. 986 would make the direct subsidy to rum producers with rum excise tax cover - over payments more difficult and preclude the usvi from using general revenue to subsidize rum producers .

as identified earlier , the subsidy the usvi is offering would include the continuation of ( 1 ) rum promotion , ( 2 ) marketing support , and ( 3 ) a molasses subsidy .

in addition , news reports have also suggested that the usvi would provide income tax breaks and a complete exemption from property taxes .

the news report also claims that the sum of these subsidies approaches 46% of the total amount covered over to the usvi and is not directly linked to the rum cover - over .

all of these benefits accompany the debt finance support outlined earlier .

the so - called rum - tax bonds are clearly linked to the rum tax as they are secured by the revenue generated by the production and export of captain morgan® by diageo .

the mix of marketing subsidies and tax incentives used to attract diageo to the usvi already exceeds the limits proposed in the legislation .

what is unclear is how the legislation would affect the diageo agreement , enacted in july 2008 , to manufacture rum in the usvi .

section 6.2.1 ( b ) on page 23 of the diageo agreement stipulates that diageo will produce rum in the usvi as long as "the economic development incentives granted by the government to diageo have not been materially reduced or made unavailable to diageo. .

the restrictions that would be imposed on the cover - over revenues would likely reduce the subsidies provided by the usvi to diageo .

it is unclear how diageo would respond to enactment of the legislation .

supporters of the restrictions claim that the tax incentives and subsidies offered by the usvi to large profitable corporations , such as diageo , are a misuse of taxpayer dollars .

others make the same argument against many government - funded sub - federal economic development incentives .

some researchers "have begun to write off economic development incentives as ineffective or inefficient for a host of reasons. .

nevertheless , the justification for using tax incentives and subsidies to attract industry has long been a part of non - federal economic development strategies .

there are numerous examples of states offering manufacturing firms reduced property taxes , access to tax - exempt financing , and favorable corporate income tax policies .

the success of these programs to retain or lure new firms has been mixed and in many cases critics assert that the programs unnecessarily sacrifice tax revenues to influence a location decision that has already been made .

from the federal government's perspective , state and local incentives for industrial development are a redistribution of tax dollars from state and local governments to manufacturing firms without a net gain in national gdp .

from this perspective , the incentives shift economic activity from one location in the united states to another .

the intended improvement of social welfare ( i.e. , helping economically disadvantaged areas ) is usually the justification for such policies in light of what many economists identify as the "zero - sum" nature of the incentives .

the size and scope of the usvi agreement with diageo ( and , to a lesser degree , cruzan ) is unique in that it involves the cover - over of rum excise tax revenues from the u.s .

departments of the treasury and the interior to the usvi and pr to directly and indirectly support the rum industry .

the legislation would not prohibit tax incentives and direct subsidies ; just limit them to a seemingly arbitrary level .

the proposed limit could also be seen as inconsistent with the intent of the cover - over as expressed in the legislation and report language cited earlier .

as noted in the legislative history in this report , congress explicitly stated that the government receiving the covered - over revenue was charged with its disposition , not the u.s. congress .

in the case of diageo , news reports indicate that diageo had already decided to leave puerto rico and the usvi presented the most attractive option .

while other caribbean countries were said to be in the competition for the diageo facility , diageo's decision to produce rum in the usvi presents the worst case scenario for pr because pr loses not only diageo but also future excise tax revenue from usvi production .

as mentioned previously , a portion of rum - tax revenue collected from other countries' imports to the united states is paid to pr , but not on imports from the usvi .

the recent recession and related budget situation have elevated the interest in the rum cover - over program .

from the perspective of u.s. taxpayers , some may question the efficacy of the rum cover - over , regardless of the historical precedent .

further , proponents of restrictions on the use of covered - over revenue have alluded to the possibility that congress may reconsider the cover - over principle generally , possibly ending the program , if the usvi uses the revenue for "unreasonable" subsidies .

u.s. congress , house committee on ways and means , subcommittee on select revenue measures , miscellaneous tax bills , 99 th cong. , 1 st sess. , may 12 and 19 , 1986 .

hearing includes consideration of h.r .

4578 , to require the unite states to pay to the virgin islands the full amount of excise taxes imposed on rum produced in the virgin islands .

u.s. congress , house committee on ways and means , tax shelters , accounting abuses , and corporate and securities reforms , 98 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , february 22 and 28 , 1984 .

hearing includes consideration of h.r .

4702 , to disallow federal excise tax rebates to puerto rico and the virgin islands for redistilled spirits originally distilled in the u.s. u.s. congress , senate committee on energy and natural resources , subcommittee on energy conservation and supply , 1983 omnibus territories , 98 th cong. , 1 st sess. , october 6 , 1983 .

hearing includes consideration of s. 589 , to authorize fy1984 appropriations for certain guam public works projects , and to authorize or revise various programs pertaining to guam , nmi , and virgin islands .

includes provision to eliminate the federal approval requirement for virgin islands spending of rum excise tax rebates .

u.s. congress , senate committee on energy and natural resources , caribbean basin initiative , 98 th cong. , 1 st sess. , june 10 , 1983 .

hearing to examine the implications of president reagan's february 1982 caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) for the virgin islands and puerto rico .

focuses on cbi provision to rebate rum excise tax revenue to the virgin islands and puerto rico to protect their economies from adverse cbi effects .

includes brief consideration of s. 544 , the caribbean basin economic recovery act , to authorize trade and tax incentives to encourage caribbean area economic revitalization .

u.s. congress , house committee on ways and means , caribbean basin economic recovery act , 98 th cong. , 1 st sess. , june 9 , 1983 .

hearing to consider h.r .

2769 , to authorize trade and tax incentives to encourage caribbean area economic revitalization .

includes provisions to require treasury dept to transfer to puerto rico and the virgin islands excise tax revenues from all rum imported into the united states .

u.s. congress , senate committee on finance , caribbean basin initiative , 98 th cong. , 1 st sess. , april 13 , 1983 .

hearing to consider s. 544 , the caribbean basin economic recovery act ( summary , p. 3-10 ) , the administration bill , to authorize trade and tax incentives to encourage caribbean area economic revitalization , including duty - free treatment through september 30 , 1995 , of qualifying caribbean products imported into the u.s. includes witness statements on the potential adverse effect of s. 544 on puerto rico and u.s. virgin islands , particularly on local bulk rum industries and u.s. imported rum excise tax rebate revenues ; presentation of puerto rico - virgin islands alternative to proposed duty - free treatment of rum .

u.s. congress , senate committee on finance , caribbean basin initiative , 97 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , august 2 , 1982 .

hearing to consider s. 2237 , the caribbean basin economic recovery act , to implement president reagan's february 1982 caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) to promote economic revitalization in the caribbean area and central america through duty - free treatment of certain articles , increased economic assistance , and tax credit for u.s. capital investment in caribbean basin countries .

includes statement by the puerto rico manufacturers association on the impact of the act on the puerto rican rum industry .

u.s. congress , senate committee on foreign relations , caribbean basin initiative , 97 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , march 25 , 31 , 1982 .

hearings to consider s. 2237 , to implement president reagan's february 1982 caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) to encourage caribbean area economic revitalization through duty - free treatment of certain articles , increased economic assistance , and tax credits for u.s. capital investments in caribbean basin countries .

includes discussion of concerns about impact of cbi duty - free provisions on competitive position of virgin islands industries , focusing on rum industry ; views on overall u.s. policies and program priorities for caribbean region .

u.s. congress , house committee on ways and means , subcommittee on trade , caribbean basin initiative , 97 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , march 17 , 23-25 , 1982 .

hearings to consider h.r .

5900 , to implement president reagan's february 1982 caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) to encourage caribbean area economic revitalization through duty - free treatment of certain articles , increased economic assistance , and tax credits for u.s. capital investment in caribbean basin countries .

also assesses cbi effects on puerto rico and the virgin islands , and includes discussion on concerns about foreseen anticompetitive effect on virgin islands rum industry of duty - free entry for all caribbean rums .

u.s. congress , house committee on ways and means , subcommittee on trade , multilateral trade negotiations , 96 th cong. , 1 st sess. , april 23-27 , 1979 .

hearings to examine the advantages and disadvantages of the multilateral trade negotiations ( mtn ) agreements for u.s. industries .

includes statements by representatives from puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands on the importance of rum industry to represented islands' economic stability and development ; impact of rum tariff reduction ; objections to duty and excise taxes assessment based on proof content as opposed to current gallonage standards .

u.s. congress , house committee on ways and means , tax remissions to virgin islands , 80 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , february 3 , 18 , 27 , 1948 .

hearings to consider s. 1014 and h.r .

4979 , which provide that proceeds from federal taxes imposed on articles produced in the virgin islands be made available to the territorial legislature .

u.s. congress , house committee on insular affairs , to assist in relieving economic distress in puerto rico and the virgin islands , part 4 , 78 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , may 16-17 , 1944 .

hearing to consider h.r .

3777 .

includes consideration of virgin islands civil works projects and rum industry tax allocations for public works programs .

u.s. congress , house committee on insular affairs , to assist in relieving economic distress in the virgin islands .

part 3: virgin islands , 78 th cong. , 1 st sess. , october 21 , 27 , november 2 , 10 , 17 , and december 2 , 6 , 1943 .

hearing includes discussion of proposals for virgin islands rum industry tax allocations for public works programs .

u.s. congress , house committee on ways and means , subcommittee on internal revenue taxation , appropriation of certain taxes to virgin islands , 76 th cong. , 1 sess. , june 26-27 , 1939 .

hearing to consider s. 1685 and h.r .

4773 .

involves the covering of taxes collected on articles of virgin islands manufacture into the treasury of the virgin islands .

