the obama administration and congress continue to grapple with high rates of unemployment despite some tentative signs of economic recovery .

on december 8 , 2009 , president obama outlined a series of proposals intended to accelerate job growth , focusing on incentives to small businesses , spending on various infrastructure projects , and job creation through energy efficiency and clean energy initiatives .

the president also signaled support for the extension of some of the direct assistance provisions included in the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) , including unemployment compensation ( uc ) benefits and health insurance premium subsidies under the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 ( cobra ) .

on december 16 , 2009 , the house passed the jobs for main street act ( h.r .

2847 ) , which would spend approximately $154 billion in three general areas: infrastructure investment , public service jobs , and emergency relief for families .

appropriations for infrastructure and jobs would total about $75 billion , to be offset by redirecting troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) funds .

emergency assistance ( which are primarily entitlement or mandatory spending provisions ) would total another $79 billion , as estimated by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) on the date of house passage ; however , this amount includes some spending for uc and cobra provisions that were subsequently enacted into law under the fy2010 defense appropriations act ( p.l .

111-118 ) .

infrastructure investments would include such projects as highways , public transit , amtrak , airports , clean water , energy innovation , school renovation , and housing .

spending for public service jobs would be intended to stabilize the jobs of teachers , law enforcement officers , firefighters , and parks and forestry workers , as well as to provide training for youth , help college students stay in school through work - study jobs , and provide training in high - growth industries .

emergency assistance would provide extended uc and cobra subsidies .

among other provisions , the bill would also extend enhanced medicaid matching provisions established under arra , temporarily expand the child tax credit , and freeze federal poverty guidelines at 2009 levels to prevent a reduction in eligibility for certain means - tested programs .

as passed by the house in december , h.r .

2847 would also extend surface transportation authorizations through fy2010 .

on february 24 , 2010 , the senate passed an amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r .

2847 ( s.amdt .

3310 ) .

this substitute would provide tax credits for hiring and retaining unemployed workers , extend a tax provision in arra related to expensing for small businesses , and reauthorize certain transportation authorities .

the senate version of h.r .

2847 contains none of the education , training , or direct assistance provisions of the house - passed bill that are discussed in this report , with the single exception of provisions for school construction bonds .

meanwhile , on february 25 , 2010 , the house passed the temporary extension act of 2010 ( h.r .

4691 ) , which would provide a shorter extension of some of the direct assistance provisions also included in the house - passed version of h.r .

2847 , including uc benefits and cobra subsidies .

this report focuses specifically on provisions in the house - passed bill that would support education and training or that would provide direct support to unemployed workers or low - income individuals .

unless noted otherwise , the senate version of h.r .

2847 contains no comparable provisions .

certain overarching provisions included in the house bill are discussed at the end of the report .

the house - passed jobs for main street act includes several provisions related to programs administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) .

first , it would create an education jobs fund that would be based on the state fiscal stabilization fund created under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) .

second , h.r .

2847 would provide additional funding for federal work - study ( fws ) programs authorized under title iv , part c of the higher education act ( hea ) .

finally , h.r .

2847 ( and the senate amendment to h.r .

2847 ) would modify provisions related to qualified zone academy bonds and qualified school construction bonds .

each of these provisions is discussed below .

the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ; p.l .

105-220 ) provides job training and related services to unemployed and underemployed individuals .

wia programs are administered by the department of labor , primarily through its employment and training administration ( doleta ) .

state and local wia training and employment activities are provided through a system of one - stop career centers .

authorization of appropriations under wia expired in fy2003 , but funds have continued to be provided for wia programs through annual appropriations acts .

wia authorizes numerous job training programs , including state formula grants for youth , adult , and dislocated worker employment and training activities ; job corps ; and national programs , including the native american program , the migrant and seasonal farmworker program , the veterans' workforce investment program , responsible reintegration for young offenders , the prisoner reentry program , career pathways innovation fund , and youthbuild .

in fy2010 , the wia programs and activities noted above are funded at $5.5 billion , including $3.0 billion for state formula grants for adult , youth , and dislocated worker activities .

as described below , wia programs also received funding under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) .

under the house - passed jobs for main street act , $1.25 billion would be provided for existing workforce development and related programs administered by doleta .

these funds would be in addition to amounts already appropriated for fy2010 .

specifically , h.r .

2847 would provide: $500 million for youth activities under title i - b of wia , specifically summer employment programs ; and $750 million for worker training in high growth and emerging industry sectors under title i - d of wia .

as noted in the introduction to this report , the house - passed jobs for main street act would provide appropriations for infrastructure investments intended to save or create jobs .

some of these appropriations would be made to programs administered by the departments of the interior and agriculture .

these programs are not discussed in this report but include resource management activities of the bureau of land management , u.s .

fish and wildlife service , national park service , and national forest service .

section 1402 of h.r .

2847 directs the secretaries of the interior and agriculture , in administering these funds , to use — to the maximum extent practicable — the public land corps , youth conservation corps , student conservation association , job corps , corps network members , and other partnerships with federal , state , local , tribal , or nonprofit organizations that serve young adults , underserved and minority populations , veterans , and special needs individuals .

certain overarching or general provisions included in the american recovery and reinvestment act would also apply to the jobs for main street act , as passed by the house .

for example , section 1702 of h.r .

2847 would maintain arra's prohibition on the use of funds for casinos or other gambling establishments , aquariums , zoos , golf courses , or swimming pools .

the bill would also provide that any funds made available under the act would be subject to the same reporting , transparency , and oversight requirements established by title xv of division a of arra .

likewise , funds provided under arra to agency inspectors general or the recovery accountability and transparency board would be available to oversee activities under the jobs for main street act as well ( section 1703 ( a ) and ( b ) ) .

finally , section 4002 of h.r .

2847 would require that any funds provided under the act be subject to the "buy american" provisions included in arra .

