any mortgage , be it on a single - family house , a multifamily building , a commercial building , or a farm , is a loan that is to be repaid over an agreed period of time , at a specified interest rate , that pledges the structure as collateral .

this report concentrates on multifamily and commercial mortgages .

it examines policy concerns over the future of multifamily finance and commercial and multifamily mortgage losses in the aftermath of the december 2007-june 2009 recession .

single - family housing is usually defined as a structure with one to four units , making multifamily housing five or more units .

commercial mortgages are mortgages secured by non - farm , non - residential property .

single - family mortgages are familiar to many .

the most popular single - family mortgage has a fixed interest rate , is paid off over 30 years with identical monthly payments , and the average amount borrowed in recent years was approximately $220,000 .

in contrast , multifamily and commercial loans most commonly have variable interest rates , mature in 10 or fewer years , have a large balance ( called a balloon ) that must be paid off at the end of the term , and the amount borrowed ranges from hundreds of thousands to millions of dollars .

this report analyzes the multifamily and commercial mortgage markets , sometimes using single - family mortgages as a comparison .

it examines some of the risks that these mortgage markets contain .

appendix a explains mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) , and appendix b discusses how mortgage applications are approved or rejected .

multifamily mortgages finance a significant share of the nation's housing stock .

multifamily housing includes traditional apartment buildings , subsidized housing , seniors housing , and student housing .

approximately 34% of households live in rental housing , and 41% of renters live in multifamily ( five or more units ) structures .

overall , 14% of households live in multifamily apartments .

rental property ownership varies with the number of units in the property .

individuals own a greater share of small - and medium - sized rental projects: approximately 83% of 2- to 4-unit rental properties and 49% of 5- to 49-unit rental properties are owned by individual investors .

partnerships and limited liability companies own 72% of 50 plus - unit projects .

since 2011 , investment pools have increased their activity and have begun to own larger shares of single family rentals in select markets .

business investor purchases of single - family homes are relatively small , but have grown from approximately 1% of sales in 2004 to approximately 6.5% of 2012 sales .

multifamily and commercial mortgages are very similar , but both differ from a single - family , owner - occupied mortgage in many ways: the multifamily and commercial mortgage markets are much smaller than the single - family market .

at the end of the third quarter of 2013 , there were $908 billion of multifamily mortgages , $2,233 billion of commercial mortgages , and $9,864 billion of single - family mortgages .

individual multifamily and commercial mortgages are much larger than a typical single - family mortgage .

multifamily and commercial mortgages frequently are for millions of dollars while single - family mortgages typically are for hundreds of thousands of dollars .

many multifamily mortgages , especially large ones purchased by fannie mae and freddie mac , are non - recourse , which means in the event of foreclosure the borrower's liability is limited to the property ; home mortgage recourse varies by state .

commercial mortgages are similar in these regards to multifamily mortgages , except that fannie mae and freddie mac cannot purchase commercial mortgages .

multifamily and commercial mortgages commonly have adjustable interest rates .

most single - family mortgages have fixed interest rates .

multifamily and commercial mortgages usually have prepayment penalties , but single - family mortgages do not .

multifamily and commercial mortgages are not structured to be paid off over the life of the mortgage , and are usually refinanced at the end of the mortgage .

single - family mortgages are paid off over the term of the mortgage , and are most commonly refinanced only when paid off early .

multifamily and commercial mortgages frequently have a life of 7-10 years , although fha multifamily mortgages can have longer terms .

single - family mortgages are most commonly for 30 years .

multifamily and commercial mortgage applications are underwritten on the rent collected , not on owner incomes .

multifamily and commercial financing is likely to be customized based on the project , the borrower , and the lender .

it can include various types of credit enhancements such as letters of credit , insurance , cash reserve accounts , sinking funds to finance major repairs , and over - collateralization .

single - family mortgages are much more standardized .

multifamily , commercial , and single - family underwriting share some characteristics: all use the loan - to - value ratio as one measure of risk to the lender .

all use the ratio of the mortgage payments to income ( owner in the case of owner - occupied , project in the case of multifamily ) as a measure of ability to pay .

commercial and multifamily property is purchased as a business investment to earn a profit , whereas owner - occupied homes are purchased primarily for shelter .

if the rate of profit on a project is greater than the cost of borrowing , profitability can be increased — at the cost of increased risk — by increasing leverage , that is , by borrowing more of the money required to finance the project .

financial analysis of a proposed investment weighs the expected profits against the risks .

for example , a lender will seek a higher profit on riskier mortgages to compensate for the risk of a loss .

when a specific potential borrower appears to present elevated risk levels , the lender either quotes a higher mortgage rate , adds terms and conditions to reduce the risk , or , in the extreme case , declines to make the loan .

the risk to a lender can be reduced by requiring the commercial or multifamily borrower to contribute more money to the purchase ( i.e. , make a larger downpayment ) or by requiring some sort of credit enhancement , such as a third - party guarantee .

in some situations , credit risk can be reduced by making the loan for a shorter period of time .

balloon payments in commercial or multifamily mortgages occur because the borrower's payments do not fully amortize the loan .

this allows the same amount of cash flow to support a larger mortgage and the real estate owner to purchase more property with the same assets .

the balloon payments in commercial or multifamily mortgages are sometimes called "soft bullets" and "hard bullets. .

a soft bullet allows the borrower the option to extend the life of the mortgage , perhaps at a higher interest rate , but a hard bullet does not allow extension .

most the time the soft bullet option is not exercised and the mortgage is refinanced .

the shorter term for multifamily and commercial mortgages coupled with prohibitions or financial penalties for prepayment provide both borrower and lender with greater cash flow certainty .

prepayments are a risk for lenders because borrowers tend to prepay when interest rates have declined , leaving the lender to replace the prepaid mortgage with a lower interest rate mortgage .

in general , lenders prefer to make loans with contractual prohibitions on prepayments , expensive penalties for prepayments , or higher interest rates .

a borrower generally prefers terms that allow prepayments without penalties and without a higher interest rate to compensate the lender .

most single - family mortgages can be prepaid without penalty , but multifamily and commercial mortgages commonly require a borrower wishing to remove the lien on property ( the equivalent of prepaying the mortgage ) to give the lender u.s. treasury bonds to match the cash flow of the mortgage .

 ( this is called defeasance. ) .

this replaces the risky mortgage payments with riskless treasury bonds paying the same interest rate ; the borrower usually finds it more advantageous not to prepay .

in addition , the shorter multifamily and commercial mortgage life reduces the incentive for the borrower to prepay because there is less time to reap the benefits of the lower interest rate .

the shorter mortgage life provides an opportunity for the property owner to increase leverage when refinancing .

the nonrecourse feature of most multifamily and commercial mortgages shifts some of the costs of foreclosure from the borrower to the lender .

in the event of foreclosure , if the property is sold for less than the amount owed , the lender has no further remedy .

if a loan is made with recourse , the borrower ( corporate or individual ) is responsible for the balance owed .

reserve accounts are often required for multifamily and commercial mortgages and are an expansion of the escrow requirements that single - family mortgages typically contain .

a homeowner makes monthly payments for property taxes and property insurance into an escrow account .

a commercial or multifamily reserve account may have these and also payments for major items such as a new roof or heating , ventilation , and air conditioning system .

sometimes these accounts are set based on the specific property , and sometimes a rule of thumb is employed using the property's rents or square footage .

as financial markets continue to recover from the december 2007-june 2009 recession , congressional interest has turned from concerns about the impact of losses in multifamily and commercial mortgages on financial stability to reforming the single - family and multifamily mortgage markets .

one key issue under debate is the question of what the federal government's role should be in residential mortgage markets , including multifamily housing .

bills in both the house and senate would wind down fannie mae and freddie mac , two congressionally chartered government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) , which were created to support the market for single - family and multifamily mortgages .

by law , fannie mae and freddie mac are limited to purchasing existing single - family and multifamily mortgages that others have originated .

they are prohibited from purchasing commercial mortgages and from extending mortgage credit directly to borrowers .

in the house , h.r .

2767 , the protecting american taxpayers and homeowners ( path ) act of 2013 , proposes to wind down fannie mae and freddie mac over a period of years .

it would replace them with a national mortgage market utility that would facilitate mortgage securitization , but would not provide a government guarantee .

the act would also eliminate or delay the implementation of certain existing regulations that some believe are inhibiting recovery in the mortgage market .

the bill makes no mention of the gses' multifamily lending .

the path act would make the federal housing administration ( fha ) an independent agency and take steps to improve its finances by reforming its single - family and multifamily mortgage insurance programs .

in the senate , s. 1217 , the housing finance reform and taxpayer protection act of 2013 ( corker - warner ) , proposes to wind down fannie mae and freddie mac and to replace the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) with a new entity to be called the federal mortgage insurance corporation ( fmic ) .

the fmic would be an independent agency charged with supporting the mortgage market and providing reinsurance on eligible mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) .

these mbs would have an explicit full - faith - and - credit federal government guarantee , and the fmic would regulate aspects of the mortgage market related to these mbs .

the fmic would assume the gses' multifamily finance role .

securitization — packaging mortgages into negotiable securities — has spread the rewards and risks of holding mortgages internationally .

losses from single - family , multifamily , and commercial real estate are not confined to the united states .

trouble with overseas real estate can expose u.s. investors to losses , and vice versa .

at the end of the third quarter of 2013 , multifamily and commercial real estate mortgages totaled $3,140.7 billion compared with $13,182.1 billion in total mortgages .

table 1 shows who holds multifamily and commercial mortgages .

the largest holder of commercial mortgages and multifamily mortgages , providing 54.7% of commercial mortgages and 30.0% of multifamily mortgages , is u.s. - chartered depositories , which experienced severe financial distress during the recession .

the gses hold 27.7% of outstanding multifamily mortgages and , together with government agencies , securitized an additional 15.3% .

thus , directly and indirectly , the gses and government agencies supported 44.5% of multifamily mortgages outstanding .

figure 3 is based on the multifamily data in table 1 and illustrates the market shares of various multifamily mortgage investor classes .

u.s. - chartered depository institutions ( mainly banks and thrifts ) are the largest investors with $272 billion , followed by the gses' holdings of $252 billion .

in addition , the gses and ginnie mae ( a government agency that is part of hud ) , have issued $139 billion of multifamily mbs .

figure 4 is a graphic representation of the commercial mortgage data in table 1 .

there are no agency - and gse - backed commercial mortgage pools , but asset - backed securities ( abs ) represent 22% of outstanding commercial mortgages .

at 55% , u.s. - chartered depositories are the largest sector holding commercial mortgages .

appendix a .

mortgage - backed securities like single - family mortgages , multifamily and commercial mortgages are frequently pooled into mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) .

mbs allow institutional lenders to supply mortgage money to borrowers throughout the nation , even if these lenders do not have the capability to issue or to service the mortgages .

in theory , this allows for greater efficiencies through specialization and economies of scale .

some businesses specialize in originating multifamily and commercial mortgages , others in servicing the mortgages , and others , such as commercial banks , life insurance companies , savings institutions , mbs issuers , and government - sponsored enterprises ( gses , i.e. , fannie mae and freddie mac ) , in supplying the funds .

other businesses specialize in rating commercial mbs ( cmbs ) .

cmbs , like single - family mortgage - backed securities ( commonly abbreviated as mbs ) , are typically created by sponsors that originate ( or sometimes purchase ) a mortgage and sell it to a trust that issues the cmbs .

this creates a "bankruptcy remote" entity that should not be affected if the sponsor declares bankruptcy .

cmbs , like mbs , can be divided into tranches or classes to better meet potential purchasers' preferences for risk , cash flow , diversification , etc .

one typical cmbs prospectus sought to raise $3.3 billion divided into 12 tranches ranging in size from $13 million to $1.2 billion .

the tranches had different expected lives , repayment of principal schedules , interest rates , and risk profiles .

this cmbs was divided into three separate real estate mortgage investment conduits ( remics ) , which are tax pass - throughs , meaning that the holders of the cmbs classes are taxed , but the remic is not taxed .

federal law and irs regulations establish the rules that an mbs servicer must follow to be a remic .

for example , to maintain their status as tax pass - throughs and to avoid being taxed , remics must be "passively" managed .

before the irs issued revenue procedure 2009-45 , an underlying mortgage could be modified only when "occasioned by default or a reasonably foreseeable default. .

irs revenue procedure 2009-45 allows servicers to modify mortgages before default if , "[b]ased on all the facts and circumstances , the holder or servicer reasonably believes that there is a significant risk of default of the pre - modification loan upon maturity of the loan or at an earlier date" without jeopardizing the remic's tax status .

in addition , the contract between the mbs servicer and the investors ( called the pooling and servicing agreement or psa ) could prevent modifications that the revenue procedures allow .

a typical psa prevents the servicers from modifying the underlying loans in ways that change the payment of principal or interest , impair the security of the loan , or reduce any credit enhancements .

certain modifications are allowed if default is imminent , the modification could reduce losses on a mortgage , or the modification would not reduce credit enhancements .

appendix b .

underwriting mortgages underwriting is the process of reviewing and analyzing the risks and potential profitability of a loan application .

basically , underwriting a loan application estimates the ability and willingness of the potential borrower to repay the loan on schedule , and the likely value of the collateral in the event that the borrower does not repay the loan .

the process of underwriting single - family mortgages considers an applicant's income , history of paying previous loans , and the likely value of the home in the event of foreclosure .

commercial and multifamily mortgage underwriting is similar , but differs with respect to the terms of the loan and the type of borrowers .

instead of considering the applicant's income , the income generated by the property is evaluated .

the borrower's ability and willingness to repay the mortgage is considered .

the likely value of the property in foreclosure is also considered .

in addition , the terms of multifamily and commercial mortgages are much less standardized so the risks that the borrower will not make all required mortgage payments are reviewed .

single - family , multifamily , and commercial mortgages all require professional appraisals .

a single - family appraisal usually is based on the sale of comparable homes in the area , but multifamily and commercial property is frequently unique , necessitating a different approach .

typically , a commercial or multifamily appraisal depends on an analysis of the market for similar property , the property's competitiveness within that market , and the property's ability to generate a cash flow to service the mortgage .

two ratios are widely used in underwriting multifamily and commercial mortgages: the debt service coverage ratio ( dscr ) and the loan to value ratio ( ltv ) .

the dscr is the annual net cash flow of the property divided by the annual principal and interest payments of the mortgage .

for example , this cash flow might come from the rent paid by tenants .

an application with a dscr of more than 1.0 has more projected net cash flow than required for paying the mortgage .

in some cases , such as acquisition , development , and construction ( adc ) loans , a lender will accept a dscr below 1.0 but require the borrower to place additional funds in a reserve account .

most multifamily and commercial mortgage underwriting considers mortgage terms , such as fixed or floating interest rates , when determining if a dscr is adequate .

the dscr is somewhat analogous to the front - end ratio or ratio of housing expenses to income for single - family mortgages and measures the ability of a property to make its mortgage payments .

the ltv is a measure of how much collateral would be available in the event of a default .

a lower ltv reflects a smaller loan on a more valuable property and a greater chance of recovering the amount lent in the event of default .

the maximum ltv on owner - occupied homes with mortgages insured by fha is 96.5% , and "conforming" single - family mortgages with ltvs above 80% require credit enhancements such as borrower paid mortgage insurance .

there are no comparable maximums for multifamily and commercial mortgages .

in short , the dscr is an indicator of the probability of default , and the ltv is a way to summarize the loss severity if a default occurs .

