the al qaeda movement has transformed in recent years: some of the strategic objectives of the original , or core , organization have remained consistent while the views and goals of new affiliates , leaders , and recruits have evolved and become more diverse .

osama bin laden's al qaeda and the affiliated organizations that ascribe their actions to his violence - based philosophy continue to desire to attack the united states and its global interests .

in a june 2010 speech , the principal deputy coordinator for counterterrorism for the department of state stated that "while ( core ) al qaeda is now struggling in some areas the threat it poses is becoming more widely distributed , more geographically diverse .

the rise of affiliated groups such as al qaeda the arabian peninsula and al qaeda in the islamic maghreb is a new and important development and is also a troubling development. .

in addressing threats to global security interests before the senate homeland security and governmental affairs committee in september 2010 , the u.s. intelligence community assessed that "the range of al qaeda's core , affiliated , allied , and inspired u.s. citizens and residents plotting against the homeland during the past year suggests the threat against the west has become more complex and underscores the challenges of identifying and countering a more diverse array of homeland plotting. .

due in large part to the actions of the u.s. government , core al qaeda , reportedly located in pakistan , is under tremendous pressure .

u.s. and coalition forces' military and intelligence operations appear to have degraded the core's capacity for conducting large catastrophic operations similar to the attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

the core organization's apparent inability to commit large - scale attacks in recent years has led some analysts to question the relevancy , capabilities , and competency of the group .

however , during the 2010 annual threat assessment hearing in front of the senate select committee on intelligence , dennis c. blair , director of national intelligence ( dni ) , observed that while "important progress has been made against the threat to the u.s. homeland over the past few years , i cannot reassure you that the danger is gone .

we face a persistent terrorist threat from al qaeda and potentially others who share its anti - western ideology .

a major terrorist attack may emanate from either outside or inside the united states. .

in addressing how the u.s. might assess whether the organization remains a viable entity the dni further stated , "until counterterrorism pressure on al qaeda's place of refuge , key lieutenants , and operative cadre outpaces the group's ability to recover , al qaeda will retain its capability to mount an attack. .

while pressure from the international community on core al qaeda appears to have limited the group's ability to undertake a catastrophic terrorist attack on u.s. interests , many terrorist groups and cells located throughout the world are affiliating their actions with the organization .

al qaeda continues to attract potential recruits and possess an ability to influence and support global organizations with similar goals and philosophical objectives .

the often - termed jihadi movement has increasingly become an issue of concern for senior members of the u.s. national security community .

during the 2010 annual threat assessment hearing dni blair noted the following: al qaeda will continue its efforts to encourage key regional affiliates and jihadist networks to pursue a global agenda .

a few al qaeda regional affiliates and jihadist networks have exhibited an intent or capability to attack inside the homeland .

some regional nodes and allies have grown in strength and independence over the last two years and have begun to project operationally outside their regions .

though al qaeda affiliated entities have attempted numerous deadly terrorist attacks in recent years , some analysts view these operations as evidence of desperation signifying that the core organization and its affiliates are no longer capable of launching a large - scale catastrophic terrorist attack directed at u.s. interests .

these analysts suggest that recent attempted acts are an acknowledgment that the destructive capabilities of corporate al qaeda and those individuals with similar philosophical goals are actually on the decline and are indicative of an organization desperate to prove its continued viability .

others , however , suggest that this recent trend may be indicative of an organization becoming more selective and sophisticated in the operations it pursues and adopting a model of encouraging affiliates and sympathizers to undertake smaller - scale acts to divert international attention and resources away from planning and preparations for larger , more catastrophic , attacks .

recognition of a more resilient enemy may have been enunciated in a september 22 , 2010 , statement by the director of the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) before the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs: the level of cooperation among al qaeda and other terrorist groups has changed in the past year suggesting that this collaboration and resulting threat to the homeland will increase .

by sharing financial resources , training , tactical and operations expertise , and recruits , these groups have been able to withstand significant counterterrorism pressure from the united states , coalition , and local government forces .

similarly , in acknowledging the government's challenge of transitioning from an almost exclusive focus on core al qaeda to also attempting to assess the capabilities of numerous smaller groups that are more opaque , the secretary of homeland security stated "the terrorist threat changes quickly and we have observed important changes in the threat even since this committee convened a similar hearing last year .

the threat is evolving in several ways that make it more difficult for law enforcement or the intelligence community to detect and disrupt plots. .

notwithstanding the challenges associated with continuing to limit core al qaeda's planning and destructive capabilities while also attempting to thwart potential attacks by lesser - known affiliated entities , some in the counterterrorism community suggest that the organization and the philosophical following it has spawned are significantly degraded .

a december 2010 report issued by west point's combating terrorism center noted the following: more than twenty years after its creation , al qaeda shows clear signs of decline .

the group has lost many of its key operational leaders to arrest or assassination ; a number of al qaeda franchises — including in saudi arabia , iraq and algeria — have been substantially weakened or defeated ; and a host of ideological challenges , including recantations from prominent jihadis themselves , have compelled al qaeda to spend valuable time defending its reputation and actions .

these setbacks and others suggest that al qaeda is not any closer to achieving its long - term goals than it was on 10 september 2001 .

likewise , others in the national security community have offered observations that help explain why al qaeda may be an organization on the decline and possibly in jeopardy of losing its appeal to potential followers .

according to the non - governmental bipartisan policy center four key strategic issues are contributing to the demise of al qaeda: indiscriminate killing of muslims , the lack of a political movement to represent the organization's interests , an ever - growing list of enemies , and the lack of a desirable vision that sustains interest in the group and its ideology ( see " al qaeda's global strategy and implications for u.s. policy " below ) .

given recent discussions regarding the potential demise of al qaeda , some counterterrorism observers suggest that such assessments may be premature .

in an article published in the december 2010 edition of studies in conflict and terrorism , the authors argue that the organization's infrastructure and ideology are resilient and have the ability to endure external pressures from the international security community .

the authors find that "although in recent years al qaeda has adopted more ideological and inspirational characteristics , it still exists as a group , and possesses , first and foremost , operational characteristics of guerilla and terrorist organization. .

the primary founder of al qaeda , osama bin laden , was born in july 1957 , the 17 th of 20 sons of a saudi construction magnate of yemeni origin .

most saudis are conservative sunni muslims , and bin laden , conservative from a young age , appears to have adopted militant islamist views while studying at king abdul aziz university in jeddah , saudi arabia .

there he attended lectures by muhammad qutb , brother of sayyid qutb , the key ideologue of a major sunni islamist movement , the muslim brotherhood .

another of bin laden's inspirations was abdullah al azzam , a major figure in the jordanian branch of the muslim brotherhood .

azzam is identified by some experts as the intellectual architect of the jihad against the 1979-1989 soviet occupation of afghanistan , and ultimately of al qaeda itself ; he cast the soviet invasion as an attempted conquest by a non - muslim power of sacred muslim territory and people .

bin laden made his first visit to afghanistan a few years after the december 1979 soviet invasion , and then relocated to areas of pakistan near the border with afghanistan by 1986 .

he reportedly used some of his personal funds to establish himself as a donor to the afghan mujahedin and a recruiter of arab and other islamic volunteers for the war .

in 1984 , azzam and bin laden structured this assistance by establishing a network of recruiting and fund - raising offices in the arab world , europe , and the united states .

that network was called the maktab al khidamat ( services office ) , also known as al khifah ; many experts consider the maktab to be the organizational forerunner of al qaeda .

another major figure who utilized the maktab network to recruit for the anti - soviet jihad was umar abd al rahman ( also known as "the blind shaykh" ) , the spiritual leader of radical egyptian islamist group al jihad .

bin laden apparently also made occasional forays across the border into afghanistan during the anti - soviet war ; he reportedly participated in a 1986 battle in jalalabad and an april 1987 frontal assault by foreign volunteers against afghan forces equipped with soviet armor .

according to some experts , bin laden has said he was exposed to a soviet chemical attack and slightly injured in the latter battle .

during this period , most u.s. officials perceived the volunteers as positive contributors to the effort to expel soviet forces from afghanistan , and u.s. officials made no apparent effort to stop the recruitment of the non - afghan volunteers for the war .

u.s. officials have repeatedly denied that the united states directly supported the non - afghan volunteers .

the united states did covertly finance ( about $3 billion during 1981-1991 ) and arm ( via pakistan ) the afghan mujahedin factions , particularly the islamic fundamentalist afghan factions , fighting soviet forces .

by almost all accounts , it was the afghan mujahedin factions , not the arab volunteer fighters , that were decisive in persuading the soviet union to pull out of afghanistan .

during this period , bin laden , azzam , and abd al rahman were not known to have openly advocated , undertaken , or planned any direct attacks against the united states , although they all were critical of u.s. support for israel in the middle east .

in 1988 , toward the end of the soviet occupation , bin laden , azzam , and other associates began contemplating how , and to what end , the islamist volunteer network they had organized could be utilized .

u.s. intelligence estimates of the size of that network were between 10,000 and 20,000 ; however , not all of these necessarily supported or participated in al qaeda terrorist activities .

azzam apparently wanted this "al qaeda" ( arabic for "the base" ) organization — as they began terming the organization in 1988 — to become an islamic "rapid reaction force," available to intervene wherever muslims were perceived to be threatened .

bin laden differed with azzam , hoping instead to dispatch the al qaeda activists to their home countries to try to topple secular , pro - western arab leaders , such as president hosni mubarak of egypt and saudi arabia's royal family .

some attribute the bin laden - azzam differences to the growing influence on bin laden of the egyptians in his inner circle , such as abd al rahman , who wanted to use al qaeda's resources to install an islamic state in egypt .

another close egyptian confidant was ayman al - zawahiri , operational leader of al jihad in egypt .

like abd al rahman , zawahiri had been imprisoned but ultimately acquitted for the october 1981 assassination of egyptian president anwar sadat , and he permanently left egypt in 1985 and arrived in the afghanistan theater in 1986 after an intervening period in saudi arabia .

in the afghanistan conflict , he used his medical training to tend to fighters wounded in the war .

in november 1989 , azzam was assassinated , and some allege that bin laden might have been responsible for the killing to resolve this power struggle .

following azzam's death , bin laden gained control of the maktab 's funds and organizational mechanisms .

abd al rahman came to the united states in 1990 from sudan and was convicted in october 1995 for terrorist plots related to the february 1993 bombing of the world trade center in new york .

zawahiri stayed with bin laden and remains bin laden's main strategist today .

overall , al qaeda leaders' statements from the mid - 1990s through the present suggest that they see themselves and their followers as the armed vanguard of an international islamist movement .

nevertheless , some experts now argue that "al - qa'ida has been a marginal actor in the larger drama of international islamist militancy," and that believe that the group's "quest for influence has been in vain. .

al qaeda and many of its affiliates state a commitment to ending non - muslim "interference" in the affairs of muslims and to recasting predominantly muslim societies according to narrow interpretations derived from the practices of sunni islam's earliest generations .

statements from some al qaeda leaders advocate for a phased struggle , in which the initial goal is the expulsion of u.s. and foreign military forces from "islamic lands" and proximate goals include the overthrow of "corrupt" regional leaders and the creation of governments that rule solely according sharia ( islamic law ) .

references to the reestablishment of an islamic caliphate frequently appear in al qaeda propaganda but often lack detail and are rarely accompanied by practical political prescriptions for achieving such a goal .

some al qaeda leaders also promote military confrontation with israel and conflict with shiite muslims .

the varying appeal and compatibility of these different components of al qaeda's ideology account for the group's successes and failures in attracting support .

in pursuit of their many goals , leaders of al qaeda and its regional affiliates frequently make appeals for support based on a wide range of political positions and , at times , attempt to harness nationalist sentiment or manipulate local grievances to generate support for their agendas .

these differing priorities , approaches , and contexts create challenges for those al qaeda figures who have hoped to construct a unified narrative of al qaeda's goals or implement a unified strategy to achieve them .

some experts note that al qaeda's "description of the enemy is confusing and inconsistent" and suggest that , overall: speaking of al - qa'ida's "strategy" is a misnomer .

the jihadi movement's various operational units , whether named al - qa'ida affiliates or small cells , cull through various ideological and strategic documents to identify elements that they can achieve .

such strategic variation is enhanced by jihadis' inability to coordinate closely , which likely limits their ability to achieve ultimate policy goals , but also complicates the processes to combat the movement writ large .

although osama bin laden's self - professed goal has been to "move , incite , and mobilize the [islamic] nation" until it reaches a revolutionary "ignition point," al qaeda leaders' statements and al qaeda attacks to date appear largely to have failed to mobilize broad support among muslims .

some observers believe that al qaeda faces fundamental limits to its appeal because its rhetoric and goals extend beyond what many muslims view as religiously legitimate or practically desirable .

while global public opinion polls and media monitoring indicate that dissatisfaction with u.s. foreign policy has grown significantly in some predominantly muslim societies , the sectarian rhetoric of some al qaeda affiliates and the persistence of al qaeda - inspired terrorist attacks that kill and maim sunni and shiite muslim civilians have undermined al qaeda's appeal among some muslim groups .

some experts also argue that the uncompromising , anti - democratic tone of many of the statements released by bin laden , al zawahiri , and their regional supporters may be alienating muslims who support the concept of secular or religious representative government .

analysis of the statements issued by al qaeda leaders and affiliates since the mid - 1990s suggests that these groups and individuals believe that characterizing their actions as religiously sanctioned , defensive reactions to external threats will increase tolerance of and support for their broader ideological program .

al qaeda and its regional affiliates also appear to believe that the identification of limited political objectives and the suggestion to non - muslim audiences that the fulfillment of those objectives will resolve their grievances may generate broader appeal than the group's underlying religious agenda .

in fact , experts note that al qaeda and its affiliates "pursue a variety of objectives that are rarely clearly defined" and point out that the group "advocates everything from reestablishing the caliphate to the personal religious salvation of its members. .

the practical political and operational realities facing many al qaeda affiliates in pursuit of their discrete goals and needs have often led these groups to take actions that have undermined their efforts to portray themselves as defenders of muslims with limited objectives .

for example: in december 2004 , bin laden identified the conflict in iraq as "a golden and unique opportunity" for jihadists to engage and defeat the united states , and he characterized the insurgency in iraq as the central battle in a "third world war , which the crusader - zionist coalition began against the islamic nation. .

nevertheless , several strategic choices made by al qaeda's affiliates in iraq undermined their support among key groups , specifically their decisions to stoke sectarian conflict , to rigidly enforce religious doctrine in some areas , and to target the leaders and citizens of some sunni muslim communities .

each of these decisions contributed to the significant attrition the group has suffered from 2007 onward at the hands of iraqi security forces , the government's sunni allies among the awakening and sons of iraq movements , and the united states military .

similarly , affiliates of al qaeda in saudi arabia initially oriented their attacks against foreign interests in the kingdom during their 2003-2007 campaign , in line with al qaeda leaders' rhetoric that had long targeted the u.s. military presence and other outside influences .

saudi security officials believe that once local al qaeda affiliates shifted the focus of their attacks away from foreign targets and onto local security forces , al qaeda created an opportunity for the government to directly engage and eliminate the group .

in addition to carrying out more robust security operations , the government launched a campaign that used nationalist sentiment to undermine popular support for the group by highlighting al qaeda attacks against security officers .

deradicalization programs have successfully demobilized some supporters of al qaeda , while other individuals have returned to militancy and rejected pro - government clerics' arguments about requiring rulers' and parents' permission to participate in violent jihad .

since 2006 , al shabaab fighters in somalia who affiliate themselves with al qaeda have rallied support from some somalis opposed to external intervention in somalia and the transitional federal government ( tfg ) .

however , al shabaab threats against the united nations world food program ( wfp ) and several other aid agencies have largely shut down humanitarian aid delivery in southern somalia , cutting access to almost half of wfp's planned beneficiaries in 2010 and exacerbating food insecurity .

terror attacks against civilian targets , including a medical school graduation ceremony in late 2009 and a mogadishu hotel in august 2010 , also have served to alienate many somalis .

amid recruiting efforts that have drawn ethnic somalis and other foreigners from the united states and europe to somalia , al shabaab nevertheless has sought to publicly downplay the presence of foreign fighters within its ranks , given local sensitivities to foreigners using somalia for their own purposes .

in southeast asia , the jemaah islamiyah ( ji ) network's 2002 bomb attack in bali , indonesia that killed over 200 people led the indonesian government to reverse course and undertake a concerted effort to track , arrest , and kill ji leaders , as well as to increase anti - terrorist cooperation with the united states and australia .

the ensuing crackdown in indonesia and other countries appears to have degraded ji's capabilities , particularly its more militant factions , which were most closely associated with al qaeda .

since the mid - 2000s , ji appears to be taking direction from more "bureaucratic" elements that oppose the militants' violent tactics , at least in the short term .

many observers argue that the success or failure of u.s. and allied counterterrorism efforts are tied to decisions made by regional governments and publics about the relative importance of combating al qaeda operatives , affiliates , and ideologues within their own societies .

recent events suggest that u.s. and allied counterterrorism policies can be successful when they capitalize on al qaeda actions and messages that alienate current or potential supporters .

similarly , events also suggest that al qaeda members seek to capitalize on u.s. and allied policies and actions that are unpopular among muslim audiences , such as military operations that result in civilian casualties as well as broader policies such as the presence of foreign military forces in muslim countries .

action taken by the united states and its allies against al qaeda affiliates has the potential to shape the global fortunes of the al qaeda brand and the appeal of violent islamism , and vice versa .

counterterrorism approaches that work in one theater of operations or political context may prove counterproductive when applied elsewhere .

these complex dynamics and calculations are likely to continue to challenge decision makers and require unique approaches in each of the regional contexts described above .

