citizens united , a nonprofit internal revenue code section 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) tax - exempt corporation , produced a 90-minute documentary regarding a presidential candidate , then - senator hillary clinton .

the group released the film in theaters and on dvd , and planned to make it available through video - on - demand .

in addition , citizens united planned to fund three broadcast and cable television advertisements to promote the movie .

concerned that both the film and its ads would be prohibited under the federal election campaign act ( feca ) , which imposes civil and criminal penalties , citizens united filed suit in u.s. district court .

specifically , the group sought a preliminary injunction to enjoin the federal election commission ( fec ) from enforcing sections 203 , 201 , and 311 of the bipartisan campaign reform act of 2002 ( bcra ) .

these provisions of law amended the federal election campaign act ( feca ) in order to regulate "electioneering communications. .

bcra defines "electioneering communication" as any broadcast , cable , or satellite transmission made within 30 days of a primary or 60 days of a general election ( sometimes referred to as the "blackout periods" ) that refers to a candidate for federal office and is targeted to the relevant electorate .

section 311 of bcra , known as the disclaimer provision , codified at 2 u.s.c .

ยง 441d , requires electioneering communications to include a statement identifying the funding source of the communication .

section 201 , codified at 2 u.s.c .

ยง 434 , requires any person who spends more than $10,000 on electioneering communications in a year to file disclosure statements with the fec .

section 203 , codified at 2 u.s.c .

ยง 441b , prohibits corporate and labor union treasury funds from being spent for electioneering communications .

the group argued that section 203 of bcra violated the first amendment on its face and as applied to its movie and advertisements .

in addition , citizens united maintained that sections 201 and 311 , requiring disclosure and identification of funding sources , were unconstitutional as applied to the television ads .

in a 2003 decision , mcconnell v. fec , the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of sections 203 , 201 , and 311 in a facial challenge .

in a 2007 decision , fec v. wisconsin right to life , inc. ( wrtl ii ) , the supreme court limited the applicability of section 203 by ruling that the prohibition could not constitutionally apply to advertisements that may reasonably be interpreted as something other than an appeal to vote for or against a specific candidate , and that such ads are not the functional equivalent of express advocacy .

the u.s. district court for the district of columbia denied the request by citizens united for a preliminary injunction , finding that the bcra provisions in question had previously been upheld by the supreme court as regulation that does not unconstitutionally burden first amendment free speech rights .

likewise , the court found that the group's as - applied claim would also fail on the merits because the movie did not focus on legislative issues , but instead took a position on the candidate's character , qualifications , and fitness for office , thereby falling within the fec's regulatory definition of an electioneering communication .

the court concluded that supreme court precedent upholding section 203 applied to citizens united to the extent that it prohibited the group from funding electioneering communications that constituted the functional equivalent of express advocacy .

the court also found that bcra's disclosure requirements were constitutional .

citizens united appealed .

bcra provides that if an action is brought to challenge the constitutionality of any of its provisions , a final decision from the district court shall be reviewable only by direct appeal to the u.s. supreme court .

the u.s. supreme court heard oral argument in citizens united v. fec on march 24 , 2009 , and re - argument on september 9 .

for the re - argument , the court ordered the parties to file supplemental briefs addressing whether the court should overrule its earlier holdings in austin v. michigan chamber of commerce , upholding the constitutionality of a state statute prohibiting corporate campaign expenditures , and the portion of its decision in mcconnell v. fec upholding the facial validity of section 203 of bcra .

in brief , before the court's ruling , corporations and labor unions were prohibited from using their general treasury funds to make expenditures for communications expressly advocating election or defeat of a clearly identified federal candidate .

in addition , 30 days before a primary and 60 days before a general election , corporations and unions were prohibited from using general treasury funds to finance electioneering communications .

however , corporations and labor unions were permitted to use political action committees ( pacs ) , financed with regulated contributions from employees or members , to make independent expenditures for express advocacy communications and to fund electioneering communications within the restricted time periods .

as a result of the court's ruling , it appears that federal campaign finance law does not restrict corporate and , most likely , labor union use of their general treasury funds to make independent expenditures for any communication expressly advocating election or defeat of a candidate , including broadcast and cablecast communications made immediately prior to an election .

corporations and unions may still establish pacs , but are only required to use pac funds in order to make contributions to candidates , parties , and other political committees .

