figure 1 .

map of hondurassource: map resources .

adapted by crs graphics .

prior to the military - imposed exile of president manuel zelaya , honduras , a central american nation of 7.4 million people , enjoyed 27 years of uninterrupted elected civilian democratic rule .

the liberal ( pl ) and national ( pn ) parties have been honduras' two dominant political parties since the military relinquished control of the country in 1982 .

both are considered to be ideologically center - right , and there appear to be few major differences between the two .

manuel zelaya of the pl was elected president in november 2005 , narrowly defeating his pn rival , porfirio lobo sosa .

zelaya — a wealthy landowner with considerable investments in the timber and cattle industries — was generally regarded as a moderate when he was inaugurated to a four - year term in january 2006 .

as his term progressed , however , zelaya advanced a number of populist policies , including free school enrollment , an increase in teachers' pay , and a 60% increase in the minimum wage .

zelaya also forged closer relations with venezuelan president hugo chávez , joining petrocaribe and the bolivarian alternative for the americas ( alba ) in 2008 .

although zelaya's populist policies allowed him to maintain considerable support among certain sectors of honduran society , they alienated many within the traditional economic and political elite .

likewise , his administration's inability to achieve concrete results on a number of issues of importance — such as poverty and violent crime — significantly weakened his public standing .

opinion polls indicated that zelaya's approval rating had fallen to about 30% prior to his ouster .

in march 2009 , president zelaya issued an executive decree introducing a process that eventually could have led to changes to the honduran constitution .

the decree called on the national statistics institute ( ine ) to hold a popular referendum on june 28 , 2009 , to determine if the country should include a fourth ballot box during the general elections in november 2009 .

the fourth ballot would consult hondurans about whether the country should convoke a national constituent assembly to approve a new constitution .

in may 2009 , zelaya repealed the march decree and issued a new decree — not published until june 25 , 2009 — that made the referendum non - binding and removed the reference to a new constitution .

the non - binding referendum would have asked hondurans , "do you agree that in the general elections of 2009 , a fourth ballot box should be installed in which the people decide on the convocation of a national constituent assembly ? .

zelaya argued that the constitution — drafted in 1982 — should be amended to reflect the "substantial and significant changes" that have taken place in honduran society in recent years .

on june 28 , 2009 , shortly before the polls were to open for the non - binding referendum , the honduran military surrounded the presidential residence , arrested president zelaya , and flew him to exile in costa rica .

the military also confiscated all referendum materials from polling places across the country .

in the aftermath of the ouster , the honduran supreme court produced documents asserting that an arrest warrant for president zelaya had been issued in secrecy on june 26 , 2009 , as a result of the executive branch's noncompliance with judicial rulings that had declared the non - binding referendum unconstitutional .

zelaya was charged with crimes against the form of government , treason , abuse of authority , and usurpation of functions for calling a referendum without the approval of the national congress and intending to use the ine to supervise the vote rather than the supreme electoral tribunal .

the judicial process was halted before a trial could be held , however , as a result of the honduran military's actions .

the honduran national congress ratified the ouster soon after the military forced zelaya from the country .

the congress accepted a letter of resignation allegedly signed by the exiled president , which zelaya immediately declared to be fraudulent .

it then passed a decree that disapproved of zelaya's conduct for "repeated violations against the constitution and laws of the republic and nonobservance of the resolutions and rulings of the judicial organs," removed zelaya from office , and named roberto micheletti — the president of congress and the next in line constitutionally — the president of honduras for the remainder of zelaya's term , which ended on january 27 , 2010 .

although some maintain that zelaya's removal was done through legal means , others assert that the actions of the military and congress were unconstitutional .

according to most analysts , the honduran military's decision to force zelaya into exile directly violated the honduran constitution , which forbids the expatriation of honduran citizens .

those involved in the ouster maintain that their actions were necessary to avoid chaos .

on january 26 , 2010 , a honduran supreme court judge dismissed charges against members of the joint command of the honduran military for their role in zelaya's expatriation , asserting that the honduran military had acted to "preserve democracy" and "avoid bloodshed. .

some honduran legal observers also have asserted that the actions of the honduran national congress were unconstitutional .

they maintain that the power to remove a president is reserved for the judicial branch .

they also note that since zelaya never resigned and the judicial process against him was terminated prematurely by the military's actions , zelaya was still president and there was no vacancy to be filled .

nevertheless , the honduran supreme court appears to have accepted the legality of the actions of congress .

on june 29 , 2009 , it ordered zelaya's legal proceedings to continue through the ordinary judicial process since he "no longer holds high office ; " however , the court has never directly ruled on the legality of congress's actions .

congress has expressed considerable interest in the situation in honduras since zelaya's forced removal on june 28 , 2009 .

on july 10 , 2009 , the house committee on foreign affairs subcommittee on the western hemisphere held a hearing on the crisis in honduras .

over the course of the following months , a number of congressional delegations traveled to the country to observe the conditions on the ground and meet with hondurans .

some members of the senate also placed temporary holds on the nominations of arturo valenzuela to be assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs and thomas shannon to be ambassador to brazil in protest of the obama administration's punitive policies toward honduras and the micheletti government .

several resolutions were introduced in the first session of the 111 th congress regarding the political crisis .

on july 8 , 2009 , h.res .

619 ( mack ) and h.res .

620 ( serrano ) were introduced in the house .

h.res .

619 condemned zelaya for his "unconstitutional and illegal" actions and called on all parties to seek a peaceful resolution .

h.res .

620 called upon the micheletti government to end its "illegal seizure of power" and work within the rule of law to resolve the situation .

on july 10 , h.res .

630 ( delahunt ) was introduced in the house .

it condemned the "coup d'etat" in honduras ; refused to recognize the micheletti government ; called for the reinstatement of zelaya ; urged the obama administration to suspend non - humanitarian assistance to honduras ; called for international observation of the november 2009 elections ; and welcomed the mediation efforts of costa rican president oscar arias .

on september 17 , h.res .

749 ( ros - lehtinen ) was introduced in the house .

the resolution called for the secretary of state to work with honduran authorities to ensure free and fair elections in honduras .

it also called on president obama to recognize the november elections "as an important step in the consolidation of democracy and rule of law in honduras. .

the honduran political crisis also influenced a change to one of the provisions of the fy2010 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

the heading of section 7008 of the "department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2010" ( division f ) was changed from "military coups" to "coups d'état. .

section 7008 requires the u.s. government to terminate some foreign assistance to any country "whose duly elected head of government is deposed by military coup or decree. .

the u.s. department of state has asserted that although zelaya's ouster could be considered a "coup d'état," it was not a "military coup" and a termination of assistance was not legally required .

the house report to the appropriations bill ( h.rept .

111-366 ) notes that there are no substantive changes to section 7008 , but conferees are "concerned that the previous title implied an unintended limitation of the provision's application. .

the house report also directs the department of state's office of the legal advisor to "undertake a review of events necessary to trigger the provisions of this section and submit a report on such events to the committees on appropriations not later than 45 days after enactment" of the bill .

on march 23 , 2009 , president zelaya announced an executive decree — which was never officially published — calling for a popular referendum on june 28 on whether to include a fourth ballot box during the november 2009 general elections .

the fourth ballot would have consulted hondurans about whether the country should convoke a national constituent assembly to approve a new constitution .

on may 26 , 2009 , president zelaya issued two executive decrees that were officially published on june 25 , 2009 .

one annulled the march 23 decree .

the other called for a non - binding referendum on june 28 on whether to include a fourth ballot box during the november 2009 general elections in which hondurans could choose to convoke a national constituent assembly .

on may 27 , 2009 , a honduran lower court judge ordered the suspension of the referendum that president zelaya proposed on march 23 .

on may 29 , 2009 , a honduran lower court judge issued an order clarifying that the may 27 ruling applied to any other executive decree that would lead to the same ends as the suspended decree .

on the same day , president zelaya ordered the honduran military and police to provide logistical support for the proposed referendum .

on june 16 , 2009 , a honduran appeals court upheld the lower court ruling that declared president zelaya's proposed non - binding referendum illegal .

on june 19 , 2009 , the honduran supreme court ordered the honduran security forces not to provide any support for the proposed non - binding referendum .

on june 23 , 2009 , the honduran congress passed a plebiscite and referendum law that prevents referenda from occurring within 180 days of a general election .

on june 24 , 2009 , president zelaya asked for the resignations of the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff and the defense minister after they refused to provide logistical support for the proposed non - binding referendum .

on june 25 , 2009 , the honduran supreme court ruled that the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff and the defense minister should remain in their positions despite zelaya's request for their resignations .

on the same day , zelaya and a group of supporters removed referendum materials from an air force base in tegucigalpa .

on june 26 , 2009 , the organization of american states ( oas ) adopted a resolution that offered support for the preservation of democratic institutions and the rule of law in honduras and called on all social and political actors to maintain social peace and prevent the rupture of the constitutional order .

on june 28 , 2009 , shortly before the polls were to open for the non - binding referendum , the honduran military arrested president zelaya , flew him to costa rica , and seized all referendum materials .

the honduran supreme court indicated that an arrest warrant had previously been issued for the deposed president , and the national congress replaced zelaya with the president of congress , roberto micheletti .

the united states and governments around the world condemned the action and called for president zelaya's reinstatement .

on july 1 , 2009 , the oas adopted a resolution that would suspend honduras' membership in the organization if the country failed to restore president zelaya to power within three days .

on the same day , the united nations general assembly adopted a resolution that condemned zelaya's ouster and called for his immediate return , u.s. southern command ordered u.s. troops to minimize contact with the honduran military , and the honduran national congress suspended a number of constitutional rights — such as the freedom of association and the freedom of movement — during curfew hours .

on july 2 , 2009 , the u.s. state department announced it would suspend foreign assistance programs to honduras that it would be legally required to terminate should it declare the events in honduras a "military coup. .

on july 4 , 2009 , the oas unanimously voted to suspend honduras for an unconstitutional interruption of the democratic order in accordance with article 21 of the inter - american democratic charter and the oas resolution adopted three days earlier .

on july 5 , 2009 , zelaya attempted to return to honduras but the micheletti government prevented his plane from landing .

on july 7 , 2009 , zelaya met with u.s. secretary of state hillary clinton in washington , dc .

following their meeting , secretary clinton announced that zelaya and micheletti had agreed to engage in negotiations mediated by costa rican president oscar arias .

on july 9 , 2009 , zelaya and micheletti met separately with president arias in costa rica to discuss a solution to the situation in honduras .

zelaya and micheletti never spoke face to face , and left the country after the meetings , designating representatives to continue negotiations .

on july 18 , 2009 , costa rican president oscar arias proposed a seven - point plan to end the political conflict in honduras .

although the plan was agreed to in principle by zelaya's representatives , it was rejected by micheletti .

on july 22 , 2009 , costa rican president oscar arias modified his previously rejected proposal and offered a 12-point plan , known as the "san josé accord," to resolve the honduran political crisis .

zelaya accepted the plan .

micheletti's negotiation team said it would take the proposal back to the independent branches of government in honduras to consider .

it later rejected the accord .

on july 24 , 2009 , exiled president manuel zelaya briefly crossed the nicaraguan border , entering honduras for the first time since his june 28 , 2009 forced removal .

on july 28 , 2009 , the u.s. department of state announced that it had revoked the diplomatic visas of four members of the honduran government and was reviewing the visas of others .

on august 21 , 2009 , the inter - american commission on human rights ( iachr ) concluded a five - day visit to honduras .

the commission — which met with representatives of the micheletti government , representatives of various sectors of civil society , and more than 100 individuals — "confirmed the existence of a pattern of disproportionate use of public force on the part of police and military forces , arbitrary detentions , and the control of information aimed at limiting political participation by a sector of the citizenry. .

on august 25 , 2009 , a delegation of foreign ministers from the oas left honduras after a three - day mission that failed to convince the micheletti government to accept the san josé accord .

on the same day , the u.s. state department announced that it was suspending non - emergency , non - immigrant visa services in the consular section of the embassy in honduras .

on september 3 , 2009 , exiled president manuel zelaya met with u.s. secretary of state hillary clinton .

on the same day , the u.s. state department announced that it was terminating nearly $22 million in previously suspended foreign assistance to honduras , revoking the visas of some members and supporters of the micheletti government , and would be unable to support the outcome of the november elections under the existing conditions on september 9 , 2009 , the millennium challenge corporation terminated two transportation projects totaling $11 million from its compact with honduras and put another $4 million on hold .

on september 21 , 2009 , president manuel zelaya revealed that he had returned to honduras and was sheltered in the brazilian embassy in the capital , tegucigalpa .

on september 25 , 2009 , the united nations security council condemned acts of intimidation against the brazilian embassy by the honduran military .

on september 26 , 2009 , the micheletti government published a decree — dated september 22 , 2009 — that declared a state of siege and suspended a number of basic civil liberties for 45 days .

the decree suspended freedom of the press and freedom of movement , required police or military authorization for public meetings , and allowed for detention without a warrant .

on september 27 , 2009 , honduras expelled four diplomats from the oas who formed part of an advance team planning a visit of foreign ministers from the region .

on the same day , the micheletti government warned brazil that it would strip its embassy of diplomatic status if brazil did not grant zelaya political asylum or hand him over to honduran authorities within 10 days .

on september 28 , 2009 , the honduran military shut down radio globo and television channel 36 , two of the principal sources of media opposition to the micheletti government .

on october 7 , 2009 , the micheletti government issued a decree allowing it to revoke or cancel the licenses of any media outlet "fomenting social anarchy. .

on the same day , a new round of talks between micheletti and zelaya were initiated under the guidance of the oas .

on october 19 , 2009 , the micheletti government formally revoked the state of siege that entered into force on september 26 , allowing radio globo and television channel 36 to return to the air .

on october 28 , 2009 , then u.s. assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs , thomas shannon , and the national security council's director for the western hemisphere , dan restrepo , traveled to honduras to restart dialogue between zelaya and micheletti .

on october 30 , 2009 , micheletti and zelaya signed an agreement designed to end the political crisis in honduras known as the "tegucigalpa / san josé accord. .

on november 2 , 2009 , a four - member verification commission intended to ensure implementation of the accord , including two members appointed by the oas and two members appointed by zelaya and micheletti , was created .

on november 4 , 2009 , the executive council of the honduran national congress voted to solicit non - binding legal opinions on zelaya's restitution from the supreme court and other honduran institutions and postponed convening an extraordinary session of congress to consider the matter until it received the responses .

on november 5 , 2009 , micheletti named a "national unity and reconciliation government" headed by himself , which zelaya and his supporters refused to recognize .

on november 8 , 2009 , members of the "national resistance front against the coup d'état," including independent presidential candidate carlos reyes , announced that they would boycott the elections on november 29 , 2009 .

they asserted that a fair election could not be held given the conditions under which the campaign had been conducted and the fact that zelaya had not been restored to office .

on november 14 , 2009 , zelaya released a letter to president obama that announced that he was no longer willing to recognize the november 29 , 2009 , elections nor accept any reinstatement deal that would serve to legitimize the june 28 , 2009 , ouster .

on november 17 , 2009 , the president of the honduran national congress announced that a special legislative session would be convoked on december 2 , 2009 ( three days after the election ) , to consider the restoration of zelaya .

on november 19 , 2009 , micheletti announced that he would temporarily halt the "exercise of [his] public duties" between november 25 and december 2 , in order to ensure that the attention of all hondurans was "concentrated on the electoral process and not the political crisis. .

on november 29 , 2009 , porfirio lobo of the national party was elected president of honduras .

lobo defeated his closest rival , elvin santos of the liberal party , 56.6% to 38.1% .

on december 2 , 2009 , 111 of the 128 deputies in the honduran national congress voted against restoring zelaya to the honduran presidency .

on december 9 , 2009 , micheletti refused to allow zelaya safe passage from the brazilian embassy in tegucigalpa to mexico unless the deposed president renounced his claim to the presidency and requested political refugee status .

on january 6 , 2010 , the attorney general and anti - corruption prosecutor in honduras filed charges against six members of the joint command of the honduran military for their forced expatriation of zelaya on june 28 , 2009 .

on january 13 , 2010 , the honduran national congress named roberto micheletti a "deputy - for - life" and approved a decree providing life - long security to micheletti and some 50 other honduran officials involved in his government or the ouster of zelaya on january 19 , 2010 , the u.s. state department revoked the visas of five additional members of the micheletti government .

on january 20 , 2010 , president - elect lobo reached an agreement with president leonel fernández of the dominican republic to provide zelaya safe passage from the brazilian embassy in tegucigalpa to the dominican republic .

on january 21 , 2010 , roberto micheletti took a leave of absence from his public functions in order to avoid a distraction from the transfer of power to the new president .

nevertheless , micheletti continued to exercise the powers of the presidency until the inauguration of president lobo .

on january 25 , 2010 , the new honduran national congress took office for its four - year term .

on january 26 , 2010 , a honduran supreme court judge dismissed charges against members of the joint command of the honduran military for their forced expatriation of zelaya .

the judge asserted that the honduran military had acted to "preserve democracy and avoid bloodshed. .

on january 27 , 2010 , porfirio "pepe" lobo sosa was inaugurated president of honduras .

on the same day , zelaya was granted safe passage from the brazilian embassy in tegucigalpa to the dominican republic , and the honduran national congress approved a political amnesty for zelaya and those involved in his ouster .

