a fundamental objective of congressional oversight is to hold executive officials accountable for the implementation of delegated authority .

this objective is especially important given the huge expansion of executive influence in the modern era .

if the founding fathers returned to observe their handiwork , they would likely be surprised by such developments as the creation of a "presidential branch" of government ( the office of management and budget , the national security council , and the like ) and the establishment of so many federal departments and agencies .

from three departments in 1789 ( state , treasury , and war , renamed defense in 1947 ) , a dozen more have been added to the cabinet .

the newest creation , in 2002 , is the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

formed from the merger of 22 separate executive branch units , it employees roughly 180,000 people .

contemporary presidents have expressed some concern about the size and reach of the national government .

in his 1981 inaugural address , for instance , president ronald reagan declared that "government is not the solution to our problem , government is the problem. .

fifteen years later , in his state of the union address , president bill clinton exclaimed , "the era of big government is over. .

needless to say , the era of big government is back , if it ever went away .

under presidents of both parties , the national government continues to grow .

the administration of republican president george w. bush witnessed substantial governmental growth , partially triggered by new domestic security , law enforcement , and military requirements after the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks .

as journalist david s. broder concluded , president bush presided over one of the largest expansions of government in history .

"he has created a mammoth cabinet department [dhs] , increased federal spending , imposed new federal rules on local and state governments , and injected federal requirements into every public school in america. .

president bush also initiated the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) — a major governmental intervention in the private sector — as part of the emergency economic stabilization act ( p.l .

110-343 ) .

tarp was authorized to purchase up to $700 billion in "troubled" real estate and other assets following a nationwide financial meltdown in numerous business enterprises .

democratic president barack obama took office in the midst of the most serious national economic crisis since the great depression .

regularly , the news media spotlighted such stories as the hikes in joblessness , home foreclosures , or plant closings .

as a result , the government intervened dramatically in the marketplace .

trillions of dollars were committed to revive the ailing economy and prevent the recession from spiraling downward into another depression .

"not since lyndon b. johnson," wrote a congressional journalist , has a president like obama "moved to expand the role of government so much on so many fronts — and with such a sense of urgency. .

in short , the probabilities of any major retrenchment or rollback in the role and scope of the federal government seem remote .

hence the importance of congress exercising its implicit constitutional prerogative to check the delegated authority that it grants to federal departments and agencies .

the goals of this report , then , are essentially six - fold: ( 1 ) highlight several reasons for the expansion of the role and reach of government ; ( 2 ) discuss a few definitions of oversight ; ( 3 ) spotlight three essential purposes of oversight ; ( 4 ) comment upon a few oversight laws and rules ; ( 5 ) review several important oversight techniques ; and ( 6 ) identify several incentives and disincentives to the conduct of congressional oversight .

the report concludes with summary observations .

"the role of government in a free society must be a matter of continuous negotiation among members of the public," wrote princeton professor michael walzer .

this fundamental idea is the essence of self - government by the people through their elected representatives .

from the beginning , our founding fathers argued about the role of the national government .

their basic argument continues to this day .

two schools of thought emerged during this early period , one articulated by thomas jefferson and the other by alexander hamilton .

jefferson was an advocate of limited government: "that government governs best that governs least. .

government closest to the people — state and local units — is to be preferred , according to jefferson , to a robust and remote national government .

as jefferson said in his march 4 , 1801 , inaugural address: still one thing more , fellow - citizens — a wise and frugal government , which shall restrain men from injuring one another , shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their own pursuits of industry and improvement , and shall not take from the mouth of labor the bread it has earned .

this is the sum of good government , and this is necessary to close the circle of our felicities .

president jefferson , however , was not reluctant to use the government to double the size of the country with the louisiana purchase .

jefferson's rival , alexander hamilton , favored a strong national government and an energetic chief executive as essential if the new nation was to survive and prosper .

a proponent of the implied powers of government , hamilton wrote in federalist no .

31 : "a government ought to contain in itself every power requisite to the full accomplishment of the objects committed to its care , and to the complete execution of the trust for which it is responsible , free from every other control but a regard to the public good and to the sense of the people. .

hamilton's philosophy , in brief , was that the national government could be a positive instrument for addressing common problems that no individual or locality could resolve by itself , such as maintaining a strong defense against foreign adversaries or creating a national currency .

as abraham lincoln put it , "government is people coming together collectively to do that which they could not do as well , or at all , individually. .

fast forward to the contemporary era and it appears evident that the hamiltonian view has largely prevailed over the jeffersonian perspective .

to be sure , jefferson's ideas of limited government and states' rights resonate powerfully with millions of americans including lawmakers , analysts , scholars , and others .

yet their actions often belie their words .

today's yeoman farmers might say they dislike or even resent big government , but they strongly support farm subsidies .

many people , it seems , are ideologically conservative but operationally liberal .

on the one hand , they may emotionally view government as a necessary evil , but personally they support federal programs that benefit them , and even welcome the government's expansion in various areas ( security from terrorist attacks , protection of the environment , and so on ) .

the fundamental reality is that the national government has taken on increasingly numerous functions and responsibilities throughout american history .

the 20 th century — from the progressive era to world war i , from the new deal to the great society — witnessed a huge increase in the size and power of government .

its expansion was driven by a number of factors .

domestic and international crises have expanded the reach of the government .

wars , for example , threaten the nation itself , and the government often accrues new and expanded prerogatives to protect the country .

the intelligence community , as an example , grew rapidly during the cold war as the united states of america faced a major threat from a nuclear - armed superpower rival: the soviet union .

the internationalization of numerous domestic issues — trade , the environment , immigration , drug trafficking , and more — often requires a federal response for their resolution .

complexity is another factor the promotes governmental growth .

new issues and problems constantly arise that call for governmental action , such as food safety or national preparedness in the event of an epidemic or pandemic ( h1n1 , the swine flu virus , for instance ) .

many national programs , moreover , are crosscutting — that is , more than one federal agency , jurisdiction , and , in some cases , international organizations are engaged in policy implementation — which adds to the complexness of determining how or what the government is doing .

to be sure , a nation with over 300 million people creates a variety of federal issues ( civil rights , financial turmoil , high unemployment , and so on ) .

even when issues have been traditionally under the purview of states and localities , such as education , it does not mean that they are exclusively state and local responsibilities .

in brief , a host of military , economic , and social challenges , along with many other factors ( industrialization , globalization , scientific and technological developments , public demand , and more ) , all contributed to the large expansion in the size and reach of the federal government .

given today's large federal establishment , congressional oversight is more important than ever in ensuring that the federal government functions economically , efficiently , and effectively .

the american public's traditional and usually healthy skepticism about concentrating power in government underscores the legislative review function's significant role in holding federal agencies and officials accountable for their actions and decisions .

to determine the quantity and quality of legislative oversight is not an easy assignment , however .

different definitions of oversight influence perspectives on the adequacy of the review function .

oversight has two basic dictionary meanings .

first , it denotes some form of legislative "supervision" or "watchfulness" of delegated authority to executive branch entities and officials .

it is this general definition that orients the focus of this report .

the second meaning of oversight implies a "failure to notice" — something that is overlooked or inadvertently omitted .

ironically , the two definitions may sometimes overlap one another .

as speaker thomas p. o'neill , d - mass .

 ( 1977-1987 ) , once exclaimed: members "like to create and legislate , but we have shied from both the word and deed of oversight. .

a senator offered a related observation about the need for more overseeing rather than overlooking .

congress has "delegated so much authority to the executive branch of government , and we ought to devote more time to oversight then we do. .

scholars have advanced a number of definitions of oversight that go beyond the meanings provided in dictionaries .

for example , one political scientist wrote: '"oversight,' strictly speaking refers to review after the fact .

it includes inquiries about policies that are or have been in effect , investigations of past administrative actions , and the calling of executive officers to account for their financial transactions. .

another political scientist provided an expanded definition: "legislative oversight is behavior by legislators and their staffs , individually or collectively , which results in an impact , intended or not , on bureaucratic behavior. .

a third scholar offered a narrower definition: "i define [oversight] as congressional review of the actions of federal departments , agencies , and commissions , and of the programs and policies they administer , including review that takes place during program and policy implementation as well as afterward. .

the absence of consensus on a precise definition means that it is difficult quantitatively to know how much oversight congress is performing , largely through its committees and subcommittees .

oversight is a ubiquitous activity on capitol hill that occurs in various ways , forums , and activities .

it is subsumed in many hearings , meetings , or informal settings that may not be labeled as "oversight. .

indeed , the review function is a byproduct of many congressional activities — committee meetings on legislation , the confirmation process , casework , informal member and staff meetings with executive officials , legislative communications with administrative leaders , and so on .

thus , questions about whether congress does enough oversight are difficult to answer because of methodological limitations ( time and resources , for instance ) in measuring its frequency comprehensively and systematically .

moreover , how "oversight is defined affects what oversight one finds. .

suffice it to say that undercounting surely characterizes the amount of oversight carried out by congress primarily through the work of its committees , members , staff aides , and legislative support units , such as the government accountability office ( gao ) .

worth raising is a related matter: what constitutes effective or quality oversight ? .

the traditional method of exercising congressional oversight is through committee hearings and investigations into executive branch operations .

for more than 200 years , congress has conducted investigations of varying types and with varying results .

along the way , there have been abuses and excesses — for example , the 1954 army - mccarthy hearings about communists in government — and successes and accomplishments .

for instance , the world war ii truman committee's ( after senator and later president harry s truman ) investigation of the war mobilization effort , including waste and fraud in defense procurement , was viewed by many as a large success .

although people may disagree on what constitutes "quality" oversight , there are a number of components that appear to foster effective oversight .

they include ( 1 ) a committee chair who is committed to doing oversight on a sustained basis ; ( 2 ) the involvement of committee members in an activity that might take weeks or months of time and resources ; ( 3 ) bipartisanship: more is likely to be achieved when both parties work together rather than against each other ; ( 4 ) an experienced professional staff with investigatory skills ; ( 5 ) preparation and documentation in advance of public hearings ; ( 6 ) coordination with other relevant committees of jurisdiction ; and ( 7 ) follow - through to ensure that any recommendations of the committee are acted upon .

helpful , too , is a cooperative administration .

absent cooperation , committees may need to use compulsory processes ( subpoena and contempt ) to obtain pertinent reports and documents and the testimony of key witnesses .

oversight is an implicit constitutional obligation of the congress .

according to historian arthur schlesinger , jr. , the framers believed it was not necessary to make specific reference to "oversight" in the constitution .

"[i]t was not considered necessary to make an explicit grant of such authority," wrote schlesinger .

"the power to make laws implied the power to see whether they were faithfully executed. .

the constitution also granted congress an array of formal powers — the purse strings , lawmaking , impeachment , among others — to hold the president and the administration accountable for their actions or inactions .

in short , oversight plays a key role in our system of checks and balances .

there is a large number of overlapping purposes associated with oversight .

this array can be divided into three basic types: programmatic , political , and institutional .

p rogrammati c purposes include such objectives as making sure agencies and programs are working in a cost - effective and efficient manner ; ensuring executive compliance with legislative intent ; evaluating program performance ; improving the economy of governmental performance ; investigating waste , fraud , and abuse in governmental programs ; reviewing the agency rulemaking process ; acquiring information useful in future policymaking ; or determining whether agencies or programs are fulfilling their statutory mission .

there are also political purposes associated with oversight , such as generating favorable publicity for lawmakers , winning the electoral support of constituents and outside groups , or rebutting criticisms of favorite programs or agencies .

after all , oversight occurs in an ever - present political context in which congress's relationship with administrative entities can range from cooperation to conflict .

there are , moreover , inherent constitutional and political tensions between congress and the president even during periods of unified government ( one party in charge of the house , senate , and white house ) .

partisan and inter - branch conflicts are not uncommon in the conduct of the legislative review function .

in addition , there are institutional oversight purposes that merit special mention , because they serve to protect congressional prerogatives and strengthen the american public's ability to evaluate and reevaluate executive activities and actions .

three institutional purposes include checking the power of the executive branch ; investigating how a law is being administered ; and informing congress and the public .

to encourage , promote , and prod the legislative branch to do more oversight , the house and senate have enacted an array of laws and rules that help to complement its many techniques ( see " oversight techniques " section below ) for monitoring executive branch performance .

mention of a few laws and rules illustrates congress's continuing interest in strengthening its own procedures for oversight , as well as obtaining oversight - related information from the executive branch .

two statutes worth briefly noting for illustrative purposes are the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra , or the results act ) and the congressional review act of 1996 ( cra ) .

in carrying out its oversight responsibilities , congress must be able to choose from a variety of techniques to hold agencies accountable , so that if one technique proves to be ineffective , committees and members can employ others singly or in combination .

most of these techniques are utilized by the committees of congress: standing , subcommittee , select , or special .

in no particular order , they include such oversight methods as the10 discussed briefly below .

despite the importance of oversight , "pass it and forget it" lawmaking sometimes occurs on capitol hill .

this reality is not to suggest that committees and subcommittees fail to hold regular oversight hearings and meetings , often aimed at rooting out government waste and abuse and , more broadly , monitoring the executive branch .

instead , there are various institutional and other developments that have limited the ability of committees and lawmakers to carry out their "continuous watchfulness" function in a continual manner .

there are , in brief , various disincentives and incentives associated with the conduct of oversight .

three will be spotlighted in each category for illustrative purposes .

there is no doubt that congress has significant authority to oversee the executive branch .

control of the purse strings , enactment of laws , the conduct of investigations , or the senate's confirmation role are among the principal levers of power available to the legislative branch to hold executive officials accountable for the implementation of federal policies and programs .

in carrying out its oversight responsibilities , congress engages in different , often overlapping , types or models of review: for example , programmatic versus political , adversarial versus cooperative , formal ( hearings ) versus informal ( staff meetings with agency officials ) , or "police patrol" versus "fire alarm. .

police patrol oversight is akin to "the cop on the beat": pro - active , regular , and systematic review of administrative performance by house and senate committees .

fire alarm oversight is reactive ; it occurs when outside events or public interest triggers episodic reviews of the executive branch .

significantly , congress may be obtaining some extra police patrol assistance through the combination of technology and civic - minded individuals or groups .

a rather new oversight trend is the "public as watchdog," or , stated differently , the "democratization" of the review function .

there are many groups , such as the project on government oversight ( pogo ) or the heritage foundation , bloggers , and websites devoted to monitoring federal expenditures and activities .

for example , websites such as recovery.gov ( initiated and maintained by a task force of federal inspectors general ) or stimuluswatch.org ( an independent website developed by volunteers ) enable interested individuals to monitor projects that receive money from more than $800 billion economic stimulus package enacted during the first session of the 111 th congress .

president obama has made transparency and open government one of his top priorities .

one result is that federal agencies are posting more of their information and data online so citizens who visit the sites can assess how their dollars are being spent or how well agencies are managing their various projects .

as the government's chief information officer stated , the new - found transparency "will elicit a more informed public oversight to help guide federal policies and programs. .

a better informed public is likely to make their evaluations of federal programs and expenditures known to congressional lawmakers .

the blogosphere , in short , adds millions of extra eyes to oversight of government spending and activities .

ultimately , congress will decide how best to pursue its oversight responsibility .

much will depend on the context of the times , the willingness of members and their staff to watch and assess the executive branch , and congress's relationship with the incumbent administration .

this relationship may range from cooperation to confrontational , but it is principally congress that can ensure that executive policies reflect the values of the american people , anticipate long - range trends , and meet the challenges of an every - changing nation and world .

