the argument for displacing coal with natural gas rests on the fact that the united states has a large base of advanced technology , underutilized , gas - burning power plants .

this section of the report describes how this reservoir of underutilized natural gas combined cycle ( ngcc ) plants came about , and why it may represent an option for reducing the use of coal plants .

as discussed in this report , the potential for displacing coal consumption in the power sector by making greater use of existing ngcc power plants depends on numerous factors .

these include: the amount of excess ngcc generating capacity available ; the current operating patterns of coal and ngcc plants , and the amount of flexibility power system operators have for changing those patterns ; whether or not the transmission grid can deliver power from existing ngcc plants to loads currently served by coal plants ; and whether there is sufficient natural gas supply , and pipeline and gas storage capacity , to deliver large amounts of additional fuel to gas - fired power plants ; and consideration of the environmental impacts of increasing gas production .

all of these factors have a time dimension .

for example , while existing ngcc plants may have sufficient excess capacity today to displace a material amount of coal generation , this could change in the future as load grows .

therefore a full analysis of the potential for gas displacement of coal must take into account future conditions , not just a snapshot of the current situation .

there is also the question of cost which , as discussed in the introduction , is beyond the scope of this report .

clearly , the cost of a coal displacement by gas policy is highly uncertain , and depends on such factors as future natural gas and coal prices , any need to build additional pipeline and transmission line facilities , and the cost of carbon ( if any ) .

the economic impacts of a coal displacement by gas policy could also spill over to other parts of the economy .

for example , increased power sector demand could drive up the price of natural gas , to the detriment of other residential , commercial , and industrial users .

decreased production of coal and increased production of natural gas would pose varying costs and benefits for states and regions .

as a step toward addressing these questions , congress may consider chartering a rigorous study of the potential for displacing coal with power from existing gas - fired power plants .

such a study would require sophisticated computer modeling to simulate the operation of the power system , to determine whether there is sufficient excess gas fired capacity and the supporting transmission and other infrastructure to displace a significant volume of coal over the near term .

this kind of study might also estimate the direct costs of a gas for coal policy , such as the impact on electric rates .

because of the large number of uncertainties , such as the future price of natural gas , the study would have to consider several scenarios .

such a study could help congress judge whether there is sufficient potential to further explore a policy of replacing coal generation with increased output from existing gas - fired plants .

congress may also consider chartering an analysis of the potential for directly using gas in existing coal - fired plants , either as a supplemental or primary fuel .

as noted in the introduction , large scale use of gas in coal plants raises engineering issues and the question of how many coal plants have adequate pipeline connections .

however , burning gas in coal plants would make it possible to displace coal while still using existing transmission lines to meet load , which could be a significant advantage .

appendix a .

background on the electric power system this appendix provides background on the components and operation of the electric power system .

readers familiar with these topics may wish to skim or skip this appendix .

power plants and power lines power plants , transmission systems , and distribution systems constitute the major components of the existing electric power system , as briefly described and illustrated below ( figure a - 1 ) : generating plants produce electricity , using either combustible fuels such as coal , natural gas , and biomass ; or non - combustible energy sources such as wind , solar energy , or nuclear fuel .

transmission lines carry electricity from power plants to demand centers .

the higher the voltage of a transmission line the more power it can carry and the fewer the line losses during transmission .

current policy discussions focus on the high voltage network ( 230 kilovolts ( kv ) rating and greater ) used to move large amounts of power long distances .

near customers a step - down transformer reduces voltage so the power can be carried by low voltage distribution lines for final delivery .

capacity and energy capacity is the potential instantaneous output of a generating or storage unit , measured in watts .

energy is the actual amount of electricity generated by a power plant or released by a storage device during a time period , measured in watt - hours .

the units are usually expressed in thousands ( kilowatts and kilowatt - hours ) or millions ( megawatts and megawatt - hours ) .

for example , the maximum amount of power a 1,000 megawatt ( mw ) power plant can generate in a year is 8.76 million megawatt - hours ( mwh ) , calculated as: 1,000 mw x 8,760 hours in a year = 8.76 million mwh .

capacity factor capacity factor is a standard measure of how intensively a power plant is utilized .

it is the ratio of how much electricity a power plant produced over a period of time , typically a year , compared to how much electricity the plant could have produced if it operated continuously at full output .

for example , as shown in the prior paragraph , the maximum possible output of a 1,000 mw power plant in one year is 8.76 million mwh .

assume that during a year the plant actually produced only 7.0 million mwh .

in this case the plant's capacity factor would be 7.0 million mwh ÷ 8.76 million mwh = 81% .

generation and load the demand for electricity ( "load" ) faced by an electric power system varies moment to moment with changes in business and residential activity and the weather .

load begins growing in the morning as people waken , peaks in the early afternoon , and bottoms - out in the late evening and early morning .

figure a - 2 shows an illustrative daily load curve .

the daily load shape dictates how electric power systems are operated .

as shown in figure a - 2 , there is a minimum demand for electricity that occurs throughout the day .

this base level of demand is met with "baseload" generating units which have low variable operating costs .

baseload units can also meet some of the demand above the base , and can reduce output when demand is unusually low .

the units do this by "ramping" generation up and down to meet fluctuations in demand .

the greater part of the daily up and down swings in demand is met with "intermediate" units ( also referred to as load - following or cycling units ) .

these units can quickly change their output to match the change in demand ( that is , they have a fast "ramp rate" ) .

load - following plants can also serve as "spinning reserve" units that are running but not putting power on the grid , and are immediately available to meet unanticipated increases in load or to back up other units that go off - line due to breakdowns .

the highest daily loads are met with peaking units .

these units are typically the most expensive to operate , but can quickly start up and shut down to meet brief peaks in demand .

peaking units also serve as spinning reserve and as "quick start" units able to go from shutdown to full load in minutes .

a peaking unit typically operates for only a few hundred hours a year .

economic dispatch and heat rate the generating units available to meet system load are "dispatched" ( put on - line ) in order of lowest variable cost .

this is referred to as the "economic dispatch" of a power system's plants .

for a plant that uses combustible fuels ( such as coal or natural gas ) a key driver of variable costs is the efficiency with which the plant converts fuel to electricity , as measured by the plant's "heat rate. .

this is the fuel input in british thermal units ( btus ) needed to produce one kilowatt - hour of electricity output .

a lower heat rate equates with greater efficiency and lower variable costs .

other things ( most importantly , fuel and environmental compliance costs ) being equal , the lower a plant's heat rate , the higher it will stand in the economic dispatch priority order .

heat rates are inapplicable to plants that do not use combustible fuels , such as nuclear and non - biomass renewable plants .

as an illustration of economic dispatch , consider a utility system with coal , nuclear , geothermal , natural gas combined cycle , and natural gas peaking units in its system: ( 1 ) nuclear , coal , and geothermal baseload units , which are expensive to build but have low fuel costs and therefore low variable costs , will be the first units to be put on - line .

other than for planned and forced maintenance , these baseload generators will run throughout the year .

 ( 2 ) combined cycle units , which are very efficient but use more expensive natural gas as a fuel , will meet intermediate load .

these cycling plants will ramp up and down during the day , and will be turned on and off dozens of times a year .

 ( 3 ) peaking plants , using combustion turbines , are relatively inefficient and burn natural gas .

they run only as needed to meet the highest loads .

an exception to this straightforward economic dispatch are "variable renewable" power plants — wind and solar — that do not fall neatly into the categories of baseload , intermediate , and peaking plants .

variable renewable generation is used as available to meet demand .

because these resources have very low variable costs they are ideally used to displace generation from gas - fired combined cycle plants and peaking units with higher variable costs .

however , if wind or solar generation is available when demand is low ( such as a weekend or , in the case of wind , in the evening ) , the renewable output could displace coal generation .

power systems must meet all firm loads at all times , but variable renewable plants do not have firm levels of output because they depend on the weather .

they are not firm resources because there is no guarantee that the plant can generate at a specific load level at a given point in time .

variable renewable generation can be made firm by linking wind and solar plants to electricity storage , but with current technology , storage options are limited and expensive .

appendix b .

combined cycle technology the combined cycle achieves a high level of efficiency by capturing waste heat that would otherwise be lost in the generating process .

as shown in figure b - 1 for a combined cycle unit fueled by natural gas , the gas is fed into a combustion turbine which burns the fuel to power a generator .

the exhaust from the combustion turbine is then directed to a specialized type of boiler ( the heat recovery steam generator or hrsg ) where the heat in the exhaust gases is used to produce steam , which in turn drives a second generator .

in combined heat and power ( chp ) applications , part of the steam is used to support an industrial process or to provide space heating , further increasing the total energy efficiency of the system .

combined cycles are built in different configurations , depending in part on the amount of capacity needed .

figure b - 1 illustrates a configuration in which one combustion turbine feeds one hrsg ; this is referred to as "1x1" design .

in higher capacity 2x1 or 3x1 designs , multiple combustion turbines feed a single hrsg .

these options illustrate the modular ( or "building block" ) nature of combined cycles , which facilitates rapid and flexible construction of new generating units to match changes in demand .

in the united states the predominant fuel used in combined cycle plants is natural gas .

combined cycles can also be designed to use fuel oil as a primary or backup fuel .

gasified coal can also be used as the fuel in an integrated gasification combined cycle ( igcc ) plant .

there are currently two prototype igcc plant operating in the united states and a commercial - scale unit is under construction in indiana .

