international social security agreements are bilateral agreements primarily intended to eliminate dual social security taxation based on the same work and provide benefit protection for workers who divide their careers between the united states and a foreign country .

by eliminating dual social security taxation , the agreements reduce the cost of doing business abroad .

in turn , they can affect the competitiveness and profitability of u.s. companies with foreign operations as well as promote investment in the united states by foreign companies .

social security agreements also affect the application of certain provisions of the social security act , such as the alien nonpayment provision which places restrictions on the payment of u.s. social security benefits to noncitizens residing outside the united states , with broad exceptions .

since 1977 , the president has had the authority to negotiate social security agreements with foreign countries ( pursuant to section 233 of the social security act ) .

currently , there are 24 social security agreements in force ( see table 2 for a list of u.s. social security agreements in force ) .

another agreement ( with mexico ) has been signed , but is not in force .

this report provides an overview of the purpose and operation of international social security agreements .

it also provides a discussion of the effects of agreements on selected provisions of the social security act and concerns raised by some policymakers about the agreements .

the united states has social security agreements in force with 24 countries ( see table 2 ) .

in addition , the united states has a pending agreement with mexico that was signed on june 29 , 2004 .

as noted previously , the agreement with mexico has not been transmitted to congress .

reportedly , as of january 2010 , the agreement remains under review at ssa ( ssa has not forwarded the agreement to the state department ) .

although the specific terms of each social security agreement may differ given the variation in social security systems in each country , the provisions of an agreement must be consistent with the social security act .

section 233 ( c ) ( 4 ) of the social security act states "any such agreement may contain other provisions which are not inconsistent with the other provisions of [title ii of the social security act] and which the president deems appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section. .

a description and the complete text of each agreement are available on the social security administration's website .

in december 2007 , about $28 million was paid in monthly benefits to about 146,200 recipients under u.s. social security agreements ( see table 3 ) .

many observers agree that international social security agreements can be beneficial for u.s. companies and workers .

however , some policymakers have expressed concerns about several aspects of the agreements .

among these concerns are ( 1 ) ssa's policies and procedures for assessing the integrity and reliability of foreign data and evidentiary documents to identify potential risks when entering into an agreement ; ( 2 ) ssa's ability to verify individuals' initial eligibility for benefits under an agreement and to monitor the continuing eligibility of beneficiaries outside the united states ; and ( 3 ) the role of congress with respect to the approval process for potential agreements , as well as the need for enhanced reporting requirements and periodic evaluation of agreements once they are in force .

in recent years , legislation has been introduced that would alter the congressional review process for international social security agreements , among other changes .

for example , in the 111 th congress , s. 42 ( social security totalization agreement reform act of 2009 or star act ) would require both houses of congress to approve a totalization agreement before it could go into effect .

in addition , the measure would establish new reporting requirements .

s. 42 would require the president to submit the "final legal text" of an agreement to congress , along with a report containing specified information such as "an assessment of the integrity of the retirement data and records ( including birth , death , and marriage records ) of the other country that is the subject of the agreement" and "an assessment of the ability of such country to track and monitor recipients of benefits under such agreement. .

in addition , the commissioner of social security would be required to report to congress and the comptroller general of the united states ( the government accountability office ) on the impact of a totalization agreement every two years after it goes into effect .

with respect to the initial biennial report by the commissioner of social security , the comptroller general would be required to conduct an evaluation of the report ( including specified information ) and submit a report to congress on the results of the evaluation .

other legislation would make structural changes to international social security agreements .

for example , in the 111 th congress , h.r .

132 ( total overhaul of totalization agreements law of 2009 ) would provide for the transfer of social security contributions between the united states and an agreement country , rather than allowing individuals to establish entitlement to benefits under each country's social security system based on combined work credits .

under the measure , if a citizen or national of an agreement country , or an individual lawfully admitted to an agreement country for permanent residence , becomes entitled to benefits under the agreement country's social security system and the individual has at least 6 quarters of coverage under the u.s. system , the secretary of the treasury would transfer from the social security trust funds to the agreement country an amount equal to the contributions paid in connection with the individual's covered employment in the united states .

conversely , if a citizen or national of the united states , or an individual lawfully admitted to the united states for permanent residence , becomes entitled to benefits under the u.s. social security system and the individual has the equivalent of 6 quarters of coverage under an agreement country's social security system , the agreement country would pay to the united states an amount equal to the contributions paid in connection with the individual's covered employment in the agreement country .

in addition , h.r .

132 would exclude from the computation of a worker's social security benefits any earnings obtained while the worker was neither a citizen or national of the united states nor lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the united states and was not authorized to work in the united states .

the exclusion would apply to all such earnings obtained before , on , or after the date of enactment of the bill .

h.r .

132 would require the commissioner of social security to recompute benefits as needed to carry out this provision , which would affect benefits for months after the date of enactment of the bill .

supporters of international social security agreements point to the advantages associated with such agreements , including elimination of dual social security taxes on the same earnings , protection of benefits for workers who divide their careers between the united states and a foreign country and increased portability of benefits through the waiver of residency requirements .

supporters also maintain that social security agreements can foster international commerce and enhance diplomatic relations .

with respect to some of the issues and concerns that have been raised about the reliability of foreign data used to administer such agreements , ssa noted in october 2009: [since 2005] , ssa has made significant advances in this area .

ssa now requires , as a prerequisite for entering into formal negotiations on a totalization agreement , a thorough review of the integrity and reliability of foreign data .

ssa has established a formal procedure for obtaining the information necessary to assess the integrity and reliability of foreign data relied upon by the united states to administer social security agreements .

ssa has also established procedures for reviewing the information obtained and determining whether the foreign data is reliable and secure .

ssa has implemented these procedures , and has reviewed the foreign data in question for all social security agreements negotiated since 2005 .

because the agreements impose a cost to the u.s. social security system , some policymakers point to the need for greater assurances that data pertaining to noncitizen workers and beneficiaries ( including dependents and survivors ) relied upon by the united states to administer the agreements are complete and accurate , a condition necessary to protect the social security trust funds from improper payments .

in addition , some policymakers point to the need for changes in the congressional review process for totalization agreements , enhanced reporting requirements and ongoing evaluation of agreements after they enter into force as reflected in current legislative proposals .

appendix a. computation of the social security primary insurance amount the primary insurance amount ( pia ) is the basic social security monthly benefit amount payable to an individual upon entitlement to retirement benefits at the normal retirement age ( i.e. , the pia does not reflect any adjustments for early or delayed retirement ) or disability benefits .

in addition , the pia is the base amount used to determine monthly benefits payable to family members on the worker's record ( such as a spouse or surviving spouse ) .

under current law , the pia is determined by applying a benefit formula to the worker's average lifetime covered earnings .

in the first step of the benefit computation , the worker's nominal earnings ( up to two calendar years prior to the year of eligibility — for example , earnings prior to the age of 60 in the case of a retirement benefit ) are indexed to wage growth to reflect the change in average wages over time .

 ( earnings in subsequent years are counted at nominal value. ) .

for purposes of computing a basic retirement benefit , the 35 highest years of indexed earnings are then averaged and a monthly amount is computed to determine the worker's average indexed monthly earnings ( aime ) .

if a worker has fewer than 35 years of covered earnings , years of zero earnings are counted in the computation of the aime .

the benefit formula is then applied to the worker's aime .

the benefit formula that applies to individuals who first become eligible for retirement or disability benefits in 2010 , or who die in 2010 before becoming eligible for benefits , is 90% of the first $761 of aime , plus 32% of aime over $761 through $4,586 , plus 15% of aime over $4,586 for example , the pia for a worker who reaches the age of 62 in 2010 , based on an aime of $5,000 , would be $1,971.00 .

the pia would be computed as follows: 90% x $761 = $684.90 , plus 32% x $3,825 = $1,224.00 , plus 15% x $414 = $62.10 pia = $1,971.00 the worker's pia is based on the benefit formula that applies in the year the worker first becomes eligible for benefits ( the age of 62 for retired - worker benefits , the year of disability for disabled - worker benefits , or the year of the worker's death for survivor benefits ) , rather than the first year of benefit receipt .

beginning with the first year of eligibility , the pia is increased by the annual social security cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) for any intervening years between eligibility and benefit receipt .

for example , if an individual who first becomes eligible for retired - worker benefits at the age of 62 in 2010 elects to receive benefits at the normal retirement age ( of 66 in 2014 ) , the pia effective at the normal retirement age would be the pia calculated using the benefit formula for 2010 ( shown above ) adjusted annually according to the cola ( if any ) effective in december 2010 , december 2011 , december 2012 , and december 2013 .

the dollar amounts that separate the three brackets of aime in the benefit formula ( $761 and $4,586 ) are referred to as bend points .

under current law , the bend points are indexed to wage growth on an annual basis to provide stable replacement rates over time for workers with similar earnings patterns .

 ( the replacement rate is based on social security benefits in the first year of benefit receipt divided by pre - retirement earnings. ) .

for example , the projected long - range constant replacement rate , based on retirement at the age of 67 in 2030 or later , is 55% for a scaled low earner ; 41% for a scaled medium earner ; and 27% for a maximum earner .

the percentages that apply to each of the three brackets of aime in the benefit formula ( 90% , 32% and 15% ) are referred to as formula factors ( or replacement factors ) .

the formula factors , which are fixed under current law , are structured so that social security benefits replace a greater share of pre - retirement earnings for lower - wage workers compared to higher - wage workers .

appendix b .

exception countries the following lists of countries , which are subject to change periodically , are taken from the electronic code of federal regulations ( e - cfr ) with data current as of june 1 , 2009 , and the social security administration's program operations manual system ( poms ) .

the e - cfr is available at http: / / ecfr.gpoaccess.gov / .

the poms are available at https: / / secure.ssa.gov / apps10 / poms.nsf / aboutpoms .

social insurance or pension system countries under the alien nonpayment provision , a noncitizen's benefits are suspended if he or she remains outside the united states for more than 6 consecutive months , unless one of several broad exceptions is met .

for example , an alien may receive benefits outside the united states if he or she is a citizen of a country that has a social insurance or pension system that pays benefits to eligible u.s. citizens residing outside that country .

the following countries meet the social insurance or pension system exception in section 202 ( t ) ( 2 ) of the social security act: albania , antigua and barbuda , argentina , austria , bahamas , barbados , belgium , belize , bolivia , bosnia - herzegovina , brazil , burkina faso , canada , chile , colombia , costa rica , cote d'ivoire , croatia , cyprus , czech republic , denmark , dominica , dominican republic , ecuador , el salvador , finland , france , gabon , grenada , guatemala , guyana , hungary , iceland , jamaica , jordan , latvia , liechtenstein , lithuania , luxembourg , macedonia , malta , marshall islands , mexico , federated states of micronesia , monaco , montenegro , nicaragua , norway , palau , panama , peru , philippines , poland , portugal , st. kitts and nevis , st. lucia , samoa , san marino , serbia , slovakia , slovenia , south korea , spain , sweden , switzerland , the netherlands , trinidad - tobago , turkey , united kingdom , uruguay , venezuela ( ssa poms , section rs 02610.015 ( status of countries for applying exceptions based on citizenship ) , available at https: / / secure.ssa.gov / apps10 / poms.nsf / lnx / 0302610015 ! opendocument ) treaty obligation countries to receive benefits outside the united states , alien dependents and survivors must have lived in the united states previously for at least five years ( lawfully or unlawfully ) , and the family relationship to the worker must have existed during that time .

the law provides several broad exceptions to the five - year u.s. residency requirement for alien dependents and survivors .

for example , an alien dependent or survivor is exempt from the u.s. residency requirement if he or she is a citizen of a treaty obligation country ( i.e. , if nonpayment of benefits would be contrary to a treaty between the united states and the individual's country of citizenship ) .

the following countries meet the "treaty obligation" exception in section 202 ( t ) ( 3 ) of the social security act: germany , greece , ireland , israel , italy , japan , netherlands* ( 20 c.f.r .

§ 404.463 ) *the treaty of friendship , commerce , and navigation now in force between the united states and the kingdom of the netherlands creates treaty obligations precluding the application of the alien nonpayment provision to citizens of that country with respect to monthly survivor benefits only .

