the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) created an emergency contingency fund ( ecf ) within the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant .

the fund expired on september 30 , 2010 .

it helped states , indian tribes , and territories pay for additional costs of providing economic aid to families during the current economic downturn for fy2009 and fy2010 .

the tanf block grant provides states , indian tribes , and territories with federal funding for a wide range of benefits and services to ameliorate the effects of , or address the root causes of , economic disadvantage for families with children .

the bulk of federal tanf funding is in a basic block grant of $16.5 billion .

under the basic block grant , each state receives an amount that has remained the same , without adjustment , since the 1996 welfare reform law .

states — taken together — are also required to contribute a minimum of $10.4 billion to tanf - funded or related programs under a maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement .

this amount , too , has not been adjusted since the 1996 welfare reform law .

tanf is best known for funding cash welfare payments for very low - income families with children .

however , states may use tanf funds "in any manner reasonably calculated" to help states achieve the broad statutory purpose of the block grant .

in fy2009 , only 28% of federal and related state tanf funds were expended on basic assistance , the category of spending that most closely corresponds to traditional cash welfare .

the cash welfare rolls had declined to 1.7 million families by july 2008 , down from a historical peak of 5.1 million families in march 1994 .

tanf also provided considerable funding for state subsidized child care programs , programs that address child abuse and neglect , pregnancy prevention programs , youth programs , and early childhood development ( eg , pre - kindergarten ) programs .

absent additional tanf funds , the limited and fixed nature of the block grant means that states bear the full cost of increased costs ( eg , increases in cash welfare ) .

to share this risk during periods of recession , the 1996 welfare reform law created a $2 billion contingency fund .

this fund , hereafter in this report called the "regular" contingency fund , provides capped matching grants to states that meet criteria of economic need and increased state spending to help states meet recession - related costs .

the overall cash assistance caseload began to rise in august 2008 .

from march 2008 to march 2010 , the national caseload increased by 13% — with some states experiencing faster caseload growth .

the regular tanf contingency fund provided 19 states with additional funding in fy2009 and early fy2010 .

however , some states ( eg , california and florida ) experienced substantial increases in their tanf cash assistance caseloads , and met the criterion of economic need required to draw regular contingency funds , but failed to draw them because of the increased state spending requirement of the regular fund .

the arra included a number of provisions related to taxes and benefit payments , designed to partially offset the declines in family income and purchasing power resulting from the increased joblessness caused by the recession .

as part of this package , the arra established within tanf a $5 billion ecf for fy2009 and fy2010 .

the ecf provided states , tribes , and territories with capped additional funding to help meet additional costs or create new programs to respond to the current economic downturn .

subject to a cap on state grants from the ecf , the fund paid states , tribes , and territories 80% of the increased costs of expenditures in the three categories of expenditures discussed below .

the tanf ecf was enacted as a temporary measure to help finance extra economic support to families to help them weather the recession .

though the economy grew in the last half of 2009 and the first three quarters of 2010 , unemployment remained high .

unemployment is typically considered a "lagging" indicator and falls only after an economic expansion has already been underway for some time .

historically , the trend in the cash welfare caseload has sometimes followed economic conditions , but sometimes not .

after the 1990-1991 recession , welfare caseloads actually peaked in march 1994 , before beginning their decline .

president obama's fy2011 budget proposal sought to establish a new emergency fund for fy2011 .

it would have been funded at $2.5 billion for that year .

the house voted twice in 2010 to extend the ecf , though such proposals failed to clear the senate .

a provision of the claims resolution act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-291 ) extended the basic tanf program through the end of fy2011 without the ecf .

