most americans with health insurance coverage obtain such coverage through the private sector .

moreover , most private coverage is provided through an employer to workers and dependents of workers .

such employment - based coverage may either be purchased from an insurance carrier ( fully insured health plan ) , or funded directly by the employer ( self - insured health benefits ) .

the distinction between self - insured and fully insured plans is significant with respect to applicable law and regulation , which , in turn , affects an enrollee's access to certain health services , applicability of consumer protections , and ability to receive financial compensation in a court of law , among many other issues .

to assist individuals , families , and employers in obtaining health coverage , the 111 th congress passed major health reform legislation , which contains provisions that directly affect self - insured plans .

this report provides background information on private health insurance coverage , state and federal regulation of private coverage , and self - insured health plans .

it includes data on the prevalence of self - insurance and discusses the employer decision to self - insure .

lastly , it describes selected private health insurance provisions under federal health reform , and application of such provisions on self - insured plans .

people buy insurance to protect themselves against the possibility of financial loss in the future .

such losses may be due to a motor vehicle collision , natural disaster , or other circumstance .

for health care consumers , financial losses may result from the use of health care services .

health insurance , then , provides some protection against the possibility of substantial financial loss due to high health care expenses .

private health insurance can be provided to groups of people that are drawn together by an employer or other organization , such as a trade union .

such groups are generally formed for some purpose other than obtaining insurance , like employment .

when insurance is provided to a group , it is referred to as "group coverage" or "group insurance. .

in the group market , the entity that purchases health insurance on behalf of a group is referred to as the plan "sponsor. .

consumers who are not associated with a group may be able to obtain private health coverage by purchasing it directly from an insurer in the individual ( or nongroup ) insurance market .

the 111 th congress passed the patient protection and affordable care act ( "ppaca," p.l .

111-148 ) ; president obama signed it into law on march 23 , 2010 .

on march 30 , 2010 , ppaca was amended by the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( "reconciliation," p.l .

111-152 ) .

ppaca imposes new requirements on individuals , employers , and health plans ; restructures the private health insurance market ; sets minimum standards for health coverage ; and provides financial assistance to certain individuals and , in some cases , small employers .

among the provisions in ppaca are ones that would have a major impact on private health insurance coverage , including self - insured plans .

under federal law , self - insured plans are considered to be a type of "group health plan. .

ppaca refers to this definition of group health plan and applies certain insurance reforms to such a plan .

because ppaca employs a patchwork approach in specifying which type of private plan would be subject to which reform , the impact on self - insured plans depends on the provision being considered .

for example , group health plans will be subject to the prohibition on coverage exclusions for preexisting health conditions , but not subject to community rating rules under ppaca .

in addition , ppaca includes grandfathering provisions for existing health insurance plans .

a group health plan or health insurance coverage ( either nongroup or group ) , in which a person was enrolled on the date of enactment , is grandfathered and exempt from most insurance reforms .

therefore , self - insured plans that existed on date of enactment are grandfathered plans and subject only to a handful of the private insurance reforms .

ppaca establishes new federal standards and requirements applicable to the private market , with the aim of increasing consumer access to health insurance , especially for persons with pre - existing health conditions and for other higher - risk groups .

these requirements relate to the offer , issuance , and renewal of insurance , applicable consumer protections , and costs borne by consumers , employers , and health plans .

as mentioned above , ppaca requires group health plans ( and , by extension , self - insured plans ) to comply with some but not all private reforms .

depending on the insurance reform , it may apply to all self - insured plans ( i.e. , both new and grandfathered ) , or only one type of self - insured plan ( see table 1 ) .

ppaca will establish health insurance exchanges , similar in many respects to existing entities like the massachusetts connector and ehealthinsurance , to facilitate the purchase of health insurance by certain individuals and small businesses .

an exchange will not be an insurer ; it will provide eligible individuals and small businesses ( and large businesses at the state's discretion ) with access to insurers' plans in a comparable way ( in the same way , for example , that travelocity or expedia are not airlines but provide access to available flights and fares in a comparable way ) .

exchanges will have additional responsibilities as well , such as negotiating with plans and determining eligibility for and administering premium and cost - sharing subsidies .

because the plans offered through an exchange are offered by insurance carriers for purchase by individuals and groups , by definition exchange plans will not be considered self - insured .

ppaca does not mandate an employer to provide employees with coverage ; however , beginning in 2014 , it does impose requirements on certain employers .

a large employer ( as defined in the law ) with at least one full - time employee ( based on a 30-hour work week ) who receives a premium credit through an exchange may be subject to a penalty .

the employer requirements under ppaca do not depend on the funding for an employer plan .

in other words , the potential imposition of an employer penalty will not be contingent on whether the plan is self - insured or fully insured .

ppaca will impose three different fees on health insurers: the first is a 40% excise tax on issuers of high - cost health plans ( defined as those with premiums exceeding $10,200 for single coverage and $27,500 for family coverage in 2018 ) .

in addition , there is an annual fee on health insurers based on their market share .

finally , ppaca will impose an annual fee on health insurance plans to fund comparative effectiveness research .

this additional fee will be calculated by multiplying $2 per insurance product by the average number of covered lives .

under ppaca if an employee has "applicable employer sponsored coverage" and the cost of such coverage exceeds the premium limits described above , then issuers of such coverage will pay a tax .

this term is defined to include "group health plans," which includes self - insured plans .

in contrast , the annual fee on insurers will not apply to sponsors of self - insured plans , among other plan entities .

the tax to fund comparative effectiveness research will apply to self - insured plans in the same manner as the tax will apply to fully insured plans .

