since the early 1970s , federal law has required state and local governments to designate metropolitan planning organizations ( mpos ) in urbanized areas with a population of 50,000 or more to help plan surface transportation infrastructure and services .

there are currently 381 mpos nationwide , of which 43 represent areas of 1 million residents or more ( large mpos ) , 139 represent areas of between 200,000 and 1 million ( medium mpos ) , and 199 represent areas of between 50,000 and 200,000 ( small mpos ) .

the foremost rationale for mpos and metropolitan transportation planning is that the metropolitan scale is the level at which most economic activities , including commuting and , therefore , local highway and transit systems , are organized .

these "metropolitan economies" transcend local government and sometimes state boundaries , and , as some observers have argued , are often too far removed from state capitals for state governments to successfully oversee them .

this is particularly an issue in places where a metropolitan area is spread over more than one state .

despite some strengthening of their authority over the years , mpos have generally remained subordinate to state departments of transportation ( dots ) in the planning and selecting ( "programming" ) of projects using federal surface transportation funds .

moreover , it can be argued that at the metropolitan level mpos are subordinate to local governments that own and operate many elements of the transportation system , and also control land use planning and zoning .

because of this perceived weakness , some in the transportation community have argued that mpos ought to be given much more power over the planning and programming of projects using federal surface transportation funds .

some even go so far as to suggest that federal policies and programs in a number of areas , including transportation , housing , and the environment , need to be coordinated at the metropolitan scale , and that mpos are the organizational venue where this should occur .

others argue that the relationship between state government , local government , and mpos is well - balanced and should not be changed .

a third view is that metropolitan transportation planning is controlled by planners who often harbor anti - car views , and , consequently , mpos can be actually detrimental to well - functioning metropolitan transportation systems .

in this view , mpos should be abolished or , at the very least , have their functions significantly curtailed .

for the period fy2005 though fy2009 , surface transportation programs were authorized by the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea - lu or safetea ; p.l .

109-59 ) .

in lieu of a new multi - year reauthorization that is still being considered , congress has extended these programs and their funding several times .

reauthorization of the surface transportation programs provides an opportunity for congress to reexamine policies related to mpos and the metropolitan planning process .

changes are also being considered as part of climate change legislation .

this report discusses several issues that congress may want to consider: the authority of mpos to plan and program funds ; representation and participation in mpos ; mpo technical capacity ; and implementation of livability / sustainability initiatives .

it also considers a number of other planning issues including the requirements for a long - range plan , the proper scale of planning , and the incorporation of freight transportation needs .

these issues are discussed in detail below after a brief description of the metropolitan transportation planning process .

the federal requirement for transportation planning in urban areas , although not mpos , dates to the federal - aid highway act of 1962 ( p.l .

87-866 ) , which called for "a continuing comprehensive transportation planning process carried on cooperatively by states and local communities. .

mpos themselves have been required as part of the transportation planning process in urbanized areas since the enactment of the federal - aid highway act of 1973 ( p.l .

93-87 ) ( 23 u.s.c .

§134 ; 49 u.s.c .

§5303 ) .

in general , the designation of the mpo , the design of its organizational structure , and voting representation within the mpo are to be agreed upon by the governor of the state and the general - purpose local governments of the area .

in urbanized areas of 200,000 residents or more , designated as transportation management areas ( tmas ) , federal law requires that the mpo must consist of local elected officials , officials from public agencies that operate major modes of transportation ( transit agencies , port authorities , etc .

 ) , and appropriate state officials ( 23 u.s.c .

§134 ( d ) ( 2 ) ; 49 u.s.c .

§5303 ( d ) ( 2 ) ) .

typically , these officials form a policy board in which some members have voting rights and others do not .

day - to - day operations of an mpo are usually managed by an executive director appointed by the board , and a staff composed largely of professional planners .

the number of staff supporting the work of the mpo is typically very small .

the government accountability office ( gao ) recently found the average ( mean ) number of full - time and part - time staff working for small mpos was 3.2 and 1.4 , respectively .

for medium mpos the averages were 8.2 full time and 1.5 part time staff , and for large mpos the averages were 49.3 full time and 3.9 part time .

with few permanent staff , smaller mpos often hire consultants to do technical work , rely on help from the state dot , or both .

the two major requirements of every mpo are the preparation of a long - range , multi - modal metropolitan transportation plan ( mtp ) covering a minimum period of 20 years , and a transportation improvement program ( tip ) covering four years .

the mtp must be updated at least every five years , or four years in areas with air quality problems , and the tip must be updated at least every four years .

the mtp is required to include an assessment of transportation supply and demand in the metropolitan area ; operational and infrastructure investment strategies to improve the condition and performance of the system ; estimates of transportation's effects on environmental quality and how these effects can be mitigated ; and a financial plan that shows how the mtp can be implemented .

two important components of developing the long - range plan are preparation of travel demand forecasts and estimates of other inputs and outputs such as future land use patterns and pollutant emissions .

the four - year tip is a priority list of proposed federally supported highway and transit projects and strategies .

federal law requires that the list of projects and strategies must be "fiscally constrained" in that the program must be supported by reasonable estimates of available funding .

to put it another way , the tip must include a priority list of projects and strategies over the coming four years that have a reasonable chance of being accomplished with available funding .

the tip must be approved by both the mpo and the governor ( although the actual approval is often delegated to the state dot ) , and be consistent with the mtp .

federally supported projects must be selected from the approved tip .

large and medium mpos , those in urbanized areas of 200,000 residents or more , have the authority to select projects from the tip in consultation with the state and public transit operators , except projects carried out on the national highway system ( nhs ) , or under the bridge program and interstate maintenance ( im ) program .

in those cases , the state dot has the authority to select projects from the tip in cooperation with the mpo .

mpos in small urban areas , however , have less authority than those in larger areas .

this is because power to select highway projects from the tip is given to the state and power to select transit projects is given to the designated recipients of public transit funding .

project selection by the state or transit system , however , must be done in cooperation with the mpo , a stronger requirement than consultation .

the transportation plans of a metropolitan area must be consistent with transportation plans that are required at the state level .

moreover , in metropolitan areas that are in nonattainment or maintenance status for air quality , transportation plans must be in conformity with the state implementation plan ( sip ) required to bring the area into compliance with air pollution standards .

the local mpo policy board is responsible for making a conformity determination between the regional transportation plan and regional air quality plan .

this determination must be made at least every four years , when a mtp or tip is updated or amended , or within 24 months after a sip or sip revision is approved by the environmental protection agency .

some argue that development of the tip , also known as project "programming," is the most important activity of an mpo because it provides the potential for setting budgetary priorities .

prior to enactment of the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea ; p.l .

102-240 ) , a tip did not need to be fiscally constrained , thus , a common complaint was that such documents were long "wish lists" from which the state could choose the projects to fund .

by contrast , since istea , mpos , particularly those in areas designated as tmas , have had a say in developing the tip and in selecting projects from the tip to be implemented .

moreover , istea is also said to have empowered mpos by giving them primary authority over surface transportation program ( stp ) funds designated for projects in specific urban areas , so - called "suballocated" funds , and , to a lesser extent , authority over congestion mitigation and air quality improvement program ( cmaq ) funds .

the planning area for which the mpo is generally responsible is the urbanized area and the area likely to become urbanized over the next 20 years , and may , therefore , encompass the entire metropolitan statistical area .

the planning process is required to be multi - modal , and is to include consideration of a range of factors: economic competitiveness ; safety ; security ; accessibility and mobility of people and freight ; environmental quality , energy conservation , quality of life , and consistency with growth and economic development patterns ; intermodal connectivity ; efficient management and operation of the system ; and preservation of the existing system ( 23 u.s.c .

§134 ( h ) ( 1 ) ; 49 u.s.c .

§5303 ( h ) ( 1 ) ) .

in areas designated as tmas , planning must include a congestion management process that encompasses travel demand reduction and operational management strategies ( 23 u.s.c .

§134 ( k ) ( 3 ) ; 49 u.s.c .

§5303 ( k ) ( 3 ) ) .

in nonattainment areas "federal funds may not be advanced ... for any highway project that will result in a significant increase in the carrying capacity for single - occupant vehicles unless the project is addressed through a congestion management process" ( 23 u.s.c .

§134 ( m ) ( 1 ) ; 49 u.s.c .

§5303 ( m ) ( 1 ) ) .

the metropolitan planning process , in areas designated as tmas , must be certified by the secretary of transportation as being carried out according to federal law .

working together , fhwa and fta perform certification reviews .

certification is required not less often than once every four years .

certification is based on the way in which the planning is carried out , not the success or failure of the projects and strategies ultimately employed .

among other things , a certification review will examine the participation of interested parties in the planning process .

federal law requires that at a minimum , stakeholders , including freight shippers , public transit operators , and the general public , be given reasonable opportunity to comment on the transportation plan .

to that end , mpos are required to develop a public participation plan .

if federal certification is not granted , the secretary may withhold 20% of highway and transit project funds attributable to the area .

in addition to the activities prescribed by federal law , some mpos carry out other activities that may be given to them by state or local government .

these include land - use planning , project implementation , transit operations , and environmental planning in addition to air quality emissions analysis .

according to gao , 70% of mpos have some land use planning responsibilities , 37% implement projects , 21% do additional environmental planning such as water quality planning , and 16% operate transit service .

although metropolitan transportation planning and mpos are supported with resources from federal , state , and local government , federal funding typically provides a majority of that support .

about 80% of mpos get a majority of planning funds from the federal government .

federal funding for metropolitan transportation planning is predominantly provided through a 1.25% deduction of federal highway funding authorized for five highway programs: im , nhs , bridge , stp , and cmaq .

these deducted funds are apportioned to each state as metropolitan planning funds based primarily on the ratio of urbanized population in a state to the total urbanized population , although every state receives at least 0.5% of the total nationwide apportionment .

federal metropolitan planning funds apportioned to a state are distributed to individual mpos based on a formula developed by the state in consultation with the mpos and approved by fhwa .

in addition to planning funds apportioned in this way , nhs , stp , and equity bonus ( eb ) funds may be used for planning activities .

federal transit funds are also available for metropolitan planning ( section 5303 funds ) .

mpos are required to match federal funds with 20% of funds from state and local sources .

for fy2009 , nearly $400 million in federal funds were apportioned for metropolitan planning , with about $304 million from federal highway funds and $94 million from federal transit funds .

federal funds apportioned for metropolitan transportation planning since 2000 can be seen in figure 1 .

since the first federal requirements for urban transportation planning in the early 1960s and for mpos in the early 1970s , congress has modified and generally strengthened the metropolitan transportation planning process and the role of mpos .

arguably , the biggest changes date to the enactment of the istea and the requirements of the clean air act amendments of 1990 ( caaa ; p.l .

101-549 ) .

among other changes , istea brought in the requirements for a fiscally constrained tip , suballocated funds to urbanized areas , funding to air quality non - attainment and maintenance areas through cmaq , and , in concert with the caaa , made air quality an important goal of metropolitan planning .

istea also increased the amount of federal planning funds provided to mpos .

subsequent surface transportation reauthorization legislation , the transportation equity act for the 21 st century , as amended , enacted in 1998 ( tea - 21 ; p.l .

105-178 ; p.l .

105-206 ) and safetea , enacted in 2005 , reaffirmed these changes with some modifications .

with the initial expiration of safetea at the end of fy2009 , the role of mpos is once again being debated in congress in the context of reauthorizing the federal surface transportation programs .

there appear to be five major issues that congress may consider in this debate: ( 1 ) the authority of mpos relative to state dots to plan and program funds ; ( 2 ) representation and participation in mpos ; ( 3 ) mpo funding and technical capacity ; ( 4 ) mpos and the implementation of livability / sustainability initiatives ; and ( 5 ) other issues with transportation planning requirements .

since the end of the second world war , america has experienced what one historian calls a "metropolitan revolution," in which the economy and culture of tightly drawn regions of urban and suburban development each focused on a central core "was replaced by an amorphous sprawl without a unifying hub or culture. .

according to this view , an important dimension of change has been the increasing fragmentation of metropolitan governance , as urban regions have decentralized over larger and larger areas .

for example , the metropolitan area of pittsburgh , one of the most fragmented , was estimated to have over 400 general - purpose local governments in the late 1990s .

even the phoenix metropolitan area , one of the least fragmented , was estimated to have 34 local governments .

despite the amorphousness of contemporary urban development , research suggests that there is a significant interdependence between places in a metropolitan area that bears on a region's economic efficiency and , thus , competitiveness in a national and international context .

governmental fragmentation can make it particularly difficult to deal with problems of a regional nature , such as transportation congestion , that affect metropolitan productivity .

this is because , it is argued , "planners and politicians are torn between mitigating the localized effects of regional problems and addressing the common concerns and long - range interests of their larger metropolitan areas. .

over the years there have been three main ways that regional governance in metropolitan areas has been enhanced .

the first way is through the state - granted power of annexation by which cities are able to expand into bordering developed or undeveloped unincorporated areas .

for example , between 1960 and 1990 , houston added 212 square miles to its jurisdiction , an increase of 65% .

a second way of reducing governmental fragmentation is through multijurisdictional consolidation .

this is typically done when a city consolidates with a county and the cities within it .

an example is the consolidation of the city of indianapolis and marion county that took place in 1970 .

although there has been some reduction in governmental fragmentation due to annexation of territory and consolidation of local governments , in many states , particularly in the older and more developed northeast and midwest , powers to annex and consolidate are weak .

the third main way that regional governance has been enhanced is the development of special - purpose regional bodies , the most widespread of which are mpos .

although regional authorities sit uncomfortably in the long established intergovernmental system of federal , state , and local government , strengthened mpos might offer the most likely current means of reducing the fragmentation of metropolitan governance .

this may be a primary reason why some would like to see congress significantly enhance and broaden the authority and resources of mpos now and in the future .

