exports of u.s. livestock and poultry products are important both to farmers and to the u.s. economy .

in 2009 , u.s. livestock and poultry exports were valued at more than $10 billion , accounting for about 12% of total global meat trade ( estimated at nearly $87 billion in 2009 ) .

in recent years , however , some countries have considered or implemented changes to their agricultural and trade policies that could potentially affect u.s. livestock and poultry exports .

one such change pertains to the use of antimicrobial drugs in animal production systems .

some u.s. trading partners and competitors , such as the european union ( eu ) , new zealand , and south korea , have implemented restrictions on the importation of livestock and poultry products grown with antimicrobial drugs .

in the united states , legislation has been introduced that seeks to restrict the use of certain antimicrobial drugs for subtherapeutic or nontherapeutic purposes in food - producing animals .

in the 112 th congress , h.r .

965 and s. 1211 ( preservation of antibiotics for medical treatment act of 2011 , pamta ) seek to restrict the use of certain antimicrobial drugs for subtherapeutic or nontherapeutic purposes in food - producing animals .

most u.s. livestock and poultry producers are opposed to such restrictions because of concerns about animal welfare and food safety , as well as concerns about possible increases in production costs , among other reasons .

this report is organized into three parts .

first , it provides an overview of u.s. export markets for livestock and poultry products , and highlights key u.s. foreign trading partners .

second , it discusses policies in selected foreign markets that may restrict or limit the use of antimicrobial drugs in food animal production , including imports of animal products grown with these drugs .

third , it discusses some implications of these policies for u.s. livestock and poultry exports to selected foreign markets .

world trade in livestock and poultry products totaled nearly $87 billion in 2009 , with the united states accounting for 12% ( $10.4 billion ) of all global trade ( table 1 ) .

within product categories , in 2009 , the united states supplied 31% ( $3.8 billion ) of all world trade in fresh , chilled and frozen poultry products ; about 18% ( $2.6 billion ) of all fresh , chilled and frozen beef products ; and 17% ( $3.2 billion ) of fresh , chilled and frozen pork products .

the united states also supplied about 4% ( $0.6 billion ) of all world trade in processed livestock and poultry products .

these statistics are based on country compilations of total reported imports , as reported in the global trade atlas , and do not always comport with other country statistics , such as reported u.s. export data compiled by the u.s. census bureau .

following is an overview of u.s. export markets for beef , pork , and poultry products , highlighting key u.s. foreign trading partners and recent market shares for these importing countries .

growing concerns about antimicrobial resistance have caused some u.s. trading partners and competitors , including the eu , new zealand , and south korea , to implement restrictions and prohibitions on the use of certain antimicrobials for subtherapeutic or nontherapeutic purposes in animal production .

as noted in the first section of this report , various aspects of antimicrobial use may complicate an understanding of the available information on country restrictions and policy objectives .

these include ( 1 ) the use of certain antimicrobial drugs in producing livestock and poultry for meat consumption ; ( 2 ) residues of antimicrobial drugs remaining in meat tissues , which may exceed allowable standards , tolerance levels , or maximum residue levels ; and ( 3 ) the use of certain antimicrobial washes and pathogen reduction treatments ( prts ) for treating meat during packing and processing of food products .

this report focuses on country restrictions on the use of certain antibiotics in feed for growth promotion purposes ( subtherapeutic or nontherapeutic ) in food - producing animals .

the united states has had a long - standing trade dispute with the eu regarding prts since the eu first banned the use of antimicrobial rinses or prts on poultry , effectively shutting out u.s. poultry exports .

in the united states , such treatments are approved by the federal government and are routinely used in u.s. chicken and turkey plants .

in a separate example , in 2008 and 2009 , russia has refused imports of meat products from several european countries and from several u.s. plants — including plants owned by tyson foods inc. and a unit of smithfield foods — because trace amounts of tetracycline and oxytetracycline were reportedly found in some of the pork tested .

these examples are different types of scenarios involving policies regarding antimicrobials and antibiotics in food animal production , and involve different sets of policy issues .

in june 2011 , a forum of multinational consumer organizations — the so - called trans atlantic consumer dialogue ( tacd ) — approved a resolution calling on countries to ban the non - therapeutic use of antibiotics in food animals , among other recommendations .

in its 2004 report , gao addressed the question of whether restrictions on antimicrobial use in food animals had affected u.s. trade and whether such polices might become an issue in the future .

gao stated that , according to officials of usda's fas , the office of the u.s. trade representative , the usmef , and the u.s. poultry and egg export council , "antibiotic resistance associated with use in animals has not been a significant factor affecting u.s. trade in meat products. .

gao concluded , however , that there was evidence that country restrictions on the use of these drugs could become an issue in the future and could affect u.s. export markets for livestock and poultry products .

at issue is whether increased restrictions and prohibition on the use of certain drugs in animal feed in some countries , including the eu , new zealand , and south korea , could affect or may already be affecting international trade in livestock and poultry products from countries , such as the united states , that do not actively restrict the use of these drugs for growth promotion in animal production .

at this time , it is not possible to provide a quantitative assessment of the potential trade implications of future restrictions on antimicrobial use in food animal production , for reasons outlined in the following sections .

instead , following is a discussion of two possible scenarios for the potential trade implications on u.s. livestock and poultry exports of tightened restrictions or prohibitions on the use of antimicrobial drugs in animal feed for growth promotion: scenario 1: tightened restrictions or prohibitions in key u.s. export markets , without corresponding changes in the united states on the use of antimicrobials in animal feed for growth promotion .

scenario 2: tightened restrictions or prohibitions in key u.s. export markets , with corresponding prohibitions in the united states on the use of antimicrobials in animal feed for growth promotion , which might increase meat exports from the united states .

although the potential trade flow outcomes of changes to import policies among key u.s. trading partners and export competitors regarding antimicrobial use cannot be precisely quantified or predicted , what seems clear is that existing and future policy changes in some countries could carry important implications for u.s. meat trade .

overall , policy changes restricting u.s. livestock and poultry trade could result in adverse effects on u.s. poultry and livestock producers and exporters , either with or without similar policy changes restricting use of these drugs .

a number of bills were introduced in the 111 th congress aimed at curtailing agricultural uses of medically significant antibiotics , but none was enacted .

these included bills introduced in the house and senate on march 17 , 2009 , as h.r .

1549 by representative slaughter and s. 619 by senator reid ( for senator kennedy ) .

these bills , the preservation of antibiotics for medical treatment act of 2009 ( pamta ) , were similar in title and purpose to bills introduced but not enacted in the 110 th congress ( h.r .

962 , s. 549 ) , the 109 th congress ( h.r .

2562 , s. 742 ) , the 108 th congress ( h.r .

2932 , s. 1460 ) , and the 107 th congress ( h.r .

3804 , s. 2508 ) .

top officials of the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) have weighed in on the debate by expressing support in concept for phasing out nontherapeutic ( essentially , nonmedical ) uses of antimicrobials in food animal production .

for more information , see crs report r40739 , antibiotic use in agriculture: background and legislation .

industry groups generally oppose these bills because of concerns about animal welfare and food safety , as well as concerns about possible increases in production costs , among other reasons .

some , including chairman peterson of the house agriculture committee , also continue to question whether the scientific evidence supports the claim that a reduction in antibiotic use in animal agriculture results in public health benefits .

lawmakers with important poultry and meat industry constituents are likely to monitor import policy changes regarding antimicrobial use among u.s. trading partners and competitors , as well as legislative proposals suggesting similar policy changes in the united states .

