by the end of the 1970s , congress had enacted several environmental laws to regulate sources of pollution in the united states , but had not yet addressed responsibility for contamination resulting from releases of pollutants into the environment .

in the late 1970s , the discovery of severely contaminated sites , such as "love canal" in new york and times beach in missouri , raised questions as to whether there should be a federal role in cleaning up environmental contamination to protect the public from potential harm .

congress enacted the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act of 1980 ( cercla ; p.l .

96-510 ) to authorize the federal government to clean up contaminated sites in the united states and to make the "potentially responsible parties" connected to those sites financially liable for the cleanup costs .

cercla created the superfund program to carry out these authorities .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) administers the program .

subsequent amendments to cercla also authorized epa to administer a separate grant program to support the cleanup of abandoned or idled "brownfields" properties to encourage their redevelopment .

cercla established a broad liability scheme that holds both past and current owners and operators of contaminated facilities financially responsible for the costs of cleanup .

at waste disposal sites , generators of the waste sent to the site for disposal , and transporters of the waste who selected the site for disposal , also are responsible for the cleanup costs .

if these potentially responsible parties cannot be found or cannot pay for the cleanup , cercla authorizes the federal government to finance the cleanup to ensure the protection of human health and the environment .

these costs borne by the federal government are referred to as "orphan shares. .

the broad liability scheme of cercla is intended to capture all parties that may have had some involvement in the actions that resulted in contamination of the environment , in order to minimize the burden of the costs of cleanup on the general taxpayer who had no involvement .

this approach to liability is based on the principle that polluters should be required to pay for the environmental damage that they cause , often referred to as the "polluter pays principle. .

cercla established the hazardous substance superfund trust fund to finance cleanup actions taken by the federal government at contaminated sites where the potentially responsible parties cannot pay or cannot be found .

a combination of special taxes on industry and revenues from the general fund of the u.s. treasury initially financed the superfund trust fund , but the authority to collect the industry taxes expired at the end of 1995 .

as the remaining revenues were expended over time , congress increased the contribution of general treasury revenues in an effort to make up for the shortfall from the expired industry taxes .

the availability of superfund trust fund monies to finance the cleanup of contaminated sites is subject to appropriations by congress .

considering the liability of the federal government as a potentially responsible party at its own facilities , the cleanup of federal facilities is not funded with superfund trust fund monies under the superfund program , but with other federal monies appropriated for other programs administered by the agencies responsible for these facilities .

the department of defense ( dod ) and the department of energy ( doe ) administer the cleanup of most contaminated federal facilities .

epa and the states are responsible for overseeing and enforcing the implementation of cercla at federal facilities to ensure that applicable requirements are met .

to prioritize cleanup actions , cercla directed epa to establish and maintain a national priorities list ( npl ) of the most contaminated sites in the united states which present the greatest risks to human health and the environment .

the npl includes both non - federal sites and federal facilities that are deemed to present a sufficient level of risk to warrant listing .

epa may require the potentially responsible parties to directly perform or pay for cleanup actions themselves .

alternatively , epa may clean up a contaminated site up - front with appropriated superfund monies and later recover those funds from the potentially responsible parties ( with the exception of the cleanup of federal facilities which must be funded up - front by the administering agencies ) .

in the event that the potentially responsible parties cannot pay or cannot be found , appropriated superfund monies may be used to pay the orphan shares of cleanup costs at a site , under a cost - sharing agreement with the state in which the site is located .

the following sections of this report summarize the major cleanup authorities of cercla and other relevant provisions of the act .

the topics discussed herein include the overall scope and reach of these statutory authorities , the process under which cleanup actions are selected and carried out at individual sites , the financial liability of potentially responsible parties for the costs of cleanup actions , the superfund trust fund that may pay for cleanup actions when the potentially responsible parties cannot pay or cannot be found , enforcement of cleanup liability against the potentially responsible parties to minimize the need for federal tax revenues to finance the cleanup of contaminated sites , the applicability of cercla to federal facilities , and federal assistance for the cleanup of brownfields properties .

a briefer summary of these topics is presented in crs report rl30798 , environmental laws: summaries of major statutes administered by the environmental protection agency .

it should be emphasized that how and to what degree a specific contaminant at an individual site must be cleaned up under cercla are not specified in the law itself .

the specific actions that are required to clean up contaminants at individual sites are determined on a site - by - site basis .

although cercla established a general process for making cleanup decisions , more specific direction is provided in epa regulation and agency guidance .

other federal agencies that administer the cleanup of federal facilities under cercla have developed additional guidance documents that apply to their own respective facilities .

although the statutory authorities upon which federal agencies have based their cleanup regulations and guidance are discussed in this report , the content of these regulations and guidance is not examined here .

as such , this report summarizes selected statutory provisions of cerlca , but does not discuss agency regulations and guidance that may provide more detailed direction for carrying out cleanup actions at individual sites .

congress has amended cercla on numerous occasions to clarify the applicability of the cleanup authorities of the statute , and to provide relief from liability for certain categories of parties who may not have been involved in actions that led to contamination , or who may have contributed only certain quantities or types of waste to a site .

congress also has amended the statute to authorize federal assistance for the cleanup of abandoned or idled "brownfields" properties to encourage their redevelopment .

further , certain amendments have addressed unique cleanup challenges at federal facilities , such as the cleanup of unexploded ordnance on decommissioned military training ranges in the united states , and responsibility for the cleanup of contaminated federal property when it is transferred out of federal ownership .

the superfund amendments and reauthorization act of 1986 ( sara ; p.l .

99-499 ) clarified that federal facilities are subject to the cleanup requirements of cercla to the same extent as non - federal entities , and amended various response , liability , and enforcement provisions of the law .

the 1986 amendments also renewed the authorization of appropriations for epa's superfund program through fy1991 , and established a separate defense environmental restoration program within the department of defense ( dod ) to address contamination at active and decommissioned military facilities in the united states .

title vi of the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-508 ) extended the authorization of appropriations for epa's superfund program through fy1994 , and title xi of that statute extended the authority to collect the special superfund taxes on industry through december 31 , 1995 .

although reauthorizing legislation has been introduced in various congresses , the taxing authority for the superfund trust fund has not been renewed to date , nor has the authorization of appropriations for epa's superfund program been extended .

instead , congress has continued to fund the superfund program primarily with general treasury revenues through the annual appropriations process .

congress has annually authorized and appropriated funding for the defense environmental restoration program each year since its establishment .

most of this funding is supported with general treasury revenues , with the exception of some revenues generated from the sale or lease of closed military bases which help fund their cleanup .

in 1992 , the community environmental response facilitation act ( p.l .

102-426 ) amended the federal facility provisions of cercla to facilitate the transfer of uncontaminated parcels of surplus federal property on which hazardous substances or petroleum products were not released .

section 334 of the national defense authorization act for fy1997 ( p.l .

104-201 ) further amended cercla to allow the transfer of contaminated surplus federal property before cleanup is complete , if assurances are provided to guarantee that the property will be cleaned up to a level that would be suitable for its intended use after transfer .

other amendments have attempted to address the fairness of the liability scheme of cercla , either by limiting or eliminating the liability of certain categories of parties .

in 1996 , the asset conservation , lender liability , and deposit insurance protection act ( subtitle e , title ii , division a of p.l .

104-208 ) amended cercla to protect certain fiduciaries and financial lenders from liability .

in 1999 , the superfund recycling equity act ( title vi , appendix i of p.l .

106-113 ) exempted generators and transporters of recyclable scrap materials from cleanup liability under cercla , if the person who received the materials disposed of them instead and the disposal resulted in contamination .

there had been some concern that the potential liability of generators and transporters under cercla could be a deterrent to recycling .

in 2002 , the small business liability relief and brownfields revitalization act ( p.l .

107-118 ) provided relief from cleanup liability for ( 1 ) persons who contributed very small quantities of waste or only municipal solid ( i.e .

non - hazardous ) waste to a site , ( 2 ) owners of property that became contaminated merely as a result of migration from a contiguous property owned by another person , and ( 3 ) "bona fide" prospective purchasers who otherwise may be hesitant to acquire a contaminated property because of potential cleanup liability once acquiring ownership .

the 2002 act also established more specific criteria for exempting "innocent" owners of contaminated property from cleanup liability , if they purchased the property without knowledge of the existing contamination and they had no involvement in actions that led to contamination .

as required by the statute , persons seeking an exemption from liability as a "bona fide" prospective purchaser , contiguous property owner , or "innocent" landowner must have performed "all appropriate inquiry" into the prior uses of the property before acquiring ownership , and must take "reasonable steps" after acquiring ownership to prevent potentially harmful exposure to environmental contamination .

because of these requirements , such persons still may bear some responsibility for managing contamination on their properties , even though they may be exempt from liability for more extensive cleanup actions that may be taken under cercla .

in addition to providing relief from liability for certain categories of parties , p.l .

107-118 authorized federal grants to assist in the cleanup of "brownfields" properties .

brownfields properties typically are abandoned , underutilized , or idled sites where the known or suspected presence of contamination , and the potential for cleanup liability , could be viewed as a deterrent to purchase the property for redevelopment .

brownfields properties tend to be less contaminated than sites listed on the npl , but may need some cleanup to make them suitable for reuse .

epa originally had established a program in 1993 to provide federal assistance for the cleanup of brownfields properties using the general cleanup authorities of cercla as the legal basis for this assistance .

p.l .

107-118 provided explicit statutory authority for this purpose , and established a separate brownfields grant program within epa , apart from the superfund program .

table 1 lists cercla as enacted in 1980 and the major amendments to the law noted above .

section 104 ( a ) of cercla specifically authorizes the president to respond to a release ( or substantial threat of a release ) of a hazardous substance into the environment , or of a pollutant or contaminant which may present an "imminent and substantial danger to the public health or welfare. .

as authorized by section 115 of cercla , the president delegated the response authorities of cercla to epa and other federal agencies by executive order .

epa may respond to releases on the land , and the u.s. coast guard may respond to releases into inland river ports and harbors , the great lakes , and u.s. coastal waters .

if a release were to occur at a federal facility , the agency that administers that facility is authorized to take response actions , subject to oversight and enforcement by epa and the states in which those facilities are located .

federal funding to carry out response actions under cercla is subject to appropriations by congress .

notification of a release of a hazardous substance is the action that may trigger a federal response under cercla .

section 103 ( a ) requires the party responsible for a release to notify the national response center if the quantity of the release exceeds the regulatory limit established for that particular substance .

these limits are referred to as "reportable quantities," which are specified in federal regulation .

state or local officials , or members of the public , who observe or suspect a release of a hazardous substance also may report the incident .

once a release is reported , the national response center is to notify the appropriate federal agency that would be responsible for carrying out the president's response authorities under section 104 ( a ) , and for taking any federal enforcement actions that may be necessary against the parties responsible for the release .

response actions taken under cercla most often entail cleanup activities involving the containment , removal , or treatment of environmental contamination to prevent potentially harmful exposure , but may include the temporary or permanent relocation of potentially exposed individuals if warranted .

congress has excluded certain types of environmental contamination from the response authorities of cercla , which may be addressed under other federal environmental laws .

these exclusions are provided within the statutory definitions of key terms upon which the response authorities of cercla hinge , including the terms "hazardous substance," "pollutant or contaminant," and "release. .

in addition to these exclusions , congress has placed general limitations on the extent to which response actions may be taken under cercla to address releases of hazardous substances , pollutants , or contaminants in certain situations .

in effect , these exclusions and limitations may restrict the applicability or scope of the response authorities of cercla at a particular contaminated site .

section 121 ( a ) of cercla generally requires response actions at contaminated sites to achieve acceptable levels of exposure that would be protective of human health and the environment .

response actions also are to be cost - effective over both the short term and long term , including the operation and maintenance of the action .

section 121 ( b ) states a preference for the selection of remedial actions that involve treatment to "permanently and significantly" reduce the "volume , toxicity or mobility" of contamination , as opposed to actions that do not involve such treatment .

actions not involving treatment often entail the containment of wastes on - site , or the removal and disposal of wastes off - site .

the containment of wastes on - site could present lingering health and environmental risks if the containment method were to fail over time .

if the remedial action would result in wastes being left on - site , section 121 ( c ) requires the president to review the performance of the remedial action every five years to determine whether that action continues to be protective of human health and the environment .

if the action is not functioning as intended , the president may take additional remedial actions at the site to achieve the cleanup goal .

although section 121 includes certain requirements to govern the selection of remedial actions , it does not specify how clean an individual site must be to protect human health and the environment .

section 121 also does not identify the specific nature of the remedial actions that would be required to attain a cleanup goal at an individual site .

instead , these cleanup decisions are made on a site - by - site basis taking many factors into consideration , including the potential for human exposure based on the anticipated land use , and the technical and economic feasibility of cleanup alternatives to prevent exposure .

section 104 ( i ) of cercla established the agency for toxic substances and disease registry ( atsdr ) primarily to assess potential health risks at npl sites .

the atsdr assesses individual sites based on the likelihood of human exposure to contamination through the air , soil , surface water , groundwater , and other pathways such as consumption of contaminated food sources .

the purpose of these assessments is two - fold: to inform the public of potential health hazards at a contaminated site , and to aid decision - makers in evaluating what cleanup actions may be warranted to prevent potentially harmful exposure .

although the findings of the atsdr may be used to inform the selection of cleanup actions , the agency does not have any authority to dictate cleanup decisions .

in addition to site - specific assessments , section 104 ( i ) directs the atsdr to prepare toxicological profiles of hazardous substances commonly found at npl sites to identify potential health effects that can result from exposure .

section 104 ( i ) of cercla also authorizes the atsdr to carry out several other functions intended to protect public health .

for example , the agency is authorized to provide medical care and testing to individuals in the event of a public health emergency caused by , or believed to be caused by , exposure to toxic substances .

cercla does not provide any criteria as to what constitutes a public health emergency for this purpose , presumably leaving the declaration of such an emergency to the discretion of the atsdr .

as with other roles , the resources of the agency to fulfill this role are subject to appropriations by congress .

to date , the atsdr has not used its authority under cercla to declare a public health emergency .

in practice , the agency's role has focused on educating the public about known health risks from exposure to hazardous substances , and assessing potential risks at individual sites to aid in informing cleanup decisions .

section 107 of cercla identifies the categories of potentially responsible parties connected with a contaminated site who are liable for the costs of response actions that epa deems necessary to protect human health and the environment .

such parties also are liable for damages for injury to , destruction of , or loss of natural resources resulting from a release of a hazardous substance , including the costs of assessing such injury , destruction , or loss ; and the costs of public health assessments carried out by the atsdr under section 104 ( i ) of cercla .

the following sections discuss the categories of parties who are liable under section 107 of cercla , the reach of liability , defenses to liability , and limitations on the liability of certain categories of parties .

cercla established the hazardous substance superfund trust fund to provide a source of funds for the federal government to finance the cleanup of contaminated sites where the potentially responsible parties cannot pay or cannot be identified .

this assumption of financial responsibility for these "orphan shares" of cleanup costs is intended to ensure that the actions necessary to protect human health and the environment are carried out .

the availability of superfund trust fund monies to pay for the cleanup of orphaned sites is subject to appropriations by congress .

once appropriated , the availability of superfund monies under epa's superfund program to pay for remedial actions is further subject to cost - sharing agreements with the states in which the sites are located , as discussed in the " state participation " section of this report .

there are three mechanisms through which the federal government can take actions to enforce cleanup liability under cercla , if the potentially responsible parties can be identified and have the financial capability to pay .

these mechanisms include judicial or administrative orders , cost - recovery actions , and voluntary settlement agreements .

like the response authorities of cercla , these enforcement authorities are presidential authorities .

as discussed earlier in this report , a 1987 executive order delegated the president's response authorities under cercla to epa and other federal agencies .

this order also delegated the enforcement of the statute to epa at sites on the land , and to the u.s. coast guard within inland river ports and harbors , the great lakes , and u.s. coastal waters .

references in this report to the enforcement authorities of epa apply equally to the u.s. coast guard within its delegated jurisdiction .

cercla also authorizes citizen suits to enforce the cleanup requirements of cercla , but a cleanup action first must be completed before compliance with applicable requirements can be challenged .

each of these enforcement mechanisms is discussed below .

after cercla was enacted in 1980 , questions arose as to whether congress intended federal facilities to be subject to the cleanup authorities and liability provisions of the statute to the same extent as non - federal facilities .

as originally enacted , section 101 ( 21 ) of cercla defined the term "person" for the purposes of the statute to include the federal government , meaning that the reference to persons who may be held liable under section 107 may include the federal government .

however , the original enactment of the law did not otherwise explicitly address the liability of federal agencies , nor the applicability of other provisions of the statute to federal agencies .

section 120 of the superfund amendments and reauthorization act of 1986 added section 120 to cercla to clarify that federal departments and agencies are subject to the requirements of cercla to the same extent as other entities , including the liability and enforcement provisions of the law .

to comply with cercla , the federal agency with administrative jurisdiction over a federal facility is responsible for performing and paying for the cleanup of contamination out of its own budget , subject to appropriations by congress .

section 111 ( e ) of cercla explicitly prohibits the use of superfund trust fund monies to clean up federal facilities , as these monies are dedicated to paying for the cleanup of sites where the potentially responsible parties cannot be identified or cannot pay .

however , section 111 ( e ) ( 3 ) does allow the use of superfund trust fund monies at an individual federal facility to provide alternative water supplies , if groundwater contamination has migrated beyond the boundary of that facility , and there are other potentially responsible parties connected to that facility in addition to the united states .

in all other instances , superfund trust fund monies are not available for the cleanup of federal facilities .

congress appropriates funding to various accounts of federal agencies to pay for the performance of the cleanup of federal facilities .

these funds generally are intended to fulfill the liability of the united states as the owner or operator of these facilities .

however , these accounts do not constitute a cleanup liability fund in a broader sense .

the funds are authorized to pay for the performance of the cleanup of the federal government's own facilities by federal agencies .

however , the funds are not explicitly authorized to pay cleanup cost - recovery or contribution claims that may be submitted to the united states by other parties , either at federal facilities or at non - federal sites where a federal agency may be held liable as a generator or transporter of wastes sent to a site for disposal .

the judgment fund of the u.s. treasury has been the source of payments for cleanup claims submitted to the united states to satisfy the federal share of liability under cercla , and compromise settlements for such claims .

by statute , the judgment fund is a permanent , indefinite appropriation that is intended to pay monetary claims against the united states , which are not otherwise provided by congress through separate appropriations .

epa and the states play a role in overseeing and enforcing the implementation of cercla at federal facilities , although the agencies that administer these facilities actually fund their cleanup .

section 120 ( e ) of the law requires epa to take the lead in overseeing the cleanup of federal facilities listed on the npl , but section 120 ( f ) allows states and local governments to participate in cleanup decisions .

the states play a more prominent role in overseeing the cleanup of federal facilities not listed on the npl .

while cercla authorizes epa and the states to oversee the cleanup of federal facilities , certain provisions of the law can limit their ability to direct or dictate how the cleanup process may be carried out .

as discussed below , cercla gives epa decision - making authority to select remedial actions at federal facilities listed on the npl , but does not explicitly authorize epa to direct the schedule of performing those actions , nor how those actions are to be operated and maintained over the long term to ensure their performance .

further , epa's enforcement of cleanup requirements at federal facilities through court actions is complicated by the limited ability of one federal agency to sue another .

with respect to states , cercla requires the opportunity to be involved in cleanup decisions , but does not give states any decision - making authority .

in practice , these limitations may restrict the extent to which epa and the states may oversee the cleanup of federal facilities , even though section 120 of cercla specifically requires federal facilities to comply with the requirements of the statute to the same extent as other entities .

in 1993 , epa established an element within the superfund program to assist communities with the cleanup of certain lower risk sites that did not warrant placement on the npl , but at which cleanup was desired to encourage economic redevelopment .

the purpose of the program was to provide federal financial assistance for the cleanup of properties referred to as "brownfields. .

these properties typically are abandoned , idled , or underutilized , and on which known or suspected contamination is perceived as a deterrent to redevelopment by prospective purchasers who may be hesitant about becoming liable for cleanup once acquiring ownership .

epa initially used superfund appropriations to provide "seed monies" to communities in the form of grants and loans to aid them in financing certain types of cleanup actions .

although there was broad support for this effort , some questioned epa's authority under cercla to use superfund monies for the cleanup of these lower risk sites that were not listed on the npl and that did not appear to warrant emergency removal actions under the superfund program .

still , in the annual appropriations process , congress set aside funding for brownfields cleanup assistance within the superfund account for several years without specifically amending cercla for this purpose .

in the 107 th congress , subtitle a and subtitle c of title ii of the small business liability relief and brownfields revitalization act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-118 , hereinafter referred to as the "brownfields act" ) amended cercla to provide explicit statutory authority for epa to administer a brownfields program separately from the superfund program .

the brownfields act authorized appropriations for this new program apart from appropriations for the superfund account .

there had been some concern about the diversion of superfund appropriations away from addressing the greater human health and environmental risks at npl sites .

still , the portion of superfund appropriations that had been spent on the cleanup of brownfields properties was relatively small compared to the total appropriation .

the program explicitly authorized in the brownfields act is similar in scope to the program that epa had established in 1993 , with the exception that the brownfields act allowed federal financial assistance for the cleanup of contamination resulting from releases of petroleum .

as discussed earlier in the " federal response authorities " section of this report , cercla otherwise does not apply to the cleanup of petroleum .

the brownfields act also created two separate types of grants within the brownfields program .

one provides more direct financial assistance for the assessment and cleanup of individual properties .

the other provides financial assistance to states and indian tribes to aid them in carrying out their own cleanup programs , which in turn may assist in the cleanup of individual properties .

specifically , section 201 of the brownfields act amended section 104 of cercla to add a new subsection ( k ) that authorized $200 million annually for grants to fund the assessment and cleanup of individual brownfields properties .

entities generally eligible for these grants include state and local governments , indian tribes , redevelopment agencies chartered or otherwise sanctioned by a state government , and land clearance authorities or other "quasi - governmental" entities operating under the supervision and control , or as an agent , of a local government .

the grants are awarded on a competitive basis .

the recipients may use the grant funds to characterize , assess , or remediate brownfields properties , or to capitalize revolving loan funds that in turn may finance the remediation of multiple brownfields properties by other entities , including loans issued to site owners or developers .

section 231 of the act also added section 128 to cercla , authorizing an additional $50 million annually for other grants to assist states and indian tribes in establishing or enhancing their own cleanup programs .

states and tribes may use these monies to augment their own resources to assist with the cleanup of brownfields properties to prepare them for reuse .

they also may use these monies to pursue the cleanup of other contaminated sites within their respective jurisdictions , which may present potential health or environmental risks but are not addressed under the federal superfund program .

the authorization of appropriations for both the section 104 ( k ) and section 128 grants expired at the end of fy2006 , but congress has continued to fund these grants through the annual appropriations process without enacting reauthorizing legislation .

as discussed earlier in the " limitations on liability " section of this report , section 222 of the brownfields act exempted "bona fide" prospective purchasers of contaminated properties from liability under cercla , if they satisfy the prerequisite statutory criteria .

this exemption is intended to work in tandem with federal grants assistance under the brownfields program to further the purpose of stimulating the economic redevelopment of contaminated properties .

accordingly , section 104 ( k ) ( 4 ) ( b ) ( iii ) of cercla specifically authorizes the eligibility of bona fide prospective purchasers for brownfields grants .

if a party cannot qualify for this exemption , or another exemption from liability , that party is not eligible to receive a brownfields grant .

this statutory prohibition on awarding brownfields grants to potentially responsible parties is consistent with the policy premise of the liability scheme of cercla to hold the potentially responsible parties responsible for the costs of cleanup , so as to minimize the burden of these costs on the federal taxpayer who had no connection with the site .

congress also has enacted certain tax incentives to encourage the cleanup of brownfields properties , through amendments to the internal revenue code but not cercla itself .

these incentives have constituted another form of federal financial assistance to support the cleanup of contaminated sites .

section 941 ( a ) of the taxpayer relief act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-34 ) allowed a taxpayer to fully deduct the costs of cleaning up a brownfields property in the year the costs were incurred .

this type of deduction is referred to as "expensing," as opposed to "capitalizing" in which the costs would be deducted over a period of years .

the tax incentive was intended to encourage property developers to rehabilitate sites where environmental contamination may be a deterrent to bringing nonproductive properties back into use .

the tax deduction has no direct application for public sector entities , such as municipalities , which do not pay income taxes .

enacted in the 111 th congress , section 745 of the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 , title vii , subtitle c ) extended this brownfields tax incentive through december 31 , 2011 .

congress also had authorized another federal brownfields tax incentive in section 702 of the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-357 , title vii ) , which expired on december 31 , 2009 .

this incentive addressed the treatment of gain or loss on the sale or exchange of certain qualified brownfields sites , as defined in section 101 ( 39 ) of cercla .

this provision allowed a tax - exempt entity to invest in a qualified brownfields site , and not treat the gains as taxable "unrelated business income. .

to be eligible for this tax incentive , the entity must have incurred cleanup costs exceeding the greater of $550,000 , or 12% of the property's fair market value in a remediated condition , in addition to meeting certain other requirements .

the tax incentive was not available to parties who are potentially liable for the cleanup under section 107 of cercla .

