initially , this report was written in anticipation of a possible strike by national football league ( nfl ) players , or a possible lockout by the nfl , in 2011 .

at that time , developments in professional football's labor - management relations had prompted questions regarding how , when , and in what manner a new collective bargaining agreement ( cba ) might be drafted .

interest in this matter included , on the part of some observers , questions about how congress responded to previous work stoppages in professional sports .

this report examines congressional activity related to the three most recent national football league ( nfl ) work stoppages , which occurred in 1982 , 1987 , and 2011 , and the 1994 major league baseball ( mlb ) strike .

although the latter strike involved another professional sports league , it is potentially instructive given the extent of congressional activity surrounding the 1994 strike .

on september 20 , 1982 , nfl players voted to strike after negotiations for a new collective bargaining agreement broke down .

the previous cba had expired on july 15 , 1982 .

initially , the nfl players association ( nflpa ) sought 55% of the owners' gross revenues .

the nfl rejected the players association's demands and offered to share $1.6 billion with the nflpa over five years .

the dispute was resolved when the players association accepted the owners' offer to share $1.28 billion over five years and to provide $60 million to the union to compensate players for salaries not paid during the strike .

the season resumed on november 21 , 1982 .

on december 5 , 1982 , the players association and the owners signed a new five - year cba .

after the strike was resolved , the season resumed with a seven - game regular season schedule and an expanded playoff bracket , which culminated in super bowl xvi on january 30 , 1983 .

the 1982 cba expired on august 31 , 1987 , and shortly thereafter negotiations broke down between the nflpa and the nfl over the issue of free agency and other matters .

the union voted to strike on september 22 , 1987 .

the owners cancelled the games scheduled for september 26 and september 27 , 1987 , while announcing their intention to resume the season on october 4 , 1987 , with replacement players .

nfl players who did not share the union's concerns regarding free agency , or who needed the money , played alongside the replacement players .

the striking players voted to return to work on october 15 , 1987 , even though there was no cba .

team owners , however , banned players who had not agreed to return to work by the owner - imposed deadline of october 14 , 1987 , from participating in that week's scheduled games .

thus , striking players who did not return to their teams until after the nflpa vote lost an additional week of pay .

replacement players were released as the regular players returned to their jobs .

the 1987-1988 season concluded on january 31 , 1988 , when the super bowl was held at jack murphy stadium in san diego .

unable to reach an agreement with the owners on a new cba in summer 1994 , major league players voted , on august 12 , 1994 , to strike .

approximately one month later , on september 14 , 1994 , major league baseball cancelled the remainder of the season .

the decisions to strike and to cancel the season followed several months of negotiations over a number of issues , including baseball's revenue sharing plan .

beginning in fall 1994 , the clinton administration attempted to facilitate negotiations between the parties .

the work stoppage ended in early 1995 following then - u.s. district court judge sonia sotomayor's issuance of an injunction that had been "requested by the national labor relations board ordering baseball owners to restore bidding on free agents , a resumption and salary arbitration and the anti - collusion rules which were a part" of the cba that had expired the previous year .

shortly after judge sotomayor issued the injunction , which occurred on march 31 , 1995 , major league baseball owners "accepted the players' offer to return to work. .

although the commencement of the 1995 season was delayed , beginning on april 26 instead of april 3 , which was the original opening day , the season was played without interruption and the postseason concluded with the world series .

the national football league's previous collective bargaining agreement took effect on march 8 , 2006 , and was to expire on the "last day of the 2012 league year. .

as described in the following excerpt from the cba , however , either party to the agreement could opt to terminate it prior to the established expiration date: section 3 .

termination prior to expiration date: ( a ) either the nflpa [nfl players association] or the management council may terminate both of the final two capped years ( 2010 and 2011 ) by giving written notice to the other on or before november 8 , 2008 .

in that event , the 2010 league year would be the final league year , and the agreement would continue in full force and effect until the last day of that league year , except for the provisions related to the draft , which would expire as prescribed in article xvi , section 1 [of the cba] .

in may 2008 , nfl team owners voted unanimously to opt out of the cba and negotiate a new agreement for the 2011 season and subsequent seasons .

following unsuccessful efforts by the league and the union to negotiate a new agreement , both parties accepted , in february 2011 , an invitation from the director of the federal mediation and conciliation service ( fmcs ) to mediate their dispute .

seventeen days of mediation took place , between february 17 and march 11 , under the auspices of the fmcs .

on march 11 , the fmcs issued a press release stating that the agency's director and deputy director had determined that "no useful purpose would be served by requesting the parties to continue the mediation process at this time. .

on march 11 , the nflpa notified the nfl that it had "decertified," and the following day the nfl announced that it was imposing a lockout .

following additional negotiations , the nfl and nflpa announced , at a joint press conference on july 25 , 2011 , that the two parties had reached an agreement .

during that same week , team facilities were opened to players and training camp began .

the first preseason games are scheduled for august 11-15 .

as measured by the number of legislative measures introduced and hearings held , and as shown in table 9 , congress was most active during the 1994 strike .

the 232-day baseball strike lasted much longer than the two nfl strikes and included the loss of the 1994 world series .

the 1982 and 1987 strikes were relatively short by comparison , lasting 57 days and 24 days , respectively .

although the 1987 strike involved the use of replacement players for several games during the regular season , the season was capped by the super bowl .

the 1982 super bowl also was held .

table 10 organizes the legislative measures according to the method proposed for resolving the dispute .

s. 3003 ( 97 th congress ) is included in two columns ( impose binding arbitration and require league and players to resume activities ) because it included two noteworthy provisions .

three methods were proposed for ending the 1982 or 1987 nfl strikes — impose binding arbitration , encourage the parties to reconcile their differences , or require the league and players to resume normal activities ( that is , resume playing games ) .

neither of the latter two options was proposed for baseball .

major league baseball enjoys a unique status as the only professional sport in the united states that has a broad antitrust exemption , and 15 legislative measures targeted the exemption , attempting to eliminate or modify it .

four measures were introduced that would have imposed binding arbitration on baseball ; two measures would have established a commission to oversee baseball ; and one measure would have amended the sports broadcasting act regarding professional baseball .

the following table shows the disposition of the legislative measures introduced or offered in response to the 1982 nfl strike , the 1987 nfl strike , the 1994 mlb strike , and the 2011 nfl lockout .

among the 26 legislative measures introduced , the only one that was approved was s.res .

294 ( 100 th congress ) , which encouraged nfl players and management to return to the bargaining table .

four bills , all related to the 1994 baseball strike , were placed on a senate or house calendar .

the one amendment ( s.amdt .

2601 to h.r .

4649 ( 103 rd congress ) ) that was offered was withdrawn .

most of the measures ( 20 ) were not reported by committee .

appendix a .

summary of nfl labor history appendix b .

sports and labor - management relations the national labor relations act ( nlra ) governs labor - management relations in the private sector and applies generally to professional sports employers .

under the nlra , employers and unions are required to bargain in good faith with respect to wages , hours , and other terms and conditions of employment .

employers and unions are required to bargain over these mandatory subjects of bargaining to the point of impasse .

the nlra does not obligate either party , however , to agree to a proposal or to make a concession .

in fact , collective bargaining presupposes the availability of certain economic weapons as part of the negotiating process .

for example , employees are permitted to strike if collective bargaining fails to achieve higher wages or improved working conditions .

similarly , during certain work stoppages , an employer may use replacement workers to continue the operation of its business .

although the nlra contemplates possible strikes by employees , it does provide for mediation and conciliation services to settle certain disputes .

the nlra authorizes the federal mediation and conciliation service ( fmcs ) to provide mediation and conciliation services upon its own motion or upon the request of one or more of the parties to a dispute whenever "in its judgment such dispute threatens to cause a substantial interruption of commerce. .

the fmcs is directed , however , to avoid mediating disputes that would have only a minor effect on interstate commerce , if state or other conciliation services are available to the parties .

where the fmcs is involved in a dispute , it is limited to providing only mediation and conciliation services , and may not issue a binding arbitration decision .

as noted earlier in this report , numerous measures were introduced in congress in 1982 and 1994 to prescribe binding arbitration to resolve the nfl and mlb strikes .

in general , these measures would have established a board or panel to take testimony , conduct hearings , and review relevant books and records .

the board or panel would then consider various factors in conjunction with the information it received before rendering a final decision or agreement that would bind the parties and replace the expired collective bargaining agreement .

some of the factors that would have been considered include the history of collective bargaining agreements between the parties , the changes in circumstances of the parties , and an owner's ability to pay .

unlike recent legislation , such as the employee free choice act , that would have amended the nlra to prescribe binding arbitration if certain conditions are not met in any private labor negotiation , many of the nfl and mlb measures would have established a panel or board to resolve a specific strike .

it appears that the panel or board would have ceased to operate once a decision was reached .

arbitration is often favored by disputing parties because it allows generally for the selection of arbitrators who have expertise in the industry in which the dispute arises .

unlike judges who may or may not be familiar with certain industry concepts , arbitrators may be people who have worked as officials or regulators in the relevant community .

indeed , at least one of the mlb measures would have established an arbitration board consisting of one representative of the owners of major league baseball selected by the owners , one representative of the major league baseball player's association selected by the association , and a third individual selected in accordance with the procedures of the american arbitration association or procedures otherwise agreed to by the parties .

supporters of arbitration have also maintained that it provides for faster dispute resolution because it is not subject generally to the rules and procedures that exist with litigation .

increasingly , however , the use of lawyers is becoming more common in arbitration .

consequently , whether arbitration is really a cost - effective alternative to litigation has been questioned .

it has also been noted that arbitration fees may be costly .

appendix c. antitrust exemptions applicable to professional sports there is one statutory exemption from the antitrust laws applicable generally to professional sports , the sports broadcasting act , and two non - statutory exemptions: the so - called "baseball antitrust exemption" describes the fact that major league baseball , alone among professional sports , is not covered by the antitrust laws ; the judicially created labor - antitrust exemption is utilized by all professional sports leagues inasmuch as it is applicable to the collective bargaining agreements between players and their teams .

each will be briefly summarized in the following paragraphs , after which an element in many , if not most , professional team - sports contracts — the "reserve" clause — will be noted and briefly discussed .

finally , there will be a short section on the 1998 congressional attempt to limit the "baseball antitrust exemption. .

further , or more specific , information may be obtained directly from the author ( s ) .

sports broadcasting act ( sba ) the sba's five sections include the following: the first section of the act ( 15 u.s.c .

§1291 ) authorizes professional sports teams ( including football teams ) to pool , by "joint agreement," their broadcasting ( "sponsored telecasting" ) rights in their games in order that their leagues may sell or transfer those rights ; and specifically makes the federal antitrust laws inapplicable to such joint agreements and sales or transfers .

 ( in 1988 , the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit ruled that the provision does not limit the antitrust exemption to a single , pooled - rights contract with a single television network. ) .

15 u.s.c .

section 1292 clarifies that the antitrust exemption granted in section 1291 does not apply to contracts for the sale of telecasting rights that seek to limit the buyer's right to telecast games into any territory , except that a league may prohibit the telecasting of games into the home territory of any team when that team is playing a home game .

the other three sections of the sba ( 1 ) carve out friday evenings ( after 6 o'clock ) and all day saturdays between the second friday in september and the second saturday in december for high school and college games by specifically noting that the antitrust exemption provided in section 1291 does not apply to contracts that permit the telecasts of professional games during those times if the high school or college games were announced prior to august 1 of the applicable year as "regularly scheduled for such day and place" ( §1293 ) ; ( 2 ) clarify that with the exception of the exemption granted in section 1291 , the applicability of the antitrust laws to "organized professional team sports" remains unchanged ( §1294 ) ; and ( 3 ) define "persons" as meaning individuals , partnerships , corporations , or "unincorporated association[s] or any combination" of them ( §1295 ) .

"baseball antitrust exemption" the so - called "baseball antitrust exemption" — a convenient and much - used shorthand phrase — is , technically , not accurate because it implies positive action by congress to grant an exemption .

in fact , the "exemption" is the result of an historical accident: the first case to come before the supreme court alleging a violation of the antitrust laws occurred prior to the supreme court's expansive interpretation of the commerce clause .

in that case , the court held that the business of putting on "exhibitions of baseball" could not be considered commerce for purposes of federal antitrust jurisdiction ; and although the court has had several opportunities to reverse its position that the antitrust laws are not applicable to professional baseball , it has never done so , preferring that the change be made specifically by congress .

while the fact of an antitrust exemption for professional baseball has been recognized since 1922 , the extent and scope of that exemption , however , has been the subject of some lower court discussion .

at least one court has interpreted the supreme court's holdings and language as limiting the exemption to baseball's "reserve system," noted , infra , pursuant to which player movement from team to team may be restrained .

labor - antitrust exemption the judicially created labor - antitrust exemption holds that congress's desire to foster collective bargaining is best furthered by permitting employees who wish to jointly negotiate the terms of their employment contracts to do so without fear of violating the antitrust laws .

the exemption is not completely open - ended , however , specifying that the practices negotiated must ( 1 ) inherently constitute mandatory subjects of collective bargaining ( i.e. , be bona fide terms or conditions of employment ) ; ( 2 ) be no more restrictive than necessary to realize the goal ( s ) it / they purport ( s ) to achieve ; and ( 3 ) be embodied in a valid , genuinely negotiated ( i.e. , arm's - length ) collective bargaining agreement .

in addition , some courts have indicated that another factor to be evaluated is whether the restraint embodied in the agreement affects only or primarily the parties to the agreement ( as opposed to competitors of either ) .

if the labor - antitrust doctrine is applicable , it covers the management as well as labor parties to a collective bargaining agreement .

as the supreme court explained in connell construction co. v. plumbers & steamfitters local union no .

100 , the nonstatutory exemption has its source in the strong labor policy favoring the association of employees to eliminate competition over wages and working conditions .

union success in organizing workers and standardizing wages ultimately will affect price competition among employers , but the goals of federal labor law could never be achieved if this effect on business competition were held a violation of the antitrust laws .

the court therefore has acknowledged that labor policy requires tolerance for the lessening of business competition based on differences in wages and working conditions .

the "reserve" clause in professional sports ; congress's attempt to address the issue in the context of the "baseball antitrust exemption" under most circumstances , the value of an offered service ( eg , the services of a professional athlete ) would be determined by the market .

prospective buyers of that service would bid on it and bargain with the seller , who , if he has an especially unique or valuable commodity to sell , would profit from his ability to exploit the competition among potential buyers .

once a professional athlete is under contract to a sports team , however , the "reserve" clause in professional sports prohibits that interplay among market participants by , in essence , binding the athlete to the team that has him under contract — at least in the year following the contract's expiration .

the argument that "the restriction of competition for players' services is not a type of restraint proscribed by the sherman act" has been made and rejected .

but that same court would not dismiss the utility of the nfl's "rozelle" rule , noting that the "'ostensible purposes' of the rule are to maintain competitive balance among … teams and protect the clubs' investment in scouting , selecting and developing players. .

even the district court hearing the relatively recent challenge to baseball's "reserve" clause observed: clearly the preponderance of credible proof does not favor elimination of the reserve clause .

with the sole exception of plaintiff [curt flood] himself , it shows that even plaintiff's witnesses do not contend that it is wholly undesirable ; in fact they regard substantial portions meritorious .

thus , the various "reserve" clauses have not been struck down completely ; they have , however , been modified to conform to judicial criticism of their enforcement and / or lack of bona fide bargaining — most "reserve" clauses are simply imported from the leagues' constitutions and bylaws and inserted in their standard player contracts .

in the years after the supreme court's flood decision refusing to alter or remove baseball's antitrust exemption , congress had made several attempts to act on the court's invitation in that case to correct the historical accident of baseball's antitrust exemption , but none was successful until the passage of the curt flood act by the 105 th congress .

the curt flood act is applicable to major league baseball players , clarifying that they are covered by the antitrust laws in transactions concerning their employment to the same extent as are other professional athletes .

among the issues specifically not covered or affected ( in addition to employment relations with minor league players ) is "the agreement [known as the 'professional baseball agreement'] between organized professional major league baseball teams and the national association of professional baseball leagues. .

we are not aware of any litigation brought pursuant to the curt flood act: although the act does get major league professional baseball players past the courthouse door by denying their employers the "we're - not - covered - by - the - antitrust - laws - so - this - case - must - be - dismissed" argument , as the foregoing material has indicated .

once in court many professional athletes have been frustrated in their attempts to challenge practices they consider onerous if those practices are embodied in valid collective bargaining agreements .

the curt flood act neither prevents the courts from recognizing the nonstatutory labor - antitrust exemption , nor provides guidance on the interpretation of that exemption .

