congress relies on two formal means of resolving differences on house and senate versions of legislation: conference committees and amendments between the houses .

conference committees can be created by the house and senate after each chamber has disagreed to the position of the other .

the house and senate presiding officers then each appoint conferees , largely drawn from the committees with jurisdiction over the bill , to represent the chamber in conference committee negotiations .

conference committees develop and present compromise legislation , in the form of a conference report , for approval in each chamber .

historically , conference committees have been used to resolve differences on major bills , where policy issues are complex and differences between the chambers are likely to be greater .

the process of exchanging amendments between the houses is more often used when differences between the chambers are comparatively small , although sometimes the chambers use it to resolve their differences on major legislation as well .

in recent congresses , the use of conference committees to resolve differences has decreased .

regardless of the formal parliamentary mechanism chosen , in the contemporary congress the chambers generally arrive at a resolution of the substantive differences between house and senate versions of a measure through informal , bicameral discussions that might resemble conference committee negotiations even though neither house has officially appointed conferees to consult over a bill .

once the interested legislators have negotiated an acceptable compromise through these discussions , the compromise can then be embodied in an amendment between the houses or , if conferees have been formally appointed , in a conference report .

the difference between amendments between the houses and a conference committee is not necessarily in the way a policy compromise is reached but in the formal parliamentary steps taken after the principal negotiators have agreed to a compromise .

the purpose of this report is to explain the procedural options for resolving differences through amendments between the houses , and to discuss the procedural effects of resolving differences through this process as an alternative to a conference committee .

throughout the report , the phrase "amendment exchange" is sometimes used as an alternative to the longer but formal name of "amendments between the houses. .

the report is arranged to identify legislative options at each stage of the amendment exchange process , first for the senate and then for the house .

for each chamber , key procedural differences between amendments between the houses and conference committee are also discussed and then listed in table 1 ( senate ) and table 2 ( house ) .

the answers to frequently asked questions are highlighted throughout the report in separate , shaded text boxes .

the final section of the report describes a particularly complicated case of amendment exchange from the 110 th congress to illustrate a variety of actions the chambers might take .

the house and senate must agree to the same legislative language in the same legislative vehicle before the bill can be presented to the president .

the same legislative vehicle means the same numbered bill or resolution ; lawmaking measures that originate in the senate carry the designation s. ( bill ) or s.j.res .

 ( joint resolution ) ; measures that originate in the house are designated h.r .

 ( bill ) or h.j.res .

 ( joint resolution ) .

only one legislative vehicle , with either a senate or house designation , is sent to the president .

after one chamber passes a bill , it sends it to the other chamber .

the receiving chamber then typically refers the measure to committee in the same way that measures introduced in that chamber are referred .

there is no requirement that one chamber act on a measure approved by the other chamber , and in each congress many measures are approved only by the originating chamber .

in order for a measure to become law , however , the house and senate must pass the same vehicle with the same text .

if one chamber passes a bill and the other chamber agrees to it without amendment , then the legislative process is complete , and the bill is sent to the president .

this is extremely common ; more than three - quarters of all legislation that became law in recent congresses passed the second - acting chamber without amendment .

many of these measures that pass this way are salient to relatively few members of congress , such as bills naming post offices or other federal buildings .

when major legislation is passed without amendment by the second - acting chamber , it usually reflects extensive negotiations between the chambers prior to the passage of the bill in either chamber .

in other words , interested members from the relevant committees and their staff consult beforehand to ensure that the bill that passes the first - acting chamber will be acceptable , without change , to the second - acting chamber .

most major legislation is not passed by the second - acting chamber without amendment , however .

in addition , on major policy topics , it is common for both the house and senate to initiate legislation , such that there is often both a senate bill ( s.___ ) and a house bill ( h.r.___ ) introduced on a topic .

the requirement that the house and senate act on the same bill with the identical text means that in this situation the house and senate must ( 1 ) select a single measure — either the house or senate bill — on which they will both act ; and ( 2 ) agree on the same legislative language .

when the house amends a bill that has already passed the senate , it sends the bill and its amendment ( s ) back to the senate accompanied by a written document that describes what is being transmitted .

this document is a message to the senate , and sometimes the senate uses the term message to refer to the amendment ( s ) received from the house .

the senate will generally hold house amendments at the desk for action by the full senate , rather than refer them to committee .

nothing in senate rules requires that the senate consider the house amendments it receives .

however , if the senate wishes to act further on that particular bill or resolution , it must take some action on the house amendments .

when the house receives amendments from the senate , the amendments are usually held at the speaker's table for later consideration by the full house .

the speaker could refer senate amendments to the committee or committees of jurisdiction , but he or she is likely to do so only if the senate proposal is on a subject that has not already been considered by the house committee of jurisdiction .

if the house wishes to continue the legislative process on a particular measure , when the house receives a senate amendment ( s ) to the measure , it must agree to take some action on the amendment ( s ) .

generally speaking , the options for action are the same as those that the senate can take on house amendments: propose a change to the amendment ( s ) , agree to the amendment ( s ) , or disagree to the amendment ( s ) .

more formally , the house can agree to a motion to concur in the senate amendment ( s ) with ( an ) amendment ( s ) , to concur in the senate amendment ( s ) , or to disagree to the senate amendment ( s ) .

if the chambers have already reached the stage of disagreement , meaning that one chamber has already disagreed to an amendment of the other or insisted on its own position , then the house can also agree to a motion to recede from a position previously taken .

for example , the house can recede from its disagreement to a senate amendment , or it can recede from its own amendment that the senate has disagreed to .

the limitation on the number of times the chambers can pass a bill back and forth described earlier applies to the house as well as the senate .

essentially , after the second - acting chamber amends a bill initially passed by the other , that amendment can be amended in two degrees: once more by the originating chamber and then once more by the second - acting chamber .

a majority of the house can override this practice , however , and extend the amendment exchange further .

under most circumstances , senate amendments are not privileged for consideration in the house , which means members cannot interrupt the regular order of business to make motions for their disposition .

furthermore , under the regular rules of the house , any house amendments offered to senate amendments are required to be germane .

typically , the house disposes of senate amendments through one of the expedited processes described below: a special rule reported by the committee on rules , a motion to suspend the rules , or by unanimous consent .

a detailed discussion and diagram of one case in the 110 th congress when the senate considered multiple house amendments serves to illustrate some of the procedural options , and potential procedural complexities , in an amendment exchange .

in april 2008 , the senate passed h.r .

3221 with a full - text substitute amendment and an amendment to the title .

the senate sent the newly titled "foreclosure prevention act of 2008" to the house .

in may , the house agreed to three separate amendments to the senate full - text substitute and sent those to the senate .

each of the house amendments addressed a group of titles in the senate amendment that fell within the jurisdiction of a single house committee .

as a result , some of the house amendments affected noncontiguous titles of the senate amendment .

house amendment no .

1 struck titles 1 through 5 , 7 , 9 , and 11 of the senate substitute and inserted five new titles , making up a "housing package," that were largely based on bills that had previously been considered by the house financial services committee .

house amendment no .

2 struck titles 6 , 8 , and 10 of the senate substitute and inserted a new title consisting largely of the text of a housing assistance tax bill previously reported by the house ways and means committee .

house amendment no .

3 proposed inserting a new section stating that the bill ( and other federal laws ) did not preempt state laws regulating foreclosure of residential real property or the treatment of foreclosed property .

senate precedents require that the chamber consider house amendments in the order that they affect the senate text ( in this case , the text of the substitute amendment the senate had agreed to in april ) .

to comply with this requirement , the senate considered the three house amendments as though they were nine separate amendments .

under the senate reorganization of the house amendments , house amendment no .

1 struck titles 1 through 5 of the senate substitute and inserted the five titles comprising the "housing package. .

house amendment no .

2 struck title 6 ; house amendment no .

3 struck title 7 ; house amendment 4 struck title 8 ; house amendment no .

5 struck title 9 ; house amendment no .

6 struck title 10 ; house amendment no .

7 struck title 11 ; house amendment no .

8 inserted the tax title ; and house amendment no .

9 inserted the proposed section affirming state laws ( see figure 1 ) .

with the house amendments reorganized , the majority leader could then propose actions on the amendments , provided he proceeded in the order they affected the senate text .

on june 19 , 2008 , the majority leader moved that the senate concur in house amendment no .

1 with an amendment .

the bipartisan senate amendment offered by the majority leader on behalf of the chair and ranking member of the banking , housing , and urban affairs committee proposed to replace the "housing package" of the other chamber .

the majority leader did not "fill the tree," and therefore the senate amendment he proposed was open to further amendment .

by unanimous consent , the senate required that amendments offered that day be on the subject of housing .

the agreement further provided that no other motions , except motions to table and reconsider , be in order during the day's consideration .

on july 19 , senators offered six amendments to the senate amendment offered by the majority leader to the first house amendment .

although under the rules , only a single second - degree amendment to an amendment offered with a motion to concur is in order at one time , senators asked and received unanimous consent to set the other pending amendments aside so they could offer their own amendments .

on several occasions that day and on subsequent days , however , unanimous consent was not granted to a senator who attempted to set aside pending amendments in order to offer another amendment .

the majority leader filed cloture on the motion to concur with an amendment on friday , june 20 , 2008 , and two days of session later , on tuesday , june 24 , the senate agreed to invoke cloture by a vote of 83-9 .

of the six amendments that had been offered to the proposed amendment to the first house amendment , the senate agreed to three of them .

these three amendments were second - degree amendments to the senate amendment to the house amendment .

they were not "amendments between the houses" but instead can be understood as senate floor amendments offered to an "amendment between the houses. .

as such , all three were incorporated into the senate amendment to the first house amendment before the senate , on june 25 , agreed to the motion to concur in the first house amendment with an amendment .

after the senate disposed of the first house amendment , it was in order to consider the additional house amendments in the order that they affected the senate text .

on june 26 , 2008 , the majority leader moved that the senate concur in the next six house amendments as reorganized by the senate .

each of the house amendments proposed to strike a title of the senate substitute for h.r .

3221 ( see figure 1 ) .

the majority leader then immediately filed cloture on the motion to concur .

after the majority leader made the motion to concur , no other motions to dispose of the house amendments were in order .

the motion to concur has precedence over the motion to disagree ; therefore , with the motion to concur pending , a motion to disagree was not in order .

the motion to concur does not have precedence over the motion to concur with an amendment .

no motion to concur with an amendment could be offered in this situation , however , because the house amendments were all simple motions to strike .

under long - standing senate precedents , motions to strike are not subject to amendment .

furthermore , the senate had agreed by unanimous consent that no further motions to refer would be in order during consideration of the house message .

pursuant to the terms of a unanimous consent agreement , the senate voted , 76-10 , on july 7 , 2008 , to invoke cloture on the motion to concur in the house amendments to strike .

the following day , the senate agreed by unanimous consent to the motion to concur .

with the other amendments disposed of , the only house amendments remaining for senate consideration were the proposals to insert the house tax title and to insert the section concerning state foreclosure laws and regulations .

on july 8 , 2008 , the majority leader made a motion that the senate disagree to these two house amendments and filed cloture on the motion .

the majority leader then used his preferential recognition to "fill the tree" by offering the following: a motion to concur in the house amendment adding a new title with a first - degree amendment ( no .

5067 ) , which proposed adding a sentence: "this title shall become effective in 3 days. .

a second - degree amendment ( no .

5068 ) to amendment no .

5067 , which proposed to strike "3" and insert "2. .

after the majority leader made those motions , no further motions proposing action on the house amendments were in order until one was disposed of or laid aside by unanimous consent .

the majority leader could "fill the tree" on a motion proposing to dispose of multiple house amendments ( one to insert a new title and a second to insert a new section ) by offering a motion that only concerned the first house amendment .

no motion to concur in the second house amendment , with or without an amendment , was in order .

two days of session later , on july 10 , 2008 , the senate agreed to the motion to invoke cloture on the motion to disagree to the final two house amendments by a vote of 84-12 .

the motion to concur with an amendment ( no .

5067 ) and the amendment to that ( no .

5068 ) fell when cloture was invoked , pursuant to the senate cloture rule requiring that the motion to disagree ( on which cloture was invoked ) remain the business before the senate until disposed of .

the following day the senate agreed to the motion to disagree to the amendments , and the message of the senate stating all of its actions on the house amendments was sent to the house .

the senate , after agreeing to the three motions described above , messaged to the house only one amendment: the substitute amendment for the "housing package" sent from the other chamber .

it also communicated its agreement to the house proposal to strike titles 6 through 11 of the first senate substitute .

similarly , the senate communicated its disagreement to the house proposal to insert a tax title and a section concerning state law .

in short , the senate , by its actions , effectively combined the matters in disagreement between the chambers into a single large amendment that was another version of the housing bill .

more precisely , the senate sent the following message to the house: the senate concurs in the house amendment , striking section 1 through title v and inserting certain language , to the senate amendment to the bill ( h.r .

3221 ) with an amendment .

the senate concurs in the house amendments , striking titles vi through xi , to the senate amendment to the aforesaid bill .

the senate disagrees to the amendments of the house , adding a new title and inserting a new section to the amendment of the senate to the aforesaid bill .

the house , pursuant to the terms of a special rule reported by the committee on rules , agreed to the senate amendment with an amendment on july 23 , 2008 .

the house amendment was yet another version of the full bill , proposing to insert text in lieu of that proposed by the senate .

according to both senators and representatives , the amendment resembled earlier versions of the legislation and resulted from bicameral negotiations .

the special rule also provided through a self - executing provision that the house recede from any other remaining amendments or disagreements .

when the house further amended the senate amendment , it had agreed to an amendment in the third degree .

although under the precedents of the house and senate , an amendment between the chambers can be amended in only two degrees , the house was able to offer a further amendment because it considered the motion under the terms of a special rule .

after the senate received the house message on july 23 , the majority leader called up the house amendment ( to the senate amendment to the house amendments to the senate amendment to h.r .

3221 ) .

at this point , the majority leader wished to propose that the senate agree with this final bicameral compromise so that the bill could be forwarded to the president .

to prevent another senator from making any other motion , he made two additional tree - filling motions .

the majority leader offered the following: a motion to concur in the house amendment ; a motion to concur in the house amendment with a first - degree amendment ( no .

5103 ) , which proposed adding a sentence: "the provisions of this act shall become effective 2 days after enactment" ; and a second - degree amendment ( no .

5104 ) to amendment no .

5103 , which proposed to strike "2" and insert "1. .

after "filling the tree," the majority leader filed cloture on the motion to concur .

the leader also asked unanimous consent that no motions to refer be in order when the house message was before the senate .

a senator "reserved the right to object" in order to express his desire to offer a further amendment .

the m ajority leader withdrew his unanimous consent request and instead made a motion to proceed to another matter .

a motion to refer is not in order when a different question is before the senate .

two days of session later , on july 25 , the senate voted to invoke cloture on the motion to concur by a vote of 80-13 .

the next day the senate voted to concur in the house amendment , and under the terms of a unanimous consent agreement , the motion to concur with an amendment was withdrawn ( and the second - degree amendment to that therefore fell ) .

the senate concurring in the house amendment was the final congressional action necessary to clear the measure to be sent to the president .

data on the manner of resolving differences were collected for recent congresses from the house final calendars .

the data are for measures that became public law .

the total number of conference committees presented in table a - 1 therefore does not include conference committees on measures that do not become law , such as budget resolutions , nor does it include unsuccessful conferences or measures that went through conference committee and were eventually vetoed .

