the proposed combination of comcast , the largest distributor of video services in the united states , and nbc universal ( nbcu ) , a major producer and aggregator of video content , would create a huge , vertically integrated entity with potentially enormous negotiating power at a time when market forces already are altering traditional content provider / distributor relationships .

comcast would own or control media and entertainment properties of significant scope and scale , including: comcast's cable systems , which currently serve 24.2 million subscribers , making comcast the largest provider of multichannel video programming distribution ( mvpd ) services in the united states ; comcast's broadband network , which passes more than 50 million homes and provides high speed internet service to just under 15 million households , making comcast the largest residential information service provider ( isp ) in the united states ; a number of national cable networks , including nbc's usa , bravo , cnbc , msnbc , oxygen , and syfy networks and comcast's e ! , style , golf channel , and versus networks , as well as minority interests in the a&e , biography , history channel , weather channel , and lifetime cable networks , and small interests in the big ten , nhl , and mlb cable networks ; comcast's 10 regional cable sports networks ; the nbc national broadcast television network , including nbc news ( a leading source of global and national news with top - rated news programming ) , nbc universal sports and olympics ( which holds contracts to broadcast the 2010 winter olympics and 2012 summer olympics , nbc sunday night football , nhl / stanley cup , the pga tour , the u.s. open , the ryder cup , wimbledon , and the kentucky derby ) , and nbc entertainment ; nbc's telemundo national broadcast television network , the second - largest spanish language programming network in the united states ; nbc's ten owned and operated local broadcast stations , which carry the nbc network programming in large u.s. markets , including new york , los angeles , chicago , and philadelphia ; nbc's 16 owned and operated local broadcast stations , which carry the telemundo network programming in cities with large spanish - speaking populations , including los angeles , new york , miami , houston , chicago , and dallas ; nbcu's large television production operations , which produce broadcast network programming , nbcu television distribution's broadcast program syndication operations , and a 3,000-title library of television episodes ; nbcu's universal pictures and focus features , which produce theatrical and non - theatrical films , as well as universal studio home entertainment's extensive movie library with more than 4,000 titles ; digital media properties , including cnbc.com , ivillage , nbc.com , fandango , and daily candy , which together generate more than 40 million unique users each month ; and nbc's 30% interest in hulu.com , a website that offers free , advertising - supported streaming video of broadcast and cable television programs .

despite the size and reach that comcast would be afforded if the deal is completed , there is so much uncertainty in the video market that the proposed combination has elicited a wide range of predictions about ( 1 ) how it would affect that market ; ( 2 ) how it would affect the long - standing public policy goals of competition , diversity of voices , and localism ; and ( 3 ) whether the merger would prove beneficial to comcast's shareholders .

from one perspective , the scope of the combined entity would be so broad that , in addition to requiring careful scrutiny of its competitive effects , it potentially could affect market structure and relationships in ways that have implications for a wide range of media rules , regulations , and policies , including program carriage rules , program access requirements , retransmission consent rules , long - standing policy supporting free over - the - air broadcast television , and even network neutrality and open access policies .

from another perspective , the recent history of failed mega - mergers in the communications sector suggests that the vertically integrated post - merger entity may have so many pieces with conflicting market incentives that it proves impossible for executives to craft an internally consistent profit - maximizing business strategy , much less exploit market power to undermine competition .

there is consensus that the department of justice ( doj ) and the federal communications commission ( fcc ) are likely to approve the combination subject to merger conditions and / or license conditions — intended to protect competition , diversity of voices , and localism — that may significantly affect the impact of the combination .

it is possible , however , that such conditions might have the effect both of protecting the public against significant harms created by the combination and of limiting potential benefits created by the combination .

with or without the comcast - nbcu combination , the video market is in a state of flux .

significant technology - induced structural changes on both the supply side and the demand side of the market are fragmenting audiences , affecting the level of revenues generated , and shifting the flow of those revenues among industry players .

long - standing business models of both content providers and distributors are being challenged .

the impact of the proposed merger on the video market and on public policy goals will be affected by these dynamic forces currently at play .

some of the structural changes are the result of independent new competitors entering the market .

others are the result of firms that already had a strong market presence expanding or extending into new activities .

on the distribution side , technological innovation has generated major new entry .

in the early 1990s , when many of the regulatory rules affecting content - distributor relationships were adopted , there was little competition to cable in the mvpd market .

in june 1994 , fewer than 2 million households subscribed to satellite television service , and most of those used the c - band technology ; fewer than 70,000 were served by direct broadcast satellite ( dbs ) , which was still in its infancy .

telephone companies were not offering video services at all .

cable dominated , with 59.5 million basic cable customers in 1994 , out of a total of 94.2 million television households .

most cable subscribers had not retained their rooftop broadcast television antennas ; if their cable company chose not to carry a particular local broadcast station's signal , many subscribers no longer were able to receive the broadcaster's programming ( including the advertising ) and had no alternative source for that programming .

since the cable company's carriage decision heavily determined the number of viewers that would view a broadcaster's programming and advertising , it enjoyed a very strong negotiating position vis - à - vis the broadcaster .

in contrast , today most american households have access to the two major dbs providers , directv and dish network ; there are more than 31 million subscribers to satellite video service .

in addition , at mid - year 2009 , verizon's fios television service was available to 10.3 million households and purchased by 2.5 million households , and at&t's u - verse service , at the end of the third quarter of 2009 , was available to approximately 20 million households and purchased by 1.8 million households .

the fios and u - verse services are not available in the same markets .

thus most households have access to at least three mvpd providers and mvpds that fail to carry "must - have" broadcast ( or other ) programming that their competitors offer may find themselves at a significant competitive disadvantage .

hence broadcasters and other programmers are in a strengthened negotiating position vis - à - vis mvpds .

at the same time , consumer electronics manufacturers have added a number of streaming video capabilities to a range of devices that allow consumers to easily connect their televisions to the internet .

such devices include internet - ready high definition televisions ( hdtvs ) , dvrs , blu - ray dvd players , video game consoles ( including xbox 360 , playstation 3 , and wii ) , and dedicated boxes ( such as the $80 wifi - or ethernet - enabled roku player ) .

these devices provide access to numerous video on demand ( vod ) services , including netflix , amazon video , mlb.com , and youtube .

they have created an entirely new way to distribute video .

the introduction of the highly mobile apple ipad provides another alternative for consumers to watch video over the internet through a wifi / 3g - enabled device that is considerably larger than the iphone , android phone , or ipod touch .

one of apple's potential advantages is the itunes store , which is capable of supplying a significant amount of additional content to consumers .

all of these products ( including home computers and laptops ) allow consumers at home and on the road to access a potentially unlimited supply of programming available over the internet .

it is not clear whether internet - based vod services will gain sufficient access to desirable programming — and particularly to the "must - have" programming that a significant portion of viewers require from their video service .

nevertheless , the emergence of internet - enabled , hdtv - quality internet service could ultimately prove to be disruptive to mvpds and over - the - air broadcasters .

on the content side , structural changes have been fragmenting audiences for more than two decades , but just when that fragmentation seemed to be abating , new market forces have been created to continue the trend .

the initial cause of audience fragmentation was the successful entry of cable networks .

as these networks proliferated they also evolved from primarily offering re - run broadcast or theatrical film programming to offering substantial amounts of original programming .

today there are more than 500 cable networks , 35 of which come into more than 90 million households and another 42 that come into more than 50 million households .

more than 85% of all television households in the united states subscribe to mvpd service and the average television household receives 130 television channels .

as recently as the early 1990s , the then - three major broadcast networks ( abc , cbs , and nbc ) and their affiliates commanded approximately 49% of u.s. television home set usage ; today , the four major broadcast networks ( with the successful entry of fox ) and their affiliates command only approximately 25% .

other broadcast stations command an additional 13% of television usage .

in contrast , advertising - supported cable networks commanded just 20% of television set home usage in the early 1990s , but today the several hundred advertising - supported cable networks command approximately 48% of usage , and pay cable networks an additional 4% .

many of the successful cable networks are owned in whole or in part by companies that also own a major broadcast network .

audiences are unlikely to be further fragmented by additional cable network entry .

there does not appear to be consumer demand for additional program offerings over yet more cable networks .

rather , a growing number of consumers , especially younger viewers , want to be able to watch popular programming at a time and place that is convenient for them .

instead of a fixed , linear schedule of programming , they are time - shifting their viewing through the use of dvrs and video on demand ( vod ) offerings .

they also are location - shifting , through video streaming and other internet - based video services , game consoles , and mobile video .

these alternatives are still in their infancy and it is not clear which will grow ( and by how much ) at the expense of traditional broadcast and cable networks .

but they have become significant enough that nielsen research has begun to prepare quarterly reports on "three screen" video viewing — television , computer , and cell phone .

according to a recent nielsen report: the 292 million people in the united states with a television on average each week spend 31 hours and 35 minutes watching traditional television , but just 32 minutes watching time shifted television .

they spend 4 hours and 6 minutes using the internet , but only 22 minutes of that time watching video on the internet , and just 3 minutes watching video on a mobile phone .

thus , time shifted television watching , internet video watching , and mobile phone video watching still represent a very small portion of total video watching .

but alternative forms of video watching are growing faster than overall video watching .

the number of people who time shifted increased by 26.9% from 3q08 to 3q09 .

in that same period , the number of people who watched video on the internet increased by 14.8% and the number of people who watched video on a mobile phone increased by 53% .

on a monthly basis , the 47% of the population ( 138 million people ) who watch video on the internet spend on average 3 hours and 24 minutes during the month doing so ; the 5% of the population ( 15.7 million people ) who watch mobile video in the united states spend on average 3 hours and 15 minutes during the month watching video on a mobile phone .

these new time - and location - shifting means of receiving video further fragment video audiences .

when a particular program is offered — and viewed — over multiple platforms , it may be possible to add up the total audience for that program , but the market impact will not be the same as if that aggregate audience was all viewing the program over a single platform .

viewers may be valued differently by advertisers depending on the platform used to view the programming ; some platforms can be more readily employed than others to generate per viewer fees ; and the multiple platforms will be competing with one another and thus the sum of their negotiating strength in the market will be lower than that of a platform provider with the full audience .

nielsen has begun measuring time - delayed as well as traditional television viewing , and some industry players are pressing nielsen to speed up its efforts to construct cross - platform ratings .

but there is evidence that the audience for time - shifted programming is qualitatively different in that it is likely to view fewer advertisements .

if identical programming generates less revenue from newly fragmented portions of the audience , then the fragmentation will have a real financial impact on programmers as well as distributors .

for example , the proliferation of internet sites — both those offering video services and others — has created a huge supply of potential online advertising sites and as a result has tended to depress the rates for advertising on the internet .

to the extent consumers shift from traditional television viewing to non - traditional viewing , and the latter generates lower advertising ( or subscription ) revenues per viewer , this audience fragmentation will reduce the profitability of the existing business models employed by network providers and mvpds , alike .

there is one countervailing market force , however .

it appears that increasing the number of platforms over which video ( television and film ) programming is available increases the total number of minutes of viewing , and thus partially constrains the fall in revenues .

the traditional business models of just about every participant in the video market are potentially challenged by these structural market changes and as a result the current environment is characterized by very contentious programmer - distributor negotiations and a multitude of novel new ways to distribute content as participants experiment with new business models .

in this uncertain environment , the announced comcast - nbcu combination has generated a wide range of predictions about market and public policy effects .

some of these claims are specific to comcast — how it might use its increased negotiating strength to place itself at an advantage or its competitors at a disadvantage , how it might use its vertically integrated structure to pursue innovative business models , or how its vertically integrated structure might stifle its ability to act quickly .

other claims address more broadly industry - wide responses , such as whether the combination will trigger further consolidation .

to neutralize political opposition to the merger and to demonstrate that the merger would foster the long - standing public policy goals of localism , diversity of voices , and competition , comcast has met with representatives of many consumer and private stakeholders and agreed in writing to meet some of their demands .

for example , comcast has agreed in writing to add four cable networks owned , or partly owned , by african americans over the next eight years and an english - language channel directed toward asian americans .

comcast also has met with officials at the doj and the fcc and negotiated conditions that they would agree to meet .

both agencies are expected to approve the comcast - nbcu merger , subject to a number of such conditions , in late january or february .

according to a number of trade press reports , a draft of the fcc order has been circulated to the commissioners for their review .

among the conditions reported to be in the draft are: a requirement that comcast offer unbundled broadband internet access service , not tied to video or telephone service , to families in its cable franchise areas who participate in the national school lunch program , for $9.95 per month .

comcast also would help families who qualify purchase user - ready computers for about $150 .

a bar on comcast prioritizing , on its broadband network , programming from its cable networks or from nbcu's cable networks and television stations ahead of unaffiliated content .

a requirement that the new entity license to online video distributors some programming that may currently be available only to mvpds that are part of tv everywhere .

a requirement that comcast extend broadband service to 400,000 additional homes by expanding its network over the next three years .

a requirement that comcast provide broadband service to six more rural communities .

