children are one of the most vulnerable segments of society during disasters .

there are over 38.5 million households with children under 18 years in the united states .

the majority of these households could be directly affected by disasters either through disruptions of day - to - day activities or through community disaster mitigation planning efforts .

the perils faced by children can include separation from family members , school closures , health care shortages , housing issues , psychological impacts , and many others .

the number of children affected by disasters is growing , yet there remains a gap in the inclusion of children in community disaster planning .

planning is just one of many tools that can be used to address the perils children face during and after disasters .

other activities include medical preparedness and response , medical countermeasures , medical transportation , disaster case management , national sheltering standards , housing , and evacuation .

congress established the national commission on children and disasters ( the commission ) to address the needs of children in disasters .

this report considers the purpose , history , and structure of the commission ; the recommendations contained in the commission's interim report to congress ; and congressional issues related to the recommendations .

in - depth analysis of the recommendations will be undertaken in later reports .

the 111 th congress is currently considering amending the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act ) .

the disaster response , recovery , and mitigation enhancement act of 2009 ( h.r .

3377 ) would enhance disaster response , recovery , preparedness , and mitigation capabilities .

the child safety , care , and education continuity act of 2010 ( s. 2898 ) provides for the safety , care , and educational needs of children in disasters .

congress may wish to consider expanding proposed legislation or introducing new legislation to amend the stafford act to include recommendations of the commission .

additional issues congress may wish to consider include eligibility for federal grant funds , the federal role in emergency management , and federal agency role clarification in disaster assistance .

in addition to amending the stafford act , congress may elect to assess whether the homeland security act ( hsa ) should be amended to emphasize the needs of children in emergencies .

in recognition of the risks and challenges facing children during and after disasters , the commission was authorized under the provisions of the kids in disasters well - being , safety , and health act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-161 ) and given federal advisory committee statutory authority under the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act of 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 ) to assess the needs of , and make recommendations about , children in disasters .

the commission is bipartisan , with 10 members appointed by the president and congressional leaders from both parties .

the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , administration for children and families ( acf ) , provides financial and administrative support to the commission .

congress authorized appropriations of $1.5 million for each of fy2008 and fy2009 to enable the commission to conduct a comprehensive study to examine and assess the needs of children in the preparation for , response to , and recovery from natural disasters , acts of terrorism , and other man - made disasters .

after evaluating existing research and recommendations , the commission is directed to submit a report to the president and congress on its findings , conclusions , and recommendations to address the identified gaps pertaining to the needs of children in disasters .

the interim report of the commission was provided to the president and congress on october 14 , 2009 .

the final report is projected to be completed by october 2010 .

in addition to the issues above pertaining to the recommendations of the commission , congress may wish to consider policy options not addressed by the commission .

these include the role of federal agencies , transitioning disaster assistance coordination to the states , and federal grants - in - aid .

legislation introduced in the 111 th congress includes provisions for child safety and education continuity in disasters ( s. 2898 ) , and changes to federal programs addressing community preparedness and mitigation ( h.r .

3377 ) .

the child safety , care , and education continuity act of 2010 ( s. 2898 ) includes provisions that address many of the child care and education recommendations of the commission .

however , congress may wish to consider expanding the provisions of s. 2898 to address additional recommendations pertaining to mental health , emergency medical services and pediatric transport , disaster case management , sheltering standards , and housing .

section 102 of the disaster response , recovery , and mitigation enhancement act of 2009 ( h.r .

3377 ) provides for the implementation of the recommendations of a congressional committee .

congress may wish to consider whether the evacuation recommendations of the commission could be incorporated into implementation of other committee recommendations .

section 201 of h.r .

3377 provides federal assistance to states wishing to enhance mitigation activities .

congress may wish to consider incorporating sheltering recommendations of the commission into the mitigation provisions of the bill .

children are one of the most vulnerable segments of society during disasters .

traditionally , they are included in broader disaster planning categories such as "special needs populations" or "at - risk populations. .

the increasing frequency and scale of disasters has made the needs of children a critical element of disaster planning .

when assessing how to meet the needs of children in disasters , some consideration needs to be given to whether existing statutory authority provides federal agencies the flexibility to meet those needs , or whether congressional intervention is necessary to ensure that special provisions are made for children .

the range of activities associated with meeting the needs of children in disasters spans multiple levels of government and the private and nonprofit sectors of society .

while there is an undeniable need to prevent loss of life and provide for the quality of life for children , there remains some question about the role of various stakeholders in funding and coordinating emergency management activities .

evaluating the recommendations of the commission within the context of existing statutory and regulatory provisions may also provide some insight into the gaps in funding and coordination , and the appropriate federal role , in caring for children affected by disasters .

