transnational terrorists and criminals may collaborate , appropriate shared tactics , and otherwise benefit from interaction , resulting in bolstered capabilities , enhanced organizational infrastructure , improved access to resources , and expanded geographic reach .

historical examples also indicate that terrorist and transnational criminal groups may evolve , converge , transform , or otherwise alter their ideological motivations and organizational composition to appear similar .

although information on the extent and nature of criminal - terrorist relationships , including their impact on u.s. national security , remains anecdotal , many view the potential confluence of criminal and terrorist actors , skills , resources , and violent tactics as a cause for concern .

such enhancements may in turn lengthen the duration of insurgencies , extend the longevity and capabilities of criminal and terrorist organizations , and undermine the ability of fragile governments to exert full control of their territory .

some analysts have identified a series of potentially disturbing patterns that has hastened the expansion of relationships between terrorist and transnational crime groups .

first , criminal syndicates appear to be growing in size , scope , and ambition .

globalization has extended their transnational reach , while major developments in technology , trade , and the financial industry have provided them with opportunities to exploit vulnerabilities in emerging criminal sectors , such as cybercrime .

many now maintain a transnational footprint and a flexible and networked membership roster that can adapt more readily to new market niches and establish more fluid alliances with external individuals and groups .

second , the nature and activities of terrorist organizations appear to have also changed .

terrorist groups today , particularly those that most threaten u.s. global interests , appear to be motivated primarily by religious rather than nationalist and ethnic separatist imperatives that were common in the 1960s and 1970s .

this shift has resulted in extremist movements that elicit sympathy well beyond a specific country or geographic region .

further , terrorist groups appear to have become more resilient , due to a combination of continued state sponsorship or support , as well as entrepreneurial expansion into profitable criminal activities .

combined , these trends may suggest an increase in geographic overlap where criminals and terrorists could operate and interact .

these patterns may also suggest greater blurring of distinctions between one group and the other , the adoption of activities often attributed to the other , or the ad hoc evolution of a group's objectives based on the security challenges they encounter .

key nodes , where interaction is most likely , include prisons ; cyberspace , particularly online opportunities for social networking ; and ungoverned or difficult - to - govern spaces , which include regions plagued by endemic corruption , conflict or post - conflict zones where legitimate governance has yet to take root , border regions , free trade zones , and urban mega cities where pockets of poverty , violence , criminality , and impunity from national law prevails .

overlap may also be facilitated by the involvement of negligent or hostile governments and kleptocratic or criminal states that may consider sponsorship or support of criminal or terrorist activity of strategic value .

limited unclassified anecdotal evidence largely serves as the basis for the current understanding of criminal - terrorist connections .

in the absence of comprehensive data , it is difficult to assess whether such anecdotal cases are indicative of a widespread problem , a growing trend , or isolated observation .

what is clear from existing literature on the subject , however , is that crime - terrorism interactions can vary significantly and change over time .

the following sections summarize several common patterns of crime - terrorism links , with specific examples drawn from a range of court cases , reports , and news articles .

with recognition that every crime - terrorism partnering circumstance will be different and the tools to identify and address such concerns may change , a wide range of anti - crime and counterterrorism policy options can be considered .

the variety of options available , however , also challenges policymakers to consider several key questions in formulating responses .

should a specific agency or an interagency coordinating body be designated as leading u.s. government responses to crime - terrorism threats ? .

under what circumstances would u.s. responses to crime - terrorism threats be most appropriately led by the intelligence community , military , diplomatic corps , or law enforcement agencies ? .

how can resources and authorities be allocated and managed to avoid excessive duplication while also ensuring effective policy response coverage ? .

the following sections describe selected key foreign policy responses to crime - terrorism nexus threats and related policy considerations for congress for each response .

these may be applied in various combinations or sequences , depending on the specific circumstances .

policy issues related to the interaction of international crime and terrorism are inherently complex .

while the u.s. government has maintained substantial long - standing efforts to combat terrorism and transnational crime separately , questions remain about how and whether issues related to the interaction of the two threats are handled most effectively across the multiple u.s. agencies involved .

efforts to combat transnational crime can result in positive and negative outcomes with counterterrorism policies , raising fundamental questions about how to prioritize combating crime or terrorism aspects of a case when both elements are present .

further , questions remain on how links between terrorist - criminal activity and potentially related u.s. polices — including but not limited to wmd proliferation , cyber security , post - conflict reconstruction efforts , and counterinsurgency — are integrated across agencies .

since the september 11 attacks , congress has enacted several landmark bills that have given the u.s. government greater authority and additional tools to counter the convergence of organized crime and terrorism .

less than six weeks after the attack , congress enacted the usa patriot act ( p.l .

107-56 ) to strengthen the u.s. government's ability to detect , report , and prevent terrorist activities , including potential connections between organized crime and terrorism .

additionally , congress enacted the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) and the usa patriot improvement and reauthorization act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-177 ) , which further enhanced u.s. government efforts to crack down on terrorist financing and money laundering .

based on recent u.s. assessments , transnational crime and international terrorism appear to intersect and overlap in ways that will , at times , affect u.s. national interests .

to this end , congress may choose to continue to evaluate existing approaches and programs to combat the confluence of crime and terrorism through hearings and requesting or legislating reports to be issued by relevant executive branch agencies and inspector general offices .

congress may also choose to modify , adapt , or enhance existing legislative authorities and mandates to target various dimensions of the problem .

such approaches may be region - or group - specific , or global in scope .

more broadly , as policymakers consider the crime - terrorism nexus issue and relevant policy responses , key questions for congress may include the following: what is the scope of the crime - terrorism issue ? .

what types of crimes are involved ? .

which groups and actors of both kinds pose the greatest threat to u.s. national security ? .

what political , social , economic , geographic , and demographic circumstances facilitate the interaction between transnational crime and international terrorism ? .

has the united states successfully exploited the partnering arrangements and differences in motivations and capabilities of terrorist groups and criminal organizations ? .

if so , what lessons learned could apply to current and future activities by such actors ? .

what prevents the u.s. government and international community from disrupting and dismantling current crime - terrorism threats ? .

which federal government entities have the lead roles for addressing various aspects of the crime - terrorism phenomenon ? .

how are government funds being spent to address concerns about crime - terrorism links ? .

is there a need to expand or adjust existing congressional authorities to combat the combined crime - terrorism threat ? .

are the available u.s. foreign policy tools sufficient to meet today's crime - terrorism concerns — and are such tools effectively implemented ? .

if not , what can be improved ? .

the following table summarizes the state department's descriptions of how current foreign terrorist organizations ( ftos ) raise funds and whether , if at all , an fto is involved in criminal activities as a source of revenue .

among the 51 ftos described in the state department's most recent country reports on terrorism ( from may 2013 ) , sources of funding vary .

common sources of funding include , in various combination , state sponsors , private donors , other terrorist groups , legitimate business activity , proceeds of crime .

popular forms criminal financing include extortion , kidnapping for ransom , drug trafficking , robbery , human smuggling , weapons smuggling , other contraband smuggling , money laundering , bank fraud , credit card fraud , cybercrime , immigration fraud , passport falsification , and illegal charcoal production .

for 9 of the 51 ftos , the state department reports that funding sources and mechanisms are "unknown. .

