according to the business cycle dating committee of the national bureau of economic research ( nber ) , the u.s. economy was in recession from december 2007 to june 2009 .

congress passed and the president signed an economic stimulus package , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) , in february 2009 .

the $787 billion package included $286 billion in tax cuts to help stimulate the economy .

among the tax reductions , many were tax incentives directed to business .

the estimated revenue losses of the business tax incentives are $40 billion for fy2009 , $36 billion for fy2010 , and $6 billion for fy2009-fy2019 ( because of estimated revenue gains in the out years ) .

the business tax incentives included a temporary expansion of the work opportunity tax credit , a temporary increase of small business expensing , a temporary extension of bonus depreciation , and a five - year carry back of 2008 net operating losses for small businesses .

many were subsequently extended by the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) .

the preliminary estimate of fourth quarter real gross domestic product ( gdp ) growth is 5.9% ; the unemployment rate , a lagging indicator , averaged 9.6% in the third quarter and 10.0% in the fourth quarter of 2009 .

federal reserve chairman ben bernanke expected the economy to continue growing at a modest pace , but predicted that bank lending will remain constrained and the job market remain weak into at least 2010 .

to further assist unemployed workers , help business , and stimulate housing markets , congress passed the worker , homeownership , and business assistance act of 2009 ( signed by the president on november 6 , 2009 , p.l .

111-92 ) .

many observers have advocated further business tax incentives to spur investment and employment .

recent op - ed contributors have proposed tax credits to encourage businesses to hire .

the obama administration has proposed tax incentives for small businesses to encourage investment and hiring .

the house and senate passed the hiring incentives to restore employment ( hire ) act , which includes an employment tax credit .

the president signed the act into law on march 18 , 2010 .

in december 2010 , p.l .

111-312 extended and expanded the business tax provisions .

some proposals would expand the reduction in payroll taxes for individuals and to extend it to employers .

while a payroll tax on the individual side expands demand in the same way as other income tax cuts , the employer tax forgiveness is similar to an employer - side wage subsidy , which acts through a different mechanism .

the reduction in payroll taxes for individuals expired at the end of 2012 .

the need for tax incentives to boost economic activity depends on the state of the economy .

one measure that has tracked economic activity fairly well in the past is the federal reserve board's industrial production index , which is used by nber in its determination of the economy's turning points .

figure 1 and figure 2 show the monthly industrial production index for the five past recessions .

the index is followed from the beginning of each recession ( month 0 in the figures ) and for the next 36 months .

figure 1 compares the trend in the industrial production index for the previous two recessions ( the 1990-1991 recession and 2001 recession ) with the recently ended recession ( the 2007-2009 recession — the dashed line ) .

the first two recessions lasted for eight months according to nber ; the industrial production index in both cases started to track upward eight months after the recession started .

in the 2007-2009 recession , however , the industrial production index was still declining eight months after the recession started and continued to trend downward for the next 10 months .

figure 2 compares the 2007-2009 recession with the 1973-1975 and 1981-1982 recessions .

the latter recessions lasted for 16 months according to nber , and the industrial production index bottomed out at the end of each recession .

the trend in index for the 2007-2009 recession appears to approximately track the trend over the other two recessions .

in the current recession , the index declined between december 2007 and june 2009 , before turning up .

the data on real gdp growth and industrial production suggest that economic activity ( that is , output ) began increasing in july 2009 ; nber determined that the recession lasted for 18 months .

the december 2012 industrial production index was still below the december 2007 index .

the tax incentives to enhance economic activity being discussed , however , do not target output .

rather , they target investment and employment .

the two most common measures to provide tax incentives for new investment are investment tax credits and accelerated deductions for depreciation .

investment tax credits provide for a credit against tax liability for a portion of the purchase price of assets and are often proposed as a counter - cyclical or economic stimulus measure .

accelerated depreciation speeds up the rate at which the cost of an investment is deducted .

the investment tax credit was originally introduced in 1962 as a permanent subsidy , but it came to be used as a counter - cyclical device .

it was temporarily suspended in 1966-1967 ( and restored prematurely ) as an anti - inflationary measure ; it was repealed in 1969 , also as an anti - inflationary measure .

the credit was reinstated in 1971 , temporarily increased in 1975 , and made permanent in 1976 .

after that time , the credit tended to be viewed as a permanent feature of the tax system .

at the same time , economists were increasingly writing about the distortions across asset types that arose from an investment credit .

the tax reform act of 1986 moved toward a system that was more neutral across asset types and repealed the investment tax credit while lowering tax rates .

accelerated depreciation tends not to be used for counter - cyclical purposes .

at least one reason for not using accelerated depreciation for temporary , counter - cyclical purposes is because such a revision would add considerable complexity to the tax law if used in a temporary fashion , since different vintages of investment would be treated differently .

an investment credit , by contrast , occurs the year the investment is made and , when repealed , only requires firms with carry - overs of unused credits to compute credits .

an exception to the problem with accounting complexities associated with accelerated depreciation is partial expensing ( that is , allowing a fraction of investment to be deducted up front and the remainder to be depreciated ) .

this partial expensing approach also is neutral across all assets it applies to , but the cash flow effects are more concentrated in the present ( and revenue is gained in the future ) .

a temporary partial expensing provision , allowing 30% of investments in equipment to be expensed over the next two years , was included in h.r .

3090 in 2002 and expanded to 50% and extended through 2004 in tax legislation enacted in 2003 .

it expired in 2004 .

the economic stimulus act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-185 ) included temporary bonus depreciation for 2008 , which was extended for 2009 by the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

the obama administration recently proposed 100% expensing for qualified capital investments through the end of 2011 .

in december 2010 , p.l .

111-312 extended and expanded the business tax provisions by allowing 100% expensing in 2011 and 50% in 2012 .

bonus depreciation was extended to the end of 2013 by the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) .

on september 8 , 2011 , the president proposed a fiscal stimulus that largely related to payroll taxes , but also proposed to increase expensing to 100% in 2012 .

this expensing provision was also included in h.r .

3630 , the house republican proposal that also extended the payroll tax and made other revisions .

this legislation was adopted by the house but not passed .

a two - month extension of payroll tax relief was adopted and was extended to the end of 2012 by the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ) .

the extent to which these business tax breaks are a successful counter - cyclical stimulus hinges on the effectiveness of investment subsidies in inducing spending .

it is difficult to determine the effect of a business tax cut and the timing of induced investment .

a business tax cut is aimed at stimulating investment largely through changes in the cost ( or price ) of capital .

if there is little marginal stimulus or if investment is not responsive to these price effects in the short run , then most of the cut may be saved: either used to pay down debt or paid out in dividends , although some of the latter might eventually be spent after a lag .

that is , if a tax cut simply involved a cash payment to a firm , most of it might be saved , particularly in the short run .

business tax cuts ( of most types ) also have effects on rates of return that increase the incentive to invest , and it is generally for that reason that investment incentives have been considered as counter - cyclical devices .

investment incentives through expensing for small businesses , however , are usually phased - out .

as a result , these provisions produce a disincentive to investment over the phase - out range .

consequently , the overall incentive effect is ambiguous .

employment and wage subsidies are designed to increase employment directly by reducing a firm's wage bill .

a firm's wage bill for labor includes wages and salaries paid to employees , the cost of fringe benefits ( eg , health insurance and pensions ) , hiring costs , and taxes paid such as the employer's share of the payroll tax .

these subsidies can take many forms .

for example , earnings or time spent working can be subsidized .

furthermore , the subsidies can be incremental or non - incremental — that is , new hires are subsidized or all workers are subsidized .

the subsidies can be targeted to certain groups of workers such as disadvantaged individuals , or can be available for any worker .

the tax system is a frequently used means for providing employment subsidies .

currently , the work opportunity tax credit ( wotc ) , a nonrefundable credit , is available to employers who hire individuals from 11 targeted disadvantaged groups .

another example of an employment tax credit is the new jobs tax credit ( njtc ) from 1977 and 1978 .

it was an incentive to business to hire employees in excess of a base amount .

most of the business tax incentives for hiring discussed in the 111 th congress were modeled somewhat on the njtc .

the njtc was an incremental jobs tax credit in that the employer had to increase the federal unemployment tax act ( futa ) wage base above at least 102% of the futa wage base in the previous year .

the credit was 50% of the increase in the futa wage base ( the wage base consisted of wages paid up to $4,200 per employee ) .

the employer's income tax deduction for wages , however , was reduced by the amount of the credit .

consequently , the effective maximum credit for each new employee ( $2,100 minus the additional tax due from the reduced deduction ) ranged from $1,806 for taxpayers in the 14% tax bracket to $630 for taxpayers in the 70% tax bracket .

furthermore , the total credit could not exceed $100,000 , which in effect limited the size of the subsidized employment expansion at any one firm to 47 .

the credit was nonrefundable but could be carried back for three years and forward for seven years .

the evidence suggests that investment and employment subsidies are not as effective as desired in increasing economic activity , especially employment .

economic theory indicates that a deficit - financed fiscal stimulus designed to increase aggregate demand would have the maximum impact on employment in the short term .

such policies could include increases in federal government spending for goods and services , federal transfers to state and local governments , and tax cuts for low and middle income taxpayers .

the short - term benefits of higher deficits , however , could be outweighed by the long - term costs if deficits are not reduced when unemployment falls .

additional fiscal stimulus that increases the deficit arguably should be considered in the context of 2009 and 2010 deficits that were larger relative to the size of the economy than all but a handful of previous wartime years .

the 2009 and 2010 deficits are not sustainable in the long run in the sense that deficits of that size would cause the national debt to continually rise relative to output — eventually investors will refuse to continue financing it because they no longer believe that the government would be capable of servicing it .

