on april 20 , 2008 , a former roman catholic bishop , fernando lugo , was elected president of paraguay , a land - locked south american nation critically wedged between brazil , argentina , and bolivia .

the lugo victory was hailed as a step toward strengthening paraguay's fragile democracy , ending six decades of one - party rule .

in many ways , the election of president lugo raised hopes for a historic break with paraguay's past and its tradition of authoritarian leadership , political isolation , and widespread corruption .

the current political environment in paraguay has been shaped by the country's turbulent political history .

paraguay was defeated in the war of the triple alliance ( 1864-1870 ) against argentina , brazil and uruguay and lost 25% of its territory and over half of its population .

this defeat led to an extensive period of political instability , with three civil wars in the first half of the 20 th century .

in the late 19 th century , a two - party political system emerged with the formation of the colorado party and the liberal party , but the colorado party soon became the dominant political force , ruling between 1887 and 1904 .

the liberal party captured control of the government and ruled from 1904 until 1940 .

a war with neighboring bolivia between 1932-1935 , the chaco war , further weakened political institutions and hindered economic development until the military assumed control in 1940 and governed through a succession of authoritarian leaders .

the colorado party returned to power in 1946 , consolidating its control through the military , dominant economic groups , and the state bureaucracy .

in the late 1940s , the party assumed greater control over state institutions to the point where party membership was a prerequisite for civil service positions and promotion in the military .

general alfredo stroessner , a member of the colorado party , staged a coup in 1954 , and consolidated power in a repressive military dictatorship .

stroessner , who engineered his "election" to complete the unexpired term of his predecessor , was subsequently re - elected seven times , ruling almost continuously under the state of siege provision of the constitution , with support from the military and colorado party .

nominally governed by a constitution approved in 1967 , stroessner's rule increased the isolation of paraguay from the world community .

during stroessner's 35-year rule , ( known as the stronato ) , political opponents were systematically harassed and persecuted , accused of communist sympathies or posing a threat to state security .

the demise of the stroessner military dictatorship in 1989 initiated a challenging political transition over the next 20 years .

due in large part to the country's authoritarian past , paraguay's state institutions had remained weak while corruption continued to undercut democratic consolidation and economic development .

in 1992 , a new constitution was adopted , and in 1993 , paraguay elected its first civilian president in almost 40 years .

for the next 15 years , however , paraguay's democracy alternated between periods of greater and lesser instability , including an attempted military coup , the assassination of a vice president , and the resignation of a president .

observers maintain that corruption is a major impediment to consolidating democratic institutions .

president nicanor duarte frutos ( 2003-2008 ) took important measures to combat corruption that included increased penalties for tax evasion , other measures to increase tax revenue , greater oversight of government spending , and a crackdown on the trade in contraband and counterfeit goods .

he removed members of the supreme court after corruption allegations surfaced against them .

these measures were partially successful , as suggested by transparency international's 2006 corruption perceptions index in which paraguay moved up to 111 out of 163 countries after paraguay was ranked among the six most corrupt countries in the world in 2004 .

in both the 2007 and 2008 index , however , paraguay dropped to 138 out of 180 countries , and in the 2009 index paraguay ranked 154 — ahead of only venezuela and haiti in the hemisphere .

in april 2008 , paraguay took another historic step with the election of former bishop fernando lugo to the presidency .

for some observers , lugo's victory is seen as a chance for paraguay to strengthen its democratic transition .

one of president lugo's central challenges is to establish presidential control over the entrenched government bureaucracy that is still essentially controlled by the colorado party .

paraguay , approximately the size of california , has a population of about 6.9 million people who are concentrated in and around the capital city of asunción .

the majority of the population is of mixed spanish and guaraní indian descent .

both spanish and guaraní are the official languages , with over 90% of the population fluent in guaraní .

in 2008 , paraguay's gross national income ( gni ) was $16.3 billion , with a per capita gni of $2,180 , up from $1,670 in 2007 .

paraguay's small , primarily agricultural economy grew by a robust 6.8% in 2007 .

it is one of the poorest countries in latin america , however , and has suffered significantly from a recent drought and the global economic downturn .

the paraguayan economy is particularly dependent on its two larger neighbors , brazil and argentina , for its export markets .

while gdp growth slowed to an estimated 5.8% in 2008 , it has contracted sharply in 2009 .

economic growth is estimated to have contracted by 3.8% in 2009 , with a projected return to growth of 4.2% in 2010 .

paraguay experienced an economic recession for several years in the aftermath of a series of bank failures from 1996-1998 that wiped out half of paraguay's locally owned banks .

when inaugurated in 2003 , former president duarte inherited a government that had defaulted on $138 million in debt , primarily as a result of low tax revenue .

under president duarte , the economy rebounded , due in part to the implementation of reforms that included anti - corruption initiatives , which increased revenue , strengthened institutions , and created a more favorable environment for foreign investment .

the paraguayan economy remains heavily dependent on its traditional agricultural exports of soybeans , cotton and meat .

approximately 20% of gdp is derived from agriculture , and agricultural activities employ approximately one - quarter of the country's workforce .

other agricultural products include wheat , corn , sugarcane , sesame and other fruits and vegetables .

paraguay's industrial sector is still largely underdeveloped , with much of the population still employed in subsistence agriculture .

economic growth tends to be limited by paraguay's dependence on imports of manufactured goods , as well as capital goods that are necessary to supply the industrial and investment requirements of the economy .

the small manufacturing sector includes agricultural goods , leather , textile , automatic data processing ( adp ) machine parts , and tobacco products .

the service sector is dominated by communications , which has benefitted from strong foreign direct investment ( fdi ) and electricity production from the itaipú hydropower plant co - owned with brazil and the yacyretá plant co - owned with argentina .

paraguay's informal sector is very large and may be twice the size of the formal sector .

consequently , while the official unemployment rate is relatively low ( 5.4% estimated for 2008 ) , the actual unemployment and underemployment rates are estimated to be much higher .

poverty rates have dropped slightly from 61% of the population in 2001 to 58.2% in 2008 .

remittances from paraguayans living abroad have significantly contributed to economic growth , increasing from approximately $200 million in 2000 to $800 million in 2008 .

a significant but declining part of the country's commercial sector consists of importing goods from the united states and asia for re - export into neighboring countries .

most of these imported goods are not declared at customs , preventing the government from obtaining substantial tax revenue .

counterfeit trade and smuggling are prevalent in the country's border regions .

increased government enforcement of taxes and custom laws is having an impact on the underground economy as a whole , although much remains to be done .

overriding a presidential veto , paraguay's congress voted to delay implementation of a personal income tax for a third successive time in june 2009 .

this was a blow to the lugo administration's plans to raise social expenditures and implement a land reform program .

the colorado / unace majority in congress also increased the fiscal deficit by raising the state pension for low income earners and other public sector wages .

members of lugo's inner circle accused the congress of sabotaging the president's land and fiscal reform policies .

the personal income tax was again due to take effect in early 2010 , but opposition in congress has continued to prevent implementation .

while promising to address income inequality and land reform , president lugo has continued the orthodox macroeconomic policies adopted by the predecessor duarte administration in 2003 .

those policies contributed to a slow and steady economic recovery after a period of recessions and weak recoveries and led to the achievement of positive economic growth .

lugo's appointment of dionisio borda as finance minister , and of other centrist politicians to his cabinet , are seen by many observers as an indication of his intent to consolidate macroeconomic stability .

borda is an independent economist , known for implementing fiscal reform .

stricter fiscal controls begun under the prior administration , which borda also served , continue to increase the number of registered taxpayers and the amount of revenue generated by the business income tax .

paraguay and the united states have good relations , cooperating extensively on counternarcotics and counterterrorism efforts .

the united states strongly supports the consolidation of paraguay's democracy and continued economic reforms .

following the april 2008 election , then - u.s .

ambassador to paraguay james cason congratulated lugo and the apc on their victory and expressed a commitment to work with them to strengthen bilateral relations .

u.s. imports from paraguay totaled $78.4 million in 2008 while the value of u.s. exports to paraguay was over $1.6 billion .

machinery and electrical machinery account for the lion's share of u.s. exports to paraguay .

the protection of intellectual property rights ( ipr , eg , fighting piracy , counterfeiting , and contraband ) has been a u.s. concern .

the duarte government made significant efforts to improve ipr protection , but the united states trade representative maintains that the country continues to have problems due to its porous border and ineffective prosecutions .

in 2003 , u.s. and paraguayan officials signed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) to strengthen legal protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights in paraguay .

in december 2007 , the mou was revised and extended through 2009 , and in november 2009 the agreement was extended again through 2011 .

the united states is particularly concerned about illicit activities in the tri - border area ( tba ) of paraguay , argentina , and brazil , where money laundering , drug trafficking , arms smuggling , and trade in counterfeit and contraband goods are prevalent .

the tri - border region is loosely controlled due to porous borders , a lack of surveillance , weak law enforcement and pervasive local corruption , especially in the paraguayan border city of ciudad del este .

the united states has worked closely with the governments of the tba countries on counterterrorism issues through the "3+1" regional cooperation mechanism , which serves as a forum for discussions , and the united states has provided anti - terrorism and anti - money - laundering support to paraguay .

u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) sent a team of specialists to the tri - border region to investigate trade - based money laundering in 2006 , and has assisted the paraguayan government in developing a trade transparency unit to examine discrepancies in trade data in order to detect customs fraud , trade - based money laundering or the financing of terrorism .

u.s. treasury officials have held workshops in the region to encourage more banking sector involvement in efforts against money laundering .

the u.s. embassy's legal adviser in asunción held training courses for local investigators and prosecutors to combat possible terrorism links .

the united states has been concerned for a number of years that the radical lebanon - based hezbollah and the sunni muslim palestinian group hamas have used the tba to raise funds from the region's sizable muslim communities by participating in illicit activities and soliciting donations .

nevertheless , according to the state department's annual terrorism report for 2008 ( issued in april 2009 ) , there is no corroborated information that these or other islamic extremist groups have an operational presence in the tba .

the state department's 2008 terrorism report stated although paraguay was generally cooperative on counterterrorism efforts , its judicial system is weak and politicized , the police force is widely viewed as ineffective and corrupt , and the country lacks strong anti - money laundering and terrorist financing legislation .

in june 2008 , paraguay's congress improved money laundering legislation as part of a major overhaul of the penal code .

however , according to the terrorism report , a bill to enact important criminal procedure reform to prosecute money laundering and terrorism was delayed for a year by the congress's legal reform commission .

effective terrorist financing legislation will be critical to keep paraguay current with its international obligations .

the terrorism report also maintained that paraguay did not exercise effective immigration or customs control on its borders .

efforts to address illicit activity in the tba were uneven because of a lack of resources , and corruption within customs , police , and the judiciary .

with u.s. support , the government's secretariat for the prevention of money laundering reportedly made progress against money laundering , including december 2008 raids on illegal exchange houses .

under the mcc threshold program , the united states provided assistance with the training of judges , prosecutors and police in investigation techniques critical to money laundering and terrorist cases .

paraguay made some progress on counterterrorism legislation in 2009 .

the paraguayan congress passed a measure in july 2009 that modifies the anti - money laundering law .

the passed bill empowers the secretariat for the prevention of money laundering ( seprelad ) in several ways .

it elevates the agency to the level of a ministry that reports directly to the president , it broadens its capacity to require suspicious transaction reports from a wider group of financial institutions , and it increases seprelad's power to audit financial institutions to ensure their procedures are adequate to prevent money laundering .

in addition , the executive has initiated legislation that would criminalize the offences of terrorism , terrorist association and terrorist financing .

attempts to gain the approval of congress on such legislation were made in 2007 , november 2009 , and december 2009 .

in december 2009 , president lugo withdrew the counterterrorism legislation that would modify some aspects of the criminal code over objections raised by human rights organizations who argued that the new legislation threatened the international protection of human rights and may undermine freedom of assembly and freedom of speech .

paraguayan authorities , however , remain optimistic that a modified initiative may pass later in 2010 .

