"pay - as - you - go" ( paygo ) procedures play an important role in enforcing budget policies with respect to the consideration of revenue and direct spending legislation .

generally , the purpose of paygo procedures is to discourage or prevent the enactment of legislation that would cause , or increase , a deficit or reduce a surplus .

paygo procedures are not a comprehensive means of budget enforcement because they do not apply to discretionary spending , which is provided in annual appropriations acts ; such spending is subject to other budget enforcement procedures .

further , paygo rules deal only with the budgetary impact of legislation considered by congress ; they do not address changes in direct spending and revenue levels under current law stemming from changes in the economy , demographic trends , and other factors .

over the years , several different paygo procedures have been used for budget enforcement purposes .

the paygo procedures have been based in statute as well as congressional rules .

statutory and rules - based paygo procedures have been in effect simultaneously at times , while at other times only one form of paygo procedures was in effect .

this report examines the statutory paygo process that was in effect from 1991 through 2002 , beginning with a discussion of the complex and evolving budget enforcement framework of which it was an important part .

the report continues with an explanation of the origin , extension , and termination of the paygo process , a review of its regular operation and statutory interventions in that operation involving directed scorekeeping , and an identification of major direct spending and revenue legislation subject to the paygo process .

it concludes with a brief discussion of proposals to restore the paygo process .

the modern congressional budget process commenced with the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 .

with respect to budget enforcement procedures , significant revisions and augmentations occurred under the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 , the budget enforcement act of 1990 , and other laws .

in addition , the house and senate established their own paygo rules .

these laws and rules are summarized briefly below .

the statutory paygo process originated in the budget enforcement act of 1990 , was extended by the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 and the budget enforcement act of 1997 , and effectively was terminated by p.l .

107-312 .

the first three of these acts were budget reconciliation measures , while the last act was a freestanding measure devoted solely to the purpose of terminating the paygo process before its scheduled expiration .

each of these measures is discussed in more detail below .

this section identifies and describes the main elements of the statutory paygo process as it was intended to operate .

further , it analyzes the operation of the process by focusing on the final paygo determinations made each year by the omb director and the use of emergency designations .

statutory interventions in the process involving directed scorekeeping , and the major direct spending and revenue legislation enacted under paygo procedures , are discussed in later sections .

in addition to availing itself of the authority under the 1985 balanced budget act to designate direct spending and revenue changes in legislation as emergency requirements , congress and the president also modified the operation of the paygo process through interventions using regular legislative procedures .

in these instances , congress and the president included "directed scorekeeping" provisions in legislation instructing the omb director on how to treat the budgetary effects of legislation with regard to the paygo scorecard .

during the 12 calendar years that the paygo process operated , from 1991 through 2002 , the omb director issued separate cost estimates on nearly 600 direct spending and revenue measures .

in addition , hundreds of other direct spending and revenue measures — each with an impact of less than $500 thousand — were identified by the omb director , but separate cost estimates were not prepared for them .

of these hundreds of paygo measures , 65 may be considered to be "major" paygo legislation on the basis that the omb director determined that they had an impact of $100 million or more in at least one of the first five fiscal years scored ( including the current year , the budget year , and the first three outyears ) .

table 7 shows the net budgetary impact of the 65 major paygo measures on a calendar year basis for 1991-2002 .

for each calendar year , the balances reflect the 5-year impact of all paygo measures enacted during that year .

these balances , unlike the final determinations presented in the preceding tables , do not reflect the impact of paygo legislation enacted in prior years or the removal of costs or savings from the scorecard due to directed scorekeeping provisions .

further , net costs of $96.723 billion over five years designated as emergency requirements ( in the job creation and worker assistance act and the air transportation safety and system stabilization act ) are counted in the table .

other paygo spending containing emergency requirements is not counted in the table because the necessary information was not provided in the omb director's final sequestration reports .

during the first eight calendar years , 1991-1998 , the 5-year total balances either were negative amounts ( in six instances ) or positive amounts less than $5 billion ( in two instances ) .

the total balances ranged from a low of - $505.122 billion ( for 1993 ) to a high of $4.037 billion ( for 1995 ) .

in the remaining four calendar years , 1999-2002 , the 5-year total balances all were positive amounts .

they ranged from $29.066 billion ( for 1999 ) to $434.720 billion ( for 2001 ) .

nearly three - quarters ( 48 ) of the 65 major paygo measures had a 5-year total balance of less than $5 billion , amounting to an average annual impact of less than $1 billion .

the remaining 17 paygo measures , each with a 5-year total balance greater than $5 billion , are shown in table 6 .

 ( the omb director scored two measures , the balanced budget act of 1997 and the taxpayer relief act of 1997 , as a single entry. ) .

as indicated in table 8 , five measures had five - year total balances that were negative , ranging from - $5.254 billion for the omnibus consolidated and emergency supplemental appropriations act for fy1998 to - $504.763 billion for the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 .

the other dozen measures all had positive 5-year total balances , ranging from $5.192 billion for the agricultural risk protection act of 2000 to $403.378 billion for the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 .

with regard to the 17 major paygo measures identified in table 6 , the five acts with negative 5-year total balances were enacted before or during the 1998 session .

on the other hand , the 12 acts with positive 5-year total balances were enacted during or after the 1999 session .

table 9 provides detailed information on the 65 major paygo measures .

proposals have been made from time to time to restore the statutory paygo requirement , but disagreements have centered principally on whether it should apply to both direct spending and revenue legislation ( as originally framed ) or only to direct spending legislation ( as proposed mainly by some republicans ) .

in the 108 th congress , president george w. bush submitted draft legislation to congress , the spending control act of 2004 , that would have restored the discretionary spending limits and the paygo process for direct spending legislation only .

the house budget committee reported a bill , h.r .

3973 ( h.rept .

108-442 ; march 19 , 2004 ) , reflecting the president's proposal ; a comparable measure , h.r .

4663 , was considered in the house on june 25 , 2004 , but failed to pass by a vote of 146-268 .

in the 110 th congress , interest was renewed in restoring a comprehensive paygo requirement .

section 508 ( sense of congress regarding extension of the statutory pay - as - you - go rule ) of the fy2008 budget resolution , s.con.res .

21 , stated: "it is the sense of congress that in order to reduce the deficit congress should extend paygo consistent with provisions of the budget enforcement act of 1990. .

a similar provision was included , as section 515 , in the fy2009 budget resolution ( s.con.res .

70 ) .

on june 9 , 2009 , president obama announced that he would submit a paygo proposal to congress , the statutory pay - as - you - go act of 2009 , that would restore a process applying to both direct spending and revenue legislation .

house majority leader steny hoyer introduced the proposal on june 17 as h.r .

2920 ; the proposal did not include discretionary spending limits .

on june 25 , the house budget committee held a hearing on the proposal , receiving testimony from omb director peter orszag , among others .

on july 22 , 2009 , the house considered and passed h.r .

2920 .

prior to action on the bill , the house considered and agreed to ( by a vote of 243-182 ) a special rule , h.res .

665 , providing for the bill's consideration .

a modified substitute amendment was incorporated into the bill automatically under a "self - executing" provision in the rule , and a substitute amendment offered by representative paul ryan , the ranking minority member of the house budget committee , was defeated , by a vote of 196-234 .

following the defeat , by a vote of 196-234 , of a motion to recommit with instructions offered by representative ryan , the house passed the bill , by a vote of 265-166 .

section 421 of the budget resolution for fy2010 ( s.con.res .

13 ) set forth a procedure , applicable only in the house , effectively exempting from the house paygo rule and other budget enforcement procedures the costs of legislation in four policy areas: ( 1 ) payments to physicians under medicare ( "doc fix" ) , ( 2 ) middle class tax reform , ( 3 ) reform of the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) , and ( 4 ) reform of the estate and gift tax .

in each case , a limitation on the amount of costs subject to exemption was specified in section 421 .

pursuant to this procedure , the house considered h.r .

3961 ( the medicare physician payment reform act of 2009 ) on november 19 , 2009 , passing the bill by a vote of 243-183 .

under the terms of the special rule governing consideration of the bill , h.res .

903 , the text of the statutory pay - as - you - go act of 2009 , as passed earlier by the house , was added to the engrossed version of h.r .

3961 , as division b .

toward the end of the 2009 session , the house appended the text of h.r .

2920 to another measure under a similar procedure .

pursuant to section 5 of a special rule , h.res .

976 , providing for the consideration of h.r .

3326 , the defense appropriations act for fy2010 , and other measures , the text of the statutory pay - as - you - go act of 2009 was added to h.r .

2847 in an exchange of amendments with the senate .

the text of the "jobs for main street act , 2010" was incorporated into h.r .

2847 as a substitute , and the statutory paygo act was appended thereto .

prospects for consideration in the senate of h.r .

2920 or another bill reinstating the statutory paygo process are uncertain at this time .

on december 22 , 2009 , the senate entered into a unanimous consent agreement providing for the consideration of h.j.res .

45 , a long - term increase in the debt limit , on january 20 , 2010 .

several of the amendments made in order under the agreement pertain to budget enforcement issues , including an amendment to be offered by senate majority leader harry reid on "pay go. .

all of the amendments are subject to a 60-vote threshold for passage .

appendix a .

section 252 of the 1985 balanced budget act , as amended ( 2 u.s.c .

902 ) sec .

252 .

enforcing pay - as - you - go .

 ( a ) purpose. — the purpose of this section is to assure that any legislation enacted before october 1 , 2002 , affecting direct spending or receipts that increases the deficit will trigger an offsetting sequestration .

 ( b ) sequestration. — ( 1 ) timing. — not later than 15 calendar days after the date congress adjourns to end a session and on the same day as a sequestration ( if any ) under section 251 or 253 , there shall be a sequestration to offset the amount of any net deficit increase caused by all direct spending and receipts legislation enacted before october 1 , 2002 , as calculated under paragraph ( 2 ) .

 ( 2 ) calculation of deficit increase. — omb shall calculate the amount of deficit increase or decrease by adding — ( a ) all omb estimates for the budget year of direct spending and receipts legislation transmitted under subsection ( d ) ; ( b ) the estimated amount of savings in direct spending programs applicable to budget year 1 resulting from the prior year's sequestration under this section or section 253 , if any , as published in omb's final sequestration report for that prior year ; and ( c ) any net deficit increase or decrease in the current year resulting from all omb estimates for the current year of direct spending and receipts legislation transmitted under subsection ( d ) that were not reflected in the final omb sequestration report for the current year .

 ( c ) eliminating a deficit increase. — ( 1 ) the amount required to be sequestered in a fiscal year under subsection ( b ) shall be obtained from non - exempt direct spending accounts from actions taken in the following order: ( a ) first. — all reductions in automatic spending increases specified in section 256 ( a ) shall be made .

 ( b ) second. — if additional reductions in direct spending accounts are required to be made , the maximum reductions permissible under sections 256 ( b ) ( guaranteed and direct student loans ) and 256 ( c ) ( foster care and adoption assistance ) shall be made .

 ( c ) third. — ( i ) if additional reductions in direct spending accounts are required to be made , each remaining non - exempt direct spending account shall be reduced by the uniform percentage necessary to make the reductions in direct spending required by paragraph ( 1 ) 2 ; except that the medicare programs specified in section 256 ( d ) shall not be reduced by more than 4 percent and the uniform percentage applicable to all other direct spending programs under this paragraph shall be increased ( if necessary ) to a level sufficient to achieve the required reduction in direct spending .

 ( ii ) for purposes of determining reductions under clause ( i ) , outlay reductions ( as a result of sequestration of commodity credit corporation commodity price support contracts in the fiscal year of a sequestration ) that would occur in the following fiscal year shall be credited as outlay reductions in the fiscal year of the sequestration .

 ( 2 ) for purposes of this subsection , accounts shall be assumed to be at the level in the baseline .

 ( d ) estimates. — ( 1 ) cbo estimates. — as soon as practicable after congress completes action on any direct spending or receipts legislation , cbo shall provide an estimate to omb of that legislation .

 ( 2 ) omb estimates. — not later than 7 calendar days ( excluding saturdays , sundays , and legal holidays ) after the date of enactment of any direct spending or receipts legislation , omb shall transmit a report to the house of representatives and to the senate containing — ( a ) the cbo estimate of that legislation ; ( b ) an omb estimate of that legislation using current economic and technical assumptions ; and ( c ) an explanation of any difference between the 2 estimates .

 ( 3 ) significant differences. — if during the preparation of the report under paragraph ( 2 ) omb determines that there is a significant difference between the omb and cbo estimates , omb shall consult with the committees on the budget of the house of representatives and the senate regarding that difference and that consultation , to the extent practicable , shall include written communication to such committees that affords such committees the opportunity to comment before the issuance of that report .

 ( 4 ) scope of estimates. — the estimates under this section shall include the amount of change in outlays or receipts for the current year ( if applicable ) , the budget year , and each outyear excluding any amounts resulting from — ( a ) full funding of , and continuation of , the deposit insurance guarantee commitment in effect under current estimates ; and ( b ) emergency provisions as designated under subsection ( e ) .

 ( 5 ) scorekeeping guidelines. — omb and cbo , after consultation with each other and the committees on the budget of the house of representatives and the senate , shall — ( a ) determine common scorekeeping guidelines ; and ( b ) in conformance with such guidelines , prepare estimates under this section .

 ( e ) emergency legislation. — if a provision of direct spending or receipts legislation is enacted that the president designates as an emergency requirement and that the congress so designates in statute , the amounts of new budget authority , outlays , and receipts in all fiscal years resulting from that provision shall be designated as an emergency requirement in the reports required under subsection ( d ) .

this subsection shall not apply to direct spending provisions to cover agricultural crop disaster assistance .

