congress is currently debating climate legislation which could affect the u.s. agriculture and forestry sectors .

in june 2009 , the house passed h.r .

2454 , the american clean energy and security act of 2009 .

in november 2009 , the senate committee on environment and public works completed markup of s. 1733 , the clean energy jobs and american power act , by approving a "manager's amendment" as a substitute , and ordered s. 1733 reported .

both the house - passed and the senate - reported bills would establish cap - and - trade systems to regulate greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions , as well as address energy efficiency , renewable energy , and other energy topics .

both bills would require major reductions in ghg emissions from entities comprising roughly 85% of current u.s. ghg emissions .

covered sectors would include electricity production , natural gas distribution , petroleum refining , and specific industrial sectors .

these and related bills and issues are currently being debated in congress .

for more detailed information see crs report r40896 , climate change: comparison of the cap - and - trade provisions in h.r .

2454 and s. 1733 .

numerous studies have attempted to estimate the economic effects of potential climate legislation currently being considered by congress .

these studies have examined both the economy - wide effects , as well as the effects to specific sectors , such as the u.s. agriculture and forestry sectors .

some of these studies have also examined the potential market and industry effects from the proposed climate legislation , including possible resource shifts such as land use conversions and related crop production changes .

some studies further examine the potential economy - wide market effects , such as possible changes to retail food prices and supplies .

this first section of this report describes results from some of the studies and discusses limitations and uncertainties associated with the economic models and their results .

the second and third sections examine two particular concerns raised by the modeling results , involving ( 1 ) lands converted from agriculture to forestry , and ( 2 ) potential unequal opportunities and costs of carbon markets in various sectors of the agricultural community .

the final section provides some conclusions .

the leading house and senate climate proposals would not require ghg emission reductions in the agriculture and forestry sectors .

however , provisions in these bills could potentially raise farm costs for energy , fertilizers , and other production inputs , while also providing opportunities for additional farm income .

these potential effects have been estimated by various governmental agencies , including the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) and the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , as well as by several universities and farm industry groups .

many of these studies examine the possibility that higher costs may be alleviated by possible farm revenue increases from other provisions of the bills .

primarily , higher costs might be countered by possible revenues for farmers who participate in carbon offset programs .

costs might also be balanced by tradable allowances that could be provided at no cost to certain agricultural industries , such as fertilizer manufacturers .

in addition , the renewable energy provisions in these bills could potentially expand the market for farm - based biofuels , biomass residues , dedicated energy crops , and other renewable energy production .

both bills also provide incentives for international forestry and related land - based activities .

this section describes these analyses in some detail and puts their results in perspective by discussing limitations and uncertainties inherent in all models , as well as constraints specific to the epa and usda studies .

both the usda and epa models have projected the conversion of substantial u.s. agricultural land to tree plantings in response to expected favorable conditions in future carbon offset markets however , many in the u.s. agricultural community are concerned that this could take millions of agricultural acres out of production , removing farmers and employees from the business of food production and raising food prices to consumers .

others question whether such scenarios will actually materialize .

farmers may be unwilling to participate in a regulatory program that could involve significant administrative and other transaction costs , as well as for other reasons .

considering the general uncertainty about the possible outcomes of a regulatory process , following the still - uncertain passage of climate legislation in congress , it is not possible to confidently predict or quantify the extent to which available u.s. cropland might be converted to woodlands .

following is a discussion of the potential for land conversion in the u.s. agricultural sectors .

this includes information suggesting that u.s. cropland would be converted to woodlands , as farmers' respond to expected favorable market conditions and prices under a future carbon offset market .

other considerations might possibly temper such a response by u.s. farmers and result in possibly lower land conversion rates than predicted in various models .

some in the u.s. farming community have expressed concern that only certain landowners and agricultural producers might be able to participate in the carbon offset market .

they suggest that only larger landowners and farming operations would benefit from a carbon program , and this may result in further industry consolidation in the farming sectors , exacerbating difficult business conditions for smaller , traditional farmers .

others are concerned that if only certain crop producers in some regions benefit from participating in the new carbon offset market , this could result in inequities across all crop producers , benefitting some while not benefitting others .

when assessing climate change legislation such as a cap - and - trade program , it is difficult for economic models to forecast costs and associated impacts several decades into the future , much less beyond .

assumptions such as regulatory requirements become more fragile as time goes forward , and unforeseen events ( such as technological breakthroughs ) and unpredictable behavior similarly threaten the basic structure of the model .

hence , long - term projections are at best speculative and should be viewed with attentive skepticism .

the finer and more detailed the estimate ( eg , land use changes in specific regions ) , the greater the skepticism should be .

the economic impact estimates of h.r .

2454 offered by epa and usda are not unique in this regard .

although both epa and usda concluded that the overall costs of the ghg cap - and - trade program established by h.r .

2454 would be "modest" — indeed finding that carbon offsets revenue could yield net economic gains for the u.s. agricultural sectors — these conclusions are rife with uncertainty .

however , the uncertainty does not necessarily suggest that the economic impacts would turn out to be dramatically different than predicted , simply that they are unknowable .

other models support the epa and usda conclusions of agriculture sector - wide benefits .

many stakeholders are concerned that smaller - sized operations and some regions might not be able to participate , and thus share in these benefits .

the details of such participation rates are discussed below .

however , even if their participation rates are low , they might still benefit from land conversions and carbon offsets by larger operations .

with some land shifting out of crop production , commodity prices are likely to rise , which benefits all farmers .

similarly , alternative sources of farm revenue raise land values , thus benefitting all landowners , even if they do not or cannot participate in carbon offset markets .

many variables complicate the economic analyses and related estimates .

in particular , the projections of land - use changes are debatable , considering the following factors: offset prices — prices are the key driver of epa simulation results regarding land conversion rates .

assumed high and rising prices substantially influence modeling results , showing increasing land conversion and afforestation .

at constant or less sharply increasing prices , projected land conversion rates are much lower .

farmer response — epa and usda analyses cannot estimate the effects of various non - economic and social norms within the farming sectors .

this could influence actual program participation and land conversion , likely overstating the modeling results .

missing costs — epa and usda analyses do not account for all likely farm - level costs , such as transaction costs associated with the future regulatory regime and possible foregone revenue from farm support programs associated with commodity crop production if farmers chose to participate in a carbon market .

if these costs were taken into account , land conversion rates would likely be lower .

regional and biological variability — epa and usda analyses are not able to fully account for precise site - specific baseline conditions , and biological differentiation is specified only at the regional level .

it is unclear how this could influence the results of the modeling analyses .

capacity constraints — epa and usda analyses may not reflect actual physical capacity constraints and limitations to support substantial afforestation efforts that will also ensure that carbon sequestration potential meets the full set of requirements in the carbon reduction program .

this could overstate the modeling results .

land tenure — epa and usda analyses do not reflect possible legal and contractual constraints that might affect participation in the carbon market , given differences in the u.s. crop sectors between farmland ownership and leasing in the united states .

as landowners would likely be in a better position to participate in a carbon market program than renters , this could overstate the modeling results .

some are concerned that the cap - and - trade offset market would disproportionately favor larger producers or certain crop producers .

the fasom simulation model cannot depict differences in farm size in their models .

the evidence and speculation on the possibly inequitable distribution of benefits is mixed .

on one hand , market forces and trends within the farming sectors suggest that larger operations would likely benefit more relative to smaller farms because of their economies of scale .

also the relative ability of smaller - sized operations to be able to cover various transaction costs of participating in the new carbon market ( but not captured in the simulation model ) is also unknown , but may favor larger - sized operations .

on the other hand , smaller - sized operations might also benefit from the developing carbon markets .

smaller - sized operations are commonly more diversified , and many are more responsive to non - economic influences than larger - sized operations .

in addition , smaller - sized farms are more likely to be owner - operated , rather than leased , which may make a shift in operations to carbon offset projects more feasible .

smaller - sized operators have shown a marked willingness to participate in conservation - payment programs , such as crp .

finally , aggregators have emerged to develop projects for the voluntary carbon markets , and seem likely to continue and even expand their role in assisting smaller - sized farming operations to participate in carbon markets .

modeling efforts are not able to differentiate by type of operation or region .

usda expanded upon epa's model simulations to disaggregate the land conversion data to the regional level .

this analysis shows that most carbon offset supplies , and the largest offset benefits , will originate in the corn belt and lake states , with lesser benefits in the northeast , south central , and rocky mountain states .

it is unclear whether these results would differ under alternative assumptions .

these results also do not mean that other regions receive no benefits .

the southwest , for example , shows an increase in cropland , while most other regions are showing conversions of cropland to forestland ; the likely explanation is that higher crop values , and higher land values generally , due to the carbon offset program increase farm revenues sufficiently to expand crop production in areas where crop production currently cannot cover operating costs .

appendix a .

selected studies of potential economic impacts of carbon offset programs epa , analysis of s. 1733 in the 111th congress , the clean energy jobs and american power act of 2009 , october 2009 ; and analysis of h.r .

2454 in the 111th congress , the american clean energy and security act of 2009 , june 2009 , http: / / www.epa.gov / climatechange / economics / economicanalyses.html .

usda , the impacts of the american clean energy and security act of 2009 on u.s. agriculture , december 18 , 2009 , http: / / www.usda.gov / oce / newsroom / archives / releases / 2009files / impactsofhr%202454.pdf ; and a preliminary analysis of the effects of h.r .

2454 on u.s. agriculture , july 22 , 2009 , http: / / www.usda.gov / oce / newsroom / archives / .

congressional budget office ( cbo ) , "the estimated costs to households from the cap - and - trade provisions of h.r .

2454," june 19 , 2009 , http: / / www.cbo.gov / ftpdocs / 103xx / doc10327 / 06-19-capandtradecosts.pdf .

agricultural carbon market working group , "the value of a carbon offset market for agriculture," http: / / www.farmland.org / programs / environment / workshops / documents / tcgwhitepaper_valueofoffsets_final.pdf .

25x ' 25 carbon work group , "summary of recent cost impact data , american clean energy security act of 2009 , h.r .

2454," august 2009 , http: / / www.25x25.org / storage / 25x25 / documents / carbon_subcommittee / aces_cost_summary_final_08-15-09.pdf .

kansas state university ( golden , b. et al .

 ) , "a comparison of select cost - benefit studies on the impacts of h.r .

2454 on the agriculture sector of the economy," december 8 , 2009 , http: / / www.farmland.org / documents / a - comparison - of - select - cost - benefit - studies - hr2454-impacts - on - agriculture - sector.pdf .

duke university's nicolas institute for environmental policy solutions ( baker , j.s .

et al .

 ) , "the effects of low - carbon policies on net farm income," wp 09-04 , september 2009 , http: / / www.nicholas.duke.edu / institute / ni.wp.09.04.pdf ; and http: / / www.nicholas.duke.edu / agmeeting / potential_economic_effects.pdf .

food and agriculture policy research institute ( fapri ) , "the effect of higher energy prices from h.r .

2454 on missouri crop production costs," fapri - mu report #05-09 , july 2009 , http: / / www.fapri.missouri.edu / outreach / publications / 2009 / fapri_mu_report_05_09.pdf .

texas a&m university's agricultural and food policy center ( afpc ) , "economic implications of the epa analysis of the cap and trade provisions of h.r .

2454 for u.s. representative farms," afpc research paper 09-2 , august 2009 , http: / / www.afpc.tamu.edu / pubs / 2 / 526 / rr%2009-2%20paper%20-%20for%20web.pdf .

iowa state university , center for agricultural and rural development ( card ) , bruce babcock , "costs and benefits to agriculture from climate change policy," summer 2009 , http: / / www.card.iastate.edu / iowa_ag_review / .

iowa state university , card , tristan brown et al. , "market impact of domestic offset programs," working paper 10-wp 502 , january 2010 , http: / / www.econ.iastate.edu / research / webpapers / paper_13154.pdf .

university of tennessee ( de la torre ugarte , d. et al .

 ) , "analysis of the implications of climate change and energy legislation to the agricultural sector," department of agricultural economics , institute of agriculture , november 2009 , http: / / www.25x25.org / storage / 25x25 / documents / ut_climate_energy_report_25x25_november.pdf .

university of arkansas ( nalley , lanier , et al. ) .

 , "how a cap - and - trade policy of green house gases could alter the face of agriculture in the south: a spatial and production level analysis , department of agricultural economics and agribusiness," http: / / purl.umn.edu / 55717 .

informa economics , "potential impacts of cap and trade policy on u.s. corn , soybean , and wheat producers," prepared for the national corn growers association ( ncga ) , december 2009 , http: / / www.fb.org / newsroom / fbn / 2009 / fbn_07-06-09.pdf .

american farm bureau federation ( afbf ) , "'flawed' cap - and - trade bill goes to senate," fb news , july 6 , 2009 vol .

88 no .

13 , http: / / www.fb.org / newsroom / fbn / 2009 / fbn_07-06-09.pdf .

fertilizer institute ( commissioned study ) , "climate change , effects of cap and trade legislation on u.s. agriculture," doane advisory services , http: / / tfi.org / issues / climate change.cfm .

brookings institution , "consequences of cap and trade," june 2009 , http: / / www.brookings.edu / ~ / media / files / events / 2009 / 0608_climate_change_economy / 20090608_climate_change_economy.pdf .

cra international , "impact on the economy of the american clean energy and security act of 2009," may 2009 , http: / / www.crai.com / uploadedfiles / publications / impact - on - the - economy - of - the - american - clean - energy - and - security - act - of - 2009.pdf .

appendix b .

selected studies of potential economic impacts of unmitigated climate change usda , the effects of climate change on u.s. ecosystems , december 2009 , http: / / www.usda.gov / img / content / effectsofclimatechangeonusecosystem.pdf .

usda , the e ffects of c limate c hange on a griculture , l and r esources , w ater r esources , and b iodiversity in the united states , may 2008 , http: / / www.climatescience.gov / library / sap / sap4-3 / final - report / default.htm .

massachusetts institute of technology , "agriculture: the potential consequences of climate variability and change for the united states," june 2002 , joint program on the science and policy of global change .

institute for policy integrity , "the other side of the coin: the economic benefits of climate legislation," policy brief 4 , september 2009 , http: / / www.policyintegrity.org / documents / othersideofthecoin.pdf .

j. bloomfield and t. francesco , "agriculture: the potential impacts of global warming on u.s. agriculture," first national assessment of the potential consequences of climate variability and change , 2000 , http: / / www.climatehotmap.org / impacts / agriculture.html .

environmental working group , crying wolf: climate change will cost farmers far more than a climate bill , october 2009 , http: / / www.ewg.org / agmag / 2009 / 10 / climate - change - will - cost - farmers - far - more - than - a - climate - bill / .

