legislative interest in the patent system was evidenced by the introduction of reform legislation in earlier sessions of congress .

in the 111 th congress , bills would have amended existing patent law in numerous respects , including changes to the right of a patent owner to obtain compensatory damages , the standard for judicial award of enhanced damages for willful infringement , the ability of patent owners to select the court in which they will bring suit , and the willingness of courts to accept appeals of orders interpreting a patent .

patent reform legislation introduced in earlier congresses would have made additional changes , including modifications to the doctrine of inequitable conduct .

discussion of these issues may potentially continue in the 112 th congress .

although the patent system has been the subject of congressional scrutiny over the past few years , the courts have also been active in making changes to important patent law principles .

many changes introduced by the judiciary have concerned topics that are also the subject of congressional consideration .

for example , the supreme court issued an important decision concerning injunctive relief in ebay inc. v. mercexchange , l.l.c .

at the same time legislation before congress would have addressed that issue .

some experts believe that as a result of the ebay decision , legislative reform of the principles of injunctive relief in patent law became unnecessary .

indeed , the patent reform bills placed before congress subsequent to ebay have not addressed this issue .

review of pertinent judicial developments relating to selected patent law topics is timely for several reasons .

first , an awareness of recent judicial opinions may assist understanding of the context of current legislative reform proposals .

second , some observers believe that several of these opinions have addressed the very concerns that had motivated legislative reform proposals , thereby obviating or reducing the need for congressional action .

third , a review of legislative and judicial developments provides an instructive historical narrative and allows for a comparison of relative institutional capabilities of these two branches of government .

this report reviews the relationship between congress and the courts in patent reform .

it begins by offering a summary of the patent system .

the report then discusses a number of topics that have been the subject of both judicial and legislative consideration .

the current state of the law is then contrasted with legislative reform proposals before previous congresses .

the report closes with observations concerning the subtle interaction between legislative , administrative , and judicial actors within the patent system and their impact upon the u.s. innovation environment .

the u.s. constitution confers upon congress the power "to promote the progress of ... useful arts , by securing for limited times to .. .

inventors the exclusive right to their ... discoveries...." in accordance with the patent act of 1952 , an inventor may seek the grant of a patent by preparing and submitting an application to the u.s. patent & trademark office ( uspto ) .

uspto officials known as examiners then determine whether the invention disclosed in the application merits the award of a patent .

uspto procedures require examiners to determine whether the invention fulfills certain substantive standards set by the patent statute .

to be patentable , an invention that constitutes a "process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter" may be patented .

it must also be novel , or different , from subject matter disclosed by an earlier patent , publication , or other state - of - the - art knowledge .

in addition , an invention is not patentable if "the subject matter as a whole would have been obvious at the time the invention was made to a person having ordinary skill in the art to which said subject matter pertains. .

this requirement of "nonobviousness" prevents the issuance of patents claiming subject matter that a skilled artisan would have been able to implement in view of the knowledge of the state of the art .

the invention must also be useful , a requirement that is satisfied if the invention is operable and provides a tangible benefit .

in addition to these substantive requirements , the uspto examiner will consider whether the submitted application fully discloses and distinctly claims the invention .

in particular , the application must enable persons skilled in the art to make and use the invention without undue experimentation .

in addition , the application must disclose the "best mode," or preferred way , that the applicant knows to practice the invention .

if the uspto allows the patent to issue , its owner obtains the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , offering to sell or importing into the united states the patented invention .

those who engage in those acts without the permission of the patentee during the term of the patent can be held liable for infringement .

adjudicated infringers may be enjoined from further infringing acts .

the patent statute also provides for an award of damages "adequate to compensate for the infringement , but in no event less than a reasonable royalty for the use made of the invention by the infringer. .

the maximum term of patent protection is ordinarily set at 20 years from the date the application is filed .

at the end of that period , others may employ that invention without regard to the expired patent .

patent rights do not enforce themselves .

patent owners who wish to compel others to respect their rights must commence enforcement proceedings , which most commonly consist of litigation in the federal courts .

although issued patents enjoy a presumption of validity , accused infringers may assert that a patent is invalid or unenforceable on a number of grounds .

the court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) possesses nationwide jurisdiction over most patent appeals from the district courts .

the supreme court enjoys discretionary authority to review cases decided by the federal circuit .

since 2005 , a number of bills titled "the patent reform act" have been introduced before congress .

to varying degrees , each of the bills would work substantial changes to the current patent system .

the bills have differed in the specific reforms that they have proposed .

the many proposed reforms have included a shift to a first - inventor - to - file priority system , allowance of assignee filing , changes to the law of patent damages , introduction of post - grant opposition proceedings , and modifications to the principle of venue as it applies to patent cases .

none of this legislation has yet been enacted .

even as congress has contemplated patent reform legislation , the courts also have been active in issuing patent decisions .

many of these rulings relate to the same legal topics that proposed legislation would address , and several made significant changes to existing law .

as attorneys bill rooklidge and alyson barker observe , "through a variety of important decisions , the courts have embarked on their own patent reform. .

this paper next reviews a common phenomenon in patent reform: judicial changes to legal doctrines that are the subject of pending congressional legislation .

numerous patent substantive and procedural doctrines have fallen under legislative scrutiny in recent years .

a recent , recurring trend is that the courts have contemporaneously reviewed a number of the same principles .

among them are the availability of injunctions in patent cases , selection of the appropriate venue for trying a patent case , the assessment of damages against adjudicated infringers , the standards governing determinations of willful infringement , extraterritorial patent enforcement , and the availability of patents for tax planning methods .

this report reviews each of these episodes in turn .

this discussion of injunctions , venue , damages , willful infringement , extraterritorial patent protection , and tax strategy patents suggests that the courts have modified a number of patent law doctrines that were previously subject to congressional consideration .

of course , many of these principles had been developed through judicial opinions .

to that extent , congressional interest in patent reform was itself a reaction to earlier developments in the courts .

this interaction between different branches of government has become a hallmark of the recent patent reform process .

notably , the supreme court and federal circuit have not reacted to every proposal in the various patent reform acts in this manner .

for example , congress has considered legislation that would permit interlocutory appeals of claim construction rulings .

the federal circuit has not altered its general practice of disfavoring such appeals , however .

it also should be appreciated that judicial opinions have worked significant changes to a number of patent principles that were not expressly the target of proposed legislative reforms .

for example , some observers believe that the 2007 supreme court opinion in ksr v. teleflex resulted in significant changes to the law of nonobviousness .

of course , judicial changes to one component of the patent system may have an impact upon other doctrines , including those subject to congressional scrutiny .

a number of reasons may explain this pattern of judicial involvement in areas of legislative interest .

first , congress considered the initial patent reform act in 2005 .

during the years that legislation has been pending , many patent infringement cases have been tried and appealed .

the courts have therefore had many opportunities to address core patent doctrines .

second , the federal circuit hears all appeals from district courts across the united states in both patent acquisition and infringement cases .

this concentration of appellate jurisdiction provides one court with the ability to change patent doctrine relatively quickly .

further , although the rulings of other federal courts of appeal bind only a limited portion of the country , federal circuit patent precedent has effect throughout the united states .

some additional factors suggest judicial interest in legislative scrutiny of the patent system .

the federal circuit's location in washington , dc , may imply an awareness of legislative activity involving patents .

that several federal circuit judges formerly served as members of congressional staff may also suggest interest in patent reform efforts on the hill .

whatever the reasons for the persistent interaction between congress and the courts in the patent reform process , these circumstances raise a number of issues pertaining to institutional competence .

the longstanding debate over whether legislatures or courts comprise the most appropriate body to work particular legal reforms has been renewed in this setting .

law professors dan burk and mark lemley side with the courts , asserting that "congress has spent the last four years , from 2005 to 2008 , in an ultimately futile effort to reform the patent system. .

they further contend that "[d]uring the period in which congress tried and failed to reform the patent system , courts were actively involved in fixing many of the very same problems congress was ultimately unable to resolve. .

in their view the "fact that courts proved capable of solving many of the problems on which congress ultimately foundered" indicates that the courts are the most appropriate institution for working needed reforms to the patent laws .

on the other hand , legislatures are frequently seen as possessing superior resources to investigate and develop factual evidence .

compared to the courts , congress possesses greater research capabilities and superior means for obtaining information from informed third parties .

the legislative decision - making process may better reflect the views of a wide range of stakeholders and offers the advantage of superior democratic accountability .

it should also be appreciated that the judiciary does not oversee a number of significant components of the patent system .

for example , the courts cannot directly influence the budget or internal operations of the uspto .

in contrast , congress possesses authority to determine such matters as the scope of uspto rule - making authority , the level of fees the uspto may charge , and the agency's budget .

several previous congresses have considered enacting a patent reform act .

to the extent legislative deliberations are believed to alert the courts to perceived problems with a particular doctrine , however , congress may be seen as already having prompted a great deal of change to the patent system .

our recent experience highlighting the interaction between the different branches of government during the patent reform process suggests the importance of legislative awareness of judicial developments .

it also reminds us that although courts often possess a range of options in interpreting statutory language that the legislature has chosen , authority to alter the patent act itself ultimately resides with congress .

