beginning with the widespread use of e - mail by congress in the mid - 1990's , the development and adoption of new electronic technologies has altered the traditional patterns of communication between members of congress and constituents .

many members now use e - mail , official websites , blogs , youtube channels , and facebook pages to communicate with their constituents — technologies that were either non - existent or not widely available 15 years ago .

these technologies have arguably served to enhance the ability of members of congress to fulfill their representational duties by providing greater opportunities for communication between the member and individual constituents , supporting the fundamental democratic role of spreading information about public policy and government operations .

electronic communications , however , have raised some concerns .

existing law and chamber regulations on the use of communication media such as the united states postal service have proven difficult to adapt to the new electronic technologies .

in addition , electronic media could provide members with the ability to easily communicate information traditionally sent to the district ( or state ) with non - constituents or non - u.s. residents .

this report examines member use of one specific new electronic communication medium: twitter .

after providing an overview and background of twitter , the report analyzes patterns of member use of twitter during august and september 2009 .

this report is inherently a snapshot in time of a dynamic process .

as with any new technology , the number of members using twitter and the patterns of use may change rapidly in short periods of time and undoubtedly will change over longer periods of time .

thus , the conclusions drawn from this data can not be easily generalized nor can these results be used to predict future behavior .

members of congress have more choices and options available to communicate with constituents than they did 15 years ago .

in addition to traditional modes of communication such as town - hall meetings , telephone calls , and postal mail , members can now reach their constituents via e - mail , websites , tele - town halls , online videos , social networking sites , and other electronic - based communication applications .

the rise of such electronic communication has altered the traditional patterns of communication between members and constituents .

although virtually all members continue to use traditional modes of constituent communication , use of new communications technology is increasing .

for example , prior to 1995 , there was virtually no e - mail traffic between members and constituents .

in 2008 , almost 200 million e - mails were sent to the house of representatives , and a similar number were sent from house computers .

member official websites , blogs , youtube channels , and facebook pages — all non - existent several years ago — also receive significant traffic .

conversely , the amount of postal mail sent to congress has dropped by more than 50% during the same time period .

in addition , electronic technology has reduced the marginal cost of constituent communications ; unlike postal letters , members can reach large numbers of constituents for a relatively small fixed cost .

member use of electronic communications has raised several concerns .

some of these concerns are similar to those associated with traditional modes of constituent communications , such as the potential electoral advantage that the franking privilege — the ability to send official mail for free — may confer on incumbent members .

other issues , such as the use of third - party communication software platforms , are unique to the new electronic mediums .

in addition , existing law and chamber regulations on the use of communication media , such as the united states postal service , have proven difficult to apply directly to the new electronic technologies .

created in 2006 by developer jack dorsey as a tool to keep in touch with friends , twitter is a web - based social networking service that allows users to send and read short messages .

also considered a micro - blogging site , twitter users send "tweets" of up to 140 characters .

these tweets are displayed on an author's twitter home page and on the pages of people subscribed to the rss feed associated with the author's twitter home page .

this report analyzes the following questions related to member use of twitter: what proportion of members are using twitter ? .

how often and when are members using twitter ? .

how widely are member tweets being followed ? .

what are members tweeting about ? .

the use of twitter by members of congress is an evolving phenomenon .

as members continue to embrace new technologies , their use of twitter and other forms of social media may increase .

these mediums allow members to communicate directly with constituents ( and others ) in a potentially interactive way that is not possible through mail or e - mail .

for members and their staff , the ability to collect and transmit real time information from constituents could be influential for policy or voting decisions .

