humans depend on plant genetic resources for food and agriculture ( pgrfa ) for many aspects of survival , including food , fuel , and fiber .

a study conducted by the united nations food and agriculture organization ( fao ) concluded that plants contribute the vast proportion of the world's food supply , particularly for developing countries in africa , asia , and the pacific .

at a global level , the total dietary energy and protein provided by plants is 84% and 63% , respectively , while animal sources contribute 16% and 37% , respectively ( table 1 ) .

plant resources are even more critical in africa , where about 93% of food energy and 79% of protein are derived from plant sources .

the history of the development and use of pgrfa has been characterized by relatively rapid movements of domesticated crops and animals across and among continents , with ultimately a relatively small number of species representing a very high percentage of the daily diets of people around the world .

fao estimates that four crops — rice , wheat , sugar ( beet and cane ) , and corn — account for over 60% of human calorie intake from plants .

the u.s. food supply is based on intensive agriculture .

intensive agriculture benefits from genetic uniformity in crops , but it can also increase the potential for crop vulnerability to new pests , diseases , and environmental stresses .

an example of that vulnerability occurred in 1970 , when a widespread outbreak of a disease called southern corn blight hit from the southeastern united states into the great plains .

the epidemic cost farmers 15% of the nation's corn crop that year because nearly all the corn planted was genetically susceptible to the fungus that caused the blight .

congress responded to this event by establishing the national plant germplasm system ( npgs ) within the united states department of agriculture's ( usda's ) agricultural research service ( ars ) .

the npgs is a national network of public agencies ( federal and state agencies including more than 20 federal gene banks located across the country ) , private institutions , and individuals .

it is the primary entity in the u.s. effort to conserve and use crop germplasm for crop improvement .

with a collection that includes about 85 crops , the npgs collects plant germplasm from all over the world .

it is "devoted to the free and unrestricted exchange of germplasm with all nations and permits access to u.s. collections by any person with a valid use," such as for research or breeding , although medical and other uses are included .

germplasm users in other countries have the same privileges as those in the united states .

according to ars , this policy has "grown out of the belief that germplasm , like the oceans and air , is a world heritage to be freely shared for the benefit of all humanity. .

through these efforts , npgs assists in improving the quality and productivity of crops in the united states and in the world .

the germplasm resources information network ( grin ) provides support to npgs and gives germplasm users continuous access to databases for the maintenance of passport , characterization , evaluation , inventory , and distribution data important for the effective management and use of national germplasm collections .

grin is also administered by ars .

in 1990 , congress authorized the establishment of a national genetic resources program ( ngrp ) .

ngrp has the responsibility to acquire , characterize , preserve , document , and distribute to scientists germplasm of all life forms important for food and agricultural production , which , in addition to plants , includes animals , microbes , and invertebrates .

the national genetic resources advisory council ( ngrac ) advises and makes recommendations to the secretary and director of the ngrp .

the ngrac responds to national issues pertaining to the conservation and utilization of genetic resources for food and agriculture .

the international treaty on plant genetic resources for food and agriculture ( the treaty on pgrfa ) provides a general framework for conservation and sustainable use of plant genetic resources .

the treaty's preamble acknowledges that the conservation , exploration , collection , characterization , evaluation , and documentation of pgrfa are essential for sustainable agriculture development and to meet the global goals of ending hunger and poverty , as stated in the rome declaration on world food security and the world food summit plan of action .

the treaty sets up a multilateral system of access and benefit sharing , where all members , in exercise of their sovereignty , provide free ( or nearly free ) access to each other's plant genetic resources for research , breeding , conservation , and training .

the multilateral approach allows members access to germplasm to promote food security and improve crop productivity , lowers transaction costs , and redistributes back to the governing body financial benefits derived from the commercial exploitation of the genetic resources .

the treaty is unlike other international laws governing global genetic resources , such as the convention on biological diversity ( cbd ; see text box below ) , which extends private or sovereign control and limitations over genetic resources through bilateral interactions , and which many feel is inappropriate for food and agriculture .

by establishing a multilateral approach that provides for a standardized protocol and framework applying to all contracting parties , the treaty deals with access and benefit - sharing of agricultural biodiversity in a different way than they are treated under the cbd .

currently 120 countries are parties to the treaty ( see appendix ) .

the united states signed the treaty on november 1 , 2002 ( treaty doc , 110-19 ) , but no further action was taken on it until it was submitted to the senate for advice and ratification by the bush administration on july 7 , 2008 .

the senate foreign relations committee held a treaty hearing on november 10 , 2009 , which included testimony in support of ratification of the plant treaty .

the senate foreign relations committee approved the treaty , without objection , on december 14 , 2010 , but it was not considered by the full senate before the close of the 111 th congress .

the 112 th congress may consider ratification of the plant treaty .

several proponents of the treaty assert that the united states might provide needed leadership and resources in the areas of agricultural biodiversity conservation and use , international agricultural research and development , and global food security .

some believe that the united states' presence could help to foster more trust and goodwill between contracting parties , which has taken many years to develop , particularly among developing countries .

others have suggested that some countries ( such as japan and china ) may be more inclined to sign on to the treaty if the united states officially ratifies .

in addition , the united states might also be able to provide leadership to resolve some outstanding tensions regarding more comprehensive inclusion of annex 1 crops covered by the mls .

critics claim that there is also a need for more resources and capacity strengthening to assist with treaty implementation and the realization of benefits , which have experienced slow progress since the treaty entered into force , especially for developing countries .

despite having signed on , many developing countries often lack the technical expertise , necessary infrastructure , or required resources to carry out effective implementation of the treaty .

one of the most widely cited accomplishments of the treaty to date is the inclusion of the cgiar ex situ collection of agricultural biodiversity under the multilateral system ( see text box below ) .

the crops listed in annex 1 to the treaty that are covered by the mls together contribute to about 80% of the world's total energy food supply .

collectively the cgiar centers hold about 600,000 accessions , which account for an estimated 30% - 60% of the world's crop diversity .

the treaty requires contracting parties to develop and implement a funding strategy for carrying out the treaty plans , programs , and activities , in particular to assist developing countries in implementing their commitments under the mls and to build capacity to use and conserve plant genetic resources for food and agriculture .

the current goal set by the governing body is to raise $116 million over the next five years .

the governing body envisions that funding will come from voluntary contributions by developed country contracting parties , international funds , bodies and organizations such as the global crop diversity trust ( see text box below ) , multilateral institutions such as the global environment facility and the world bank , and private organizations .

mandatory and voluntary contributions resulting from the commercialization of crop diversity from the treaty's mls will also provide funds , for example , 1.1% of gross sales from the commercialized product .

what is less clear is how the funds are to be distributed and used .

the benefit - sharing provisions give priority to the sharing of resources and benefits with farmers , especially in developing countries , but the details of how this objective would be implemented is not fully articulated .

the governing body established a "benefit - sharing fund," which initially distributed $500,000 to 11 projects in its first biennial cycle ( 2008-2009 ) .

these projects addressed one or more of the following priorities: ( 1 ) information exchange , technology transfer and capacity building ; ( 2 ) managing and conserving plant genetic resources on - farm ; and ( 3 ) the sustainable use of plant genetic resources .

more detail may be sought about the longer term , and about a broader strategy for scaling up the use of treaty funds to support a coordinated , sustainable , and efficient set of programs and activities that promote the conservation and use of pgrfa , especially by farmers in developing countries .

more information may also be relevant on how the governing body will ( or will not ) coordinate with existing international partners , such as the cgiar centers and the global crop diversity trust , in carrying out the benefit - sharing objectives .

if the united states becomes a party to the treaty , some believe that other countries will expect the united states to contribute greater capacity - building resources for the conservation and use of agricultural biodiversity globally , and for the implementation of the mls provisions by developing countries .

even though contributions are technically made on a "voluntary" basis , fao does have an indicative scale of contributions that provides a recommendation for how much countries should contribute .

in the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) , congress authorized usaid to contribute $60 million to the global crop diversity trust from fy2008 to fy2012 to assist in the conservation of genetic diversity in food crops .

to date , the united states has contributed $14.5 million to the trust , $2.5 million for operational support and $12.5 million for the trust's endowment .

for fy2010 , usaid has earmarked $10 million for the trust .

a key question that arises is whether there will be increasing pressure for the united states to commit additional funds to the governing body , and if so , how much is appropriate for these causes .

congress may opt to consider the importance and implications of the plant treaty relative to other pending international issues and agreements , including the convention on biological diversity .

article 1 of the plant treaty states explicitly that the objectives should be carried out "in harmony with the convention on biological diversity. .

as discussed in the " history of the treaty " section , the treaty was adapted from the international understanding ( iu ) to meet identified gaps in the cbd process related to agricultural biodiversity .

the cbd is the only comprehensive international agreement dedicated to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity .

only four nations are not parties to the cbd: andorra , iraq , somalia , and the united states .

after extensive involvement by the united states in the six - year drafting and negotiation phases , president george h. w. bush declined to sign the treaty when it opened for signatures at the 1992 rio earth summit .

in june 1993 , president clinton signed the cbd on behalf of the united states and transmitted the cbd to the senate for advice and consent along with "seven understandings" to accompany the ratification instrument .

he noted that existing federal , state , and local laws and programs were "sufficient to enable any activities necessary to effectively implement our responsibilities under the convention" and that the "administration does not intend to disrupt the existing balance of federal and state authorities through the convention. .

the senate foreign relations committee supported cbd ratification by a 16-3 bipartisan vote , subject to the seven understandings .

however , the cbd never received a ratification vote on the senate floor .

the senate has not revisited cbd ratification for 15 years .

several environmental groups advocate for the u.s. ratification of the cbd because of their support for biological conservation and protection globally .

at the same time , other groups are opposed to ratification of the cbd because of the perceived potential restrictions imposed by the cbd on intellectual property rights and the position of the cartagena protocol on biosafety regarding biotechnology .

the cartagena protocol , which is an international agreement on biosafety and a supplement to the cbd , claims to protect biological diversity from the potential and perceived risks posed by genetically modified organisms ( gmos ) .

the cartagena protocol allows countries to invoke the "precautionary principle" when considering the benefits and risks of new technologies such as biotechnology .

for example , it allows countries to ban imports of genetically modified crops if they contend that there is not enough scientific evidence that the product is safe .

they can also require exporters to label shipments containing genetically altered commodities such as corn or cotton .

the united states has been a strong proponent of the use of biotechnology for agriculture and has argued in international trade venues against the blocking of u.s. commodities by the european community and others because they contain gmos .

the 112 th congress could assess whether ratification of the treaty for pgrfa would have any bearing on the united states' position on the cbd .

while signing on to one does not require the united states to be a party to the other ( eg , becoming a party to the plant treaty without being a signatory on the cbd does not offer up any known policy contradictions ) , some maintain that consideration of the context and relationship of both treaties is a prudent approach .

the state department analysis suggests that the united states provide clarifying language to the governing body regarding some interpretations of the mls provisions , especially those in article 12 that describe the terms under which recipients accept the pgrfa .

according to article 12 , recipients shall not claim any intellectual property or other rights that limit access to pgrfa or their genetic parts or components , in the form received from the mls .

the state department analysis suggests notifying the governing body of the following upon deposit of its instrument of ratification: "the united states understands that article 12.3d shall not be construed in a manner that diminishes the availability or exercise of intellectual property rights under national laws. .

commercialization of plant genetic materials is allowable under the treaty , but parties must either provide free access to the material to all contracting parties or return 1.1% of gross sales of the commercialized material back to the governing body's "benefit - sharing" fund .

the treaty and its objectives have been promoted extensively by international agricultural researchers and development practitioners as a critical factor for ensuring global food security .

yet several of the global food security initiatives proposed by the administration and congress do not directly make the link between agricultural biodiversity conservation and use , and agricultural research , development , and economic growth .

what , if any , are the links between these initiatives and the objectives and activities carried out by this treaty ? .

is there a reason to make the connection between these initiatives ? .

the global food security act of 2009 ( s. 384 in the senate and h.r .

3077 in the house ) authorizes increased investment in agricultural productivity , infrastructure , science and technology , research , education , and extension for hunger and poverty alleviation .

the bill emphasizes the importance of agricultural research in developing countries as the primary means to increasing the productivity of smallholder farmers and seeks to strengthen the use of science and technology for agriculture in countries suffering from chronic food insecurity and poverty .

at the same time , no mention is made about how any of these proposed programs might relate to the conservation and use of pgrfa , and the need for technical capacity - building in the development of pgrfa for crop improvement purposes , especially in developing countries .

as of february 24 , 2010: 120 the following instruments have been deposited on the dates indicated .

