in december 2001 , argentina suffered a severe financial crisis , leading to the largest sovereign debt default in history , except for greece .

in 2005 , argentina abandoned negotiations to restructure the debt and made a unilateral offer on terms highly unfavorable to creditors .

still , $62.3 billion of the $81.8 billion in principal was exchanged .

a diverse group of "holdouts" representing $18.6 billion did not tender their bonds .

argentina completed a second bond exchange in 2010 , capturing another $12.4 billion of defaulted bonds ( for a total of 91.3% of the original defaulted debt ) .

at the close of 2010 , argentina reported that it owed private investors $11.2 billion ( $6.5 billion in principal , $4.7 billion in past due interest ) .

with additional interest , holdout creditors argue that they may now be owed as much as $15 billion .

argentina does not recognize the private holdout debt in its budget , and legislation bars the government from making further offers to the holdouts .

u.s. responses have been varied .

some of the "holdout creditors" have brought claims against argentina in the u.s. federal courts totaling $1.3 billion , resulting in judgments and attachment orders .

recent court decisions have left argentine central bank assets in the united states immune from attachment , but require argentina to treat both holdout and exchange bondholders equally .

in this case , the district court ordered argentina to pay litigant holdouts the full $1.3 billion of their claim .

the appeals court stayed the order pending conclusion of the appeals process .

a final payments offer was rejected by the holdouts , who urged the appeals court to enforce the lower court ruling against argentina .

should this occur , it could prohibit banks from allowing argentina to make payments to exchange bondholders unless it also paid the holdouts , creating a conundrum for argentina: either pay all parties per the court order , or for lack of an ability to pay only the exchange bondholders , find itself in technical default .

argentina may try to continue the appeals process , but could eventually have to decide whether to find a way to settle with the holdouts , or find itself in technical default of the exchanged bonds .

the u.s. government has also taken action , and punitive legislation against argentina has been introduced in the last three congresses .

this report reviews argentina's financial crisis , the bond exchanges of 2005 and 2010 , ongoing litigation , prospects for a final solution , related u.s. legislation , and broader policy issues .

argentina's 2001 debt crisis resulted from many factors .

for the most part , argentina over borrowed and fell victim to its own economic policies , but this was compounded by questionable lending and policy advice by the international monetary fund ( imf ) , a global recession , and international credit markets determined to chase high - yielding debt with inadequate regard to risk .

together , these factors propelled argentina toward a position of unsustainable debt that ended in financial crisis , unprecedented default , and a controversial restructuring scheme .

the financial crisis hit argentina hard .

between capital flight and the large peso devaluation , much of the country's wealth evaporated nearly overnight .

poverty and unemployment skyrocketed , leading to street protests and political unrest .

as argentina turned to address its debt problem , it argued that bondholders would have to share in the misery that affected the whole country , and that the government had a moral duty to ensure this outcome .

it was , as many argued , a matter of equity that the write - down on bonds be historically high , particularly given that continued lending from the imf , investment banks , and foreign governments at a time when it was clear that argentina faced an impending crisis had only compounded the financial problems .

also , it was apparent that under these circumstances , argentina was simply in no position to repay such massive debt .

a sovereign default means the government is no longer willing or able to pay the debt it has legally incurred in the international markets .

sovereign defaults occur periodically and are typically worked out in what amounts to a consensual understanding between creditors and debtors .

this arrangement usually takes the form of a debt restructuring , which involves a formal and legal change in the contractual arrangements of the debt , such as reducing the face value of the obligations , issuing new bonds with lower interest rates and longer maturities , and capitalizing overdue interest , usually at a sizable loss to bondholders .

historically , a "successful restructuring" that results in a resolution that avoids prolonged litigation has typically captured a 90% or greater participation rate ( there are always some holdouts ) by offering no less than 50% on the net present value of the debt .

usually , this process unfolds with the assistance of the imf in setting macroeconomic targets that form the basis for a mutual understanding between debtor and creditor of a country's ability to repay its debt .

argentina began the debt restructuring process in 2002 , negotiating with the imf and investors for three years in search of a solution that it felt was commensurate with its deeply diminished economic and social reality .

facing a huge debt burden , argentina adopted a hard line toward all parties , insisting on a large write - down of principal for private creditors and postponing action on paris club and imf debt .

after years of negotiations , which were criticized by both sides , argentina eventually determined that it had reached an impasse with creditors and decided to act on its own .

it suspended its agreement with the imf and filed for a one - time unilateral offer with the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) to settle with private creditors .

the argentine legislature codified this commitment with the so - called "lock law" ( ley cerrojo ) , which prohibited the government from reopening the exchange or making any kind of future offer on better terms , and suspended any future payments on the untendered debt .

this action served the dual purpose of ensuring participating bondholders that they would not lose out on any better deal in the future and prodding , if not forcing , a relatively higher participation rate than might otherwise have been the case .

on january 14 , 2005 , argentina opened the bond exchange hoping to reach a final settlement on the $81.8 billion face value of debt plus $20.8 billion of past due interest ( pdi ) .

the default was unprecedented for its size ( $102.6 billion ) , lengthy resolution ( over three years ) , low recovery rate ( 27% - 30% on a net present value basis ) , and large residual holdout ( 24% of creditors ) .

bondholders and the imf criticized argentina for engaging in a process that stretched ( creditors would argue flaunted ) the then - accepted guidelines of sovereign debt negotiations .

nonetheless , of the $81.8 billion face value of debt , $62.3 billion was exchanged for $35.2 billion of new bonds .

past due interest was not addressed .

the argentine government , however , was unable to settle the matter fully because $18.6 billion of bonds were not tendered and remained in dispute along with accrued interest , $6.3 billion of paris club arrears , and $9.5 billion of imf debt .

argentina addressed this remaining debt in multiple ways .

first , in 2006 it decided to repay in full the $9.5 billion owed to the imf , relieving the government of any pressure to follow imf policy constraints .

second , in 2008 and again in 2010 , argentina promised , but then postponed , plans to repay debt owed to the paris club countries .

third , it has resisted the litigation efforts of holdout creditors .

argentina remains steadfast in its determination to follow a policy of "financial independence. .

it has been able to do so with the help of strong economic growth and use of rather unorthodox self - financing measures to meet fiscal needs .

prior to the 2010 debt exchange , argentina owed approximately $29 billion of bond principal and interest arrears to private investors and $6.3 billion of loans to paris club countries , including nearly $550 million in arrears to the united states .

in 2009 , the portion of "holdout" debt plus that owed to the paris club represented 21% of argentina's total public sector debt ( this fell to 10% in 2010 and 7% in 2011 ) .

there were three major incentives for argentina to resolve its outstanding debt issues .

first , as with most countries , argentina had relied on international capital markets to finance sovereign debt .

despite public statements eschewing foreign debt , by initiating a restructuring process in 2010 , when the fiscal balance was positive , argentina left open the option for reengaging the international credit markets .

second , opportunities for ad hoc financing were becoming increasingly difficult to find .

in the absence of access to international capital markets , argentina has met its financial needs by monetizing its debt , placing bonds with domestic government agencies , restructuring domestically held debt , selling bonds directly to the government of venezuela , and nationalizing private pension funds .

in a politically contentious decision that resulted in dismissal of the president of the central bank , the fernández government by executive order began to borrow against central bank reserves to repay debt owed to multilateral development banks and other international creditors .

in addition to undermining the independence of the central bank , this strategy effectively diminishes argentina's international reserve position and allows the government to defer difficult decisions on fiscal adjustment .

third , market conditions initially favored placing debt , encouraging argentina to move ahead with the bond restructuring .

interest rates were low by historical standards and liquidity high .

these conditions changed when the debt problems emerged in the eurozone , causing yields to rise , making the exchange more difficult , and precluding argentina from selling any new debt as it had planned .

the bond exchange , however , was already well underway .

by some measures , argentina was also in better financial shape to address repudiated debt than it was during the 2001 crisis or the 2005 exchange .

argentina had a positive current account balance and had increased its international reserves from a low of $10.4 billion in 2002 to $52.2 billion in 2010 .

during the 2003-2008 economic recovery , argentina had an average annual growth rate of 8.5% , and the increased revenues had , until 2009 , allowed it to maintain a primary surplus of 2.8% or higher ( for data , see appendix a ) .

the primary surplus reflects the fiscal surplus after non - debt expenditures have been paid , and so is a measure of resources available for debt service .

because of the global financial crisis , however , the primary surplus has been cut in half since 2009 , levels inadequate to reduce argentina's total public debt .

in 2009 , argentina began the initial process of setting up a new bond exchange , taking three important steps: ( 1 ) president cristina fernández de kirchner lent full support for the deal ; ( 2 ) on november 18 , 2009 , the argentine legislature temporarily suspended that portion of the 2005 "lock law" that prohibited reopening a debt restructuring offer ; and ( 3 ) in december 2009 , the argentine government filed a preliminary prospectus with the sec , which approved argentina's request to issue new bonds .

on april 15 , 2010 , the minister of economy announced the key features of the proposed bond deal .

a formal offer was made on april 30 , 2010 .

the bond exchange closed on june 22 , 2010 , with a second stage concluded on december 31 , 2010 .

some $12.4 billion of the eligible $18.4 billion in bonds were exchanged ( 67.7% ) , leaving by one estimate $6.0 billion untendered , although the argentine government puts the value at 6.5 billion .

an imf breakdown appears in table 1 , and details of the bond exchange terms are found in appendix b .

argentina advertised that a "successful" exchange would be one that exceeded a 60% participation rate because it would allow for a total participation rate , including the 2005 exchange , of over 90% of defaulted debt .

when done through mutually agreed negotiations , this threshold has been sufficient in the past to resolve defaults , eventually allowing the sovereign to borrow in international credit markets , but this has not been the case for argentina .

in argentina's case , the 67.7% participation rate for the 2010 exchange allowed for a total participation rate of 91.3% of total defaulted debt , including the 2005 exchange participants .

the remaining untendered bonds , however , continued to present a problem for argentina given the ongoing litigation and attachment orders in place that would allow confiscation of proceeds from any new international bond offer .

according to official argentine sources , as of december 31 , 2010 , argentina was in arrears with holdouts and some members of the paris club in the following amounts: $11.2 billion to the holdouts worldwide ( including $6.5 billion in principal past and coming due , and $4.7 billion in past due interest through december 2010 ) .

holdout creditors argue that this number could be $15 billion by 2013 , of which $1.3 billion is being litigated by hedge funds in u.s. courts , and $6.3 billion to the paris club , including pdi through december 31 , 2010 , plus the possible addition of interest and penalties .

argentina has had at least three options to address this debt: ( 1 ) ignore holdouts and test its prospects in the courts ; ( 2 ) attempt a third swap to capture remaining holdouts ; and ( 3 ) settle with holdouts .

to date , argentina has opted for the first strategy , but court rulings in 2012 and 2013 could force argentina in another direction .

in the eyes of holdout creditors , and apparently increasingly the u.s. courts , the 2005 and 2010 bond exchanges have set a precedent that cannot be condoned , even though 91.3% of total bondholders have accepted the terms .

although argentina continues to argue that the restructurings took place after extensive negotiations , they were not mutually agreed solutions .

bondholders had to accept or reject the offers with the alternative being the promise of no restitution at all .

holdout bondholders remain unpaid while argentina is current on its obligations to the bondholders who exchanged their debt , an outcome that is currently being challenged in court as illegal under the equal treatment ( pari passu ) provision of the bond contracts .

because many bonds in the hands of holdouts were and may still be traded , ownership has been difficult to track .

they were originally marketed in local national currencies: 58% in euros , 38% in u.s. dollars , 2% in argentine pesos , and the remaining 2% in other currencies .

currently , the market value of all untendered bonds left over from the 2001 default is estimated to be approximately $12 billion .

the value of bonds held by u.s. hedge funds is estimated to be approximately $3.0 billion , of which $1.3 billion is under litigation .

many of these funds are legally organized in countries outside the united states and known for their discrete treatment of investor information .

therefore , it is difficult to identify the nationality of fund investors , and by extension , the underlying ownership of the argentine bonds in question .

litigation and settlement strategies differ among bondholder groups .

institutional funds representing corporations and investment banks tend to negotiate for the best terms available in an exchange , most of which end up settling given the high opportunity cost of litigation .

retail ( individual ) investors often part with their bonds in the secondary markets early in the process .

hedge funds specializing in distressed debt typically purchase defaulted debt at highly discounted prices , eschew offers with large haircuts , and sue for full recovery .

their "holdout" strategy can be highly profitable for investors with patience .

it rests on realizing capital gains on discounted bonds and settling with the debtor country for a much higher price than paid in the secondary market .

historically , this strategy has worked well when holdouts dwindle to a small portion of total creditors , making it financially feasible for sovereigns to settle .

in the united states , 151 individual cases have been filed against argentina in u.s. district court for the southern district of new york ( district court ) .

judgments have been entered in 108 cases for $5.9 billion in principal and interest .

many cases have since been settled by the two bond exchanges .

of those bondholders that remain , a few have chosen to litigate with the others watching closely on the sidelines .

although claims remain unresolved , u.s. federal courts have put increasing pressure on argentina .

in 2010 , argentina completed the second of two debt restructurings , mostly on its own terms , for one of the largest and most controversial defaults in sovereign debt history .

there is little disagreement that in 2002 argentina faced a desperate financial situation that required a radical restructuring of debt , including a large write - off by bondholders .

despite the historical precedent for sovereign debt restructurings , the argentine case involved methods , processes , and deep discounts that were notably unprecedented , if not illegal .

argentina appears to be increasingly under pressure from u.s. court rulings to address the holdouts , although a final resolution could be delayed for weeks or months .

as data in appendix a indicate , argentina has been able to reduce its debt , if measured as a portion of gdp .

it has benefitted from strong economic growth , driven by a lengthy resurgence in commodity prices .

economic conditions in both argentina and the world , however , are in flux .

currently , argentina is experiencing high inflation and much slower growth .

it is relying on a questionable policy of using central bank reserves and other internal financing mechanisms to finance the government , and continues to follow an expansionary monetary policy .

fiscal and current account balances have also deteriorated , and there is growing concern over capital and exchange rate controls among a long list of tightening financial and other market regulations .

these trends do not bode well for chances that argentina would be inclined to repay remaining disputed debt , irrespective of future court decisions .

as to the initial default , there appear to be few if any winners , with the possible exception of the hedge funds that have purchased argentine bonds at a deep discount , should they prevail in court .

argentina's debt restructuring was costly for all parties , raising at least three broad policy questions .

first , is there an effective strategy for policymakers to consider , particularly the u.s. congress , in pressing argentina to resolve the debt impasse ? .

second , are there alternatives to the argentine solution , which in the absence of collective action , has led to unequal outcomes for creditors ? .

third , given the ongoing concern over sovereign indebtedness , currently related to greece and the eurozone more broadly , does argentina present a plausible model for default ? .

with argentina's default on debt owed to paris club countries , including approximately $550 million owed to the united states government , a number of actions have been taken under u.s. law .

u.s. agencies , including the export - import bank , overseas private investment corporation , u.s. agency for international development , and the u.s. trade and development agency , are prohibited from lending to a country that is in arrears on its debt to the u.s. government .

the u.s. military is prohibited from offering foreign military financing , exercising the excess defense articles through 505 drawdown authority , or fully using the global peacekeeping operations initiative funding .

all foreign assistance is prohibited , except for international military education and training funding and certain programs related to countering terrorism and trafficking in narcotics or persons .

finally , as a matter of policy , the united states has begun to vote against any new loans to argentina at the world bank and inter - american development bank , with the exception of those benefitting the very poor .

policymakers have been frustrated by argentina's reluctance to settle with u.s. bondholders and members of the paris club .

some members of congress have introduced punitive legislation in the last three congresses to pressure the argentine government to reconsider its position .

the judgment evading foreign states accountability act was introduced in part at the behest of the american task force argentina ( atfa ) , a private lobby group representing some 40 constituent groups , including hedge funds .

it would attempt to pressure argentina in a number of ways .

various versions of the legislation have cited argentina for ignoring multiple judgments against it stemming from the 2001 default .

the major provisions would have denied states deemed to be "judgment evaders" from issuing debt in the united states ( as is the case of private bond defaulters ) and required that any future debt offerings carry a warning label that notifies would - be purchasers that the state had previously failed to satisfy outstanding judgments against it .

this legislation has not had much traction , failing to receive a hearing .

it was , nonetheless , marked up in the 112 th congress by the house committee on foreign affairs subcommittee on the western hemisphere on november 29 , 2012 .

despite support for u.s. interests in this matter , some members have been reluctant to support the bill .

in this case , it was argued that ( 1 ) this committee lacked jurisdiction ; ( 2 ) it might be considered imprudent to take action on the bill while the issue is before u.s. federal courts ; and ( 3 ) it should be considered in light of larger foreign policy issues .

opinions differ in congress as to supporting the holdouts with legislation .

first , because it is unclear if the remaining "holdouts" represent many if any u.s. retail investors , and in fact comprise , as best that can be determined , largely hedge funds incorporated offshore , it is difficult to discern the degree to which u.s. stakeholders are involved .

second , there may be concern over legislating against what amounts to be the actions of a single country .

in fact , argentina has , on occasion , expressed a strong reaction against this legislation , in part because it is viewed as being directed solely at argentina and might be interpreted as tantamount to a threat of imposing economic sanctions .

third , there may be some recognition of a fundamental agreement in the united states given the executive branch , under both democratic and republican presidents , has taken available action .

fourth , the u.s. courts seem to be the logical venue for adjudicating claims in this case .

still , some continue to argue that argentina is a "rogue debtor" that does not deserve the deep debt forgiveness it forced on bondholders , that it should comport to international norms of economic behavior , and that failure to enforce this outcome only invites other countries to default in similar fashion .

for the united states , neither sanctions nor legislative proposals have had any noticeable influence on argentina , and actually may have reinvigorated argentina's resolve to stay the course of default as long as possible .

in the end , it appears that a combination of fiscal necessity , litigation , and international markets may yet have the greatest leverage on argentine decision making .

as one expert perhaps wryly notes , "sovereign debt is unenforceable. .

argentina epitomizes this statement , and years of costly litigation have not compelled argentina to pay holdouts .

foreign holders of argentine bonds faced a difficult choice , and the limited availability of a collective response mechanism diminished their negotiating position .

the initial owners of the bonds clearly suffered , as did members of the paris club .

those who purchased highly discounted bonds in the secondary market , however , are betting that their patience and risk taking will be rewarded , should argentina ever be forced to settle with them .

historically , rather than rely on legal recourse , creditors as a whole have been better served by a quick and mutually - agreed sovereign debt workout , which has led to better and more equitable terms than those resulting in the argentine case .

the lack of collective action was a serious problem in this case , resulting in unequal outcomes .

the financial markets have since responded in ways that seek to avoid a second occurrence of a prolonged , costly , unilateral workout .

the most important development along these lines has been the fuller and more creative adoption in the united states of collective action clauses ( cacs ) in sovereign debt contracts , the norm in british law .

they can compel minority holdouts to capitulate to a negotiated solution agreed to by a supermajority , reducing , but not eliminating , the opportunity for holdouts to act separately , and often contrary to the interests of the majority .

cacs are not full - proof answers to collective action , but they have proven useful at the margin and have become the "market standard" for sovereign bonds .

still , critics argue that cacs with low creditor acceptance levels ( eg , less than 90% ) undermine market discipline and invite lower settlements from defaulting countries .

cacs , however , are evolving and becoming more "aggressive," and so may still offer the best opportunity to resolved sovereign defaults in the absence of a supranational resolution system .

in light of the sovereign debt restructuring negotiations with greece and concern with debt of other eurozone countries , questions have been raised as to the applicability of argentine model for other countries .

the situation in greece , however , is significantly different , in no small part because it is a member of a european monetary union .

on the face of the argentine experience alone , however , it does not seem to offer a reasonable alternative .

in fact , a number of important lessons emerge from the argentine case .

first , a prolonged disregard for fiscal responsibility can have long - term economic , social , and political consequences .

second , a disorderly or non - negotiated debt workout has been extremely costly for argentina .

as a result , argentina has had to resort to creative , but unorthodox financing mechanisms that cannot adequately replace conventional financing arrangements indefinitely .

these have strained both argentina's domestic and external account balances , increased a general distrust of the government , and may be setting the stage for another major financial setback .

such a strategy seems a highly undesirable model for other countries contemplating a sovereign default , and greece has already opted for variations on more conventional approaches .

appendix a. argentina: selected economic data , 2000-2012 appendix b .

summary of the 2010 bond exchange terms the 2010 exchange was structured to provide two different offers ( see table 2 ) , one for retail or small investors , defined as those holding less than $50,000 of defaulted bonds , and a second for institutional investors , or those holding amounts greater than $50,000 , a feature also present in the 2005 exchange .

the retail investors were made a more generous offer to entice their support in order to ensure a minimally acceptable overall participation rate .

the bond exchange addressed two aspects of outstanding debt .

first , it covered the face ( or par ) value of the bond .

this term refers to the principal or stated value on the bond when it was issued .

second , it covered past due interest ( pdi ) , or a portion of unpaid interest .

in each case , both retail and institutional investors received a bond in exchange for the defaulted debt , cash or a separate "global" bond for pdi , and a separate gdp - linked security called a warrant that provides for additional payments under certain economic growth scenarios ( see below ) .

the total value of securities eligible for exchange was $18.4 billion , $17.6 billion to cover principal and $0.8 billion to cover unpaid interest accrued as of december 21 , 2001 , the point of default .

the total amount covers the face value of defaulted debt , including the heavily discounted ( reduced ) value of the bonds owed to institutional investors , plus the pdi on bonds owed institutional investors ( retail investors received cash for pdi , see below ) .

there was a limit of $2.0 billion of par bonds , but no limit on the issuance of discount bonds beyond the total $18.4 billion of total securities as defined in the prospectus .

face value retail investors received a par bond to compensate them for the full face value of the defaulted bonds they hold .

institutional investors , by comparison , received a discount bond reflecting a 66.3% reduction in the face value of the defaulted bonds they hold .

in each case , new bonds were issued in exchange for the old ones , with the discount bond for institutional investors maturing in 2033 and carrying an annual interest rate of 8.28% .

par bonds for retail investors will mature in 2038 , and carry a sliding annual interest rate beginning with 2.5% for the first 9½ years , 3.75% for the next 10 years , and 5.25% for the final 9½ years .

interest is paid semi - annually .

past due interest at settlement , retail investors were paid pdi in cash , covering interest from december 31 , 2003 , up to september 30 , 2009 .

pdi for institutional investors was covered by a par "global" bond maturing in 2017 with interest paid in semi - annual payments , carrying an interest rate of 8.75% .

it covered interest from december 31 , 2003 , through december 30 , 2009 .

gdp - linked warrants in the 2005 exchange , both retail and institutional investors received gdp warrants , which are securities that may be traded separately from the bonds to which they are attached .

a warrant is a promise to make a particular offer under certain circumstances , often issued in connection to bonds to make them more attractive to investors .

in this case , argentina promises to make additional payments on the new bonds in the event that the argentine economy grows faster than 3.26% .

the warrant is meant to compensate for bonds outstanding in december 2001 and interest accrued to december 30 , 2001 , but payment in any given year is based on better than expected economic performance in the previous year .

from a budgeting perspective , higher than anticipated economic growth tends to generate higher than expected public revenue .

argentina has effectively promised to use some of this revenue to make higher payments to bondholders , should economic conditions allow .

this feature turned out to be particularly attractive for the 2005 exchange because argentina emerged from its crisis with six years of very high economic growth , well above anticipated rates .

since 2005 , argentina has experienced strong economic growth , with the exception of 2009 , and has remained current on its payments to exchange bondholders .

investors had hoped that the new deal would include the equivalent of past payments on warrants issued in the 2005 exchange , arguing that like past due interest , they were entitled to compensation from argentina's better - than - expected fiscal position arising from very strong past economic growth as were the investors who exchanged their bonds in 2005 .

argentina decided not to include such payments , reasoning that in rejecting the 2005 deal , the holdouts had declined to participate in that growth .

although market speculation had suggested that the absence of this provision might reduce the participation rate , argentina was able to exceed its stated goal of a 60% participation rate .

valuation in the arcane world of bond valuation , analysts estimated the value of the exchange for discount bonds at between 48 cents and 51 cents per dollar value of the bond .

these numbers compare unfavorably with the 60 cents on the dollar valuation of the 2005 exchange , which included a better than expected performance because of gdp - linked warrants .

analysts estimated that inclusion of past payments of gdp warrants would have added 7 cents on the dollar to the offer .

the defaulted bonds had traded recently in the market in a range of 48-50 cents on the dollar , nearly four times their lowest trade level of 11 cents recorded in september 2008 .

