habeas corpus is the procedure under which an individual held in custody may petition a federal court for his release on the grounds that his detention is contrary to the constitution or laws of the united states .

it has been sought by state and federal prisoners convicted of criminal offenses and by the detainees in guantanamo .

the supreme court in boumediene v. bush , 553 u.s. 723 ( 2008 ) , held that limitations on the judicial review of detainee status were contrary to the demands of the privilege of the writ and suspension clause .

the court has thus far declined to hold that a state prisoner sentenced to death , but armed with compelling evidence of his innocence , is entitled to habeas relief .

legislation was introduced in the 111 th congress to deal with both issues .

moreover , the constitution subcommittee of the house committee on the judiciary has held hearings on habeas review and received recommendations for legislation on related issues .

this report is a brief overview of those recommendations and legislative proposals .

federal law imposes several bars to habeas relief in the interests of finality , federalism , and judicial efficiency .

one of these prohibits filing repetitious habeas petitions claiming that the petitioner's state conviction was accomplished in a constitutionally defective manner .

this second or successive petition bar does not apply where newly discovered evidence establishes that but for the constitutional defect no reasonable jury would have convicted the petitioner ( constitutional defect plus innocence ) .

but suppose the new evidence merely demonstrates the petitioner's innocence , unrelated to the manner in which he was convicted ? .

the supreme court has never said that habeas relief may be granted on such a freestanding claim of innocence .

it has twice said , however , that assuming relief might be granted in a freestanding innocence case , the evidence on the record before it did not reach the level of persuasion necessary to grant relief .

a third such case is now working its way through the federal court system .

two bills offered in the 111 th congress would have established actual innocence as a ground upon which habeas relief might be granted , the effective death penalty appeals act ( h.r .

3986 ) and the justice for the wrongfully accused act ( h.r .

3320 ) .

representative moore ( kansas ) introduced h.r .

3320 on july 23 , 2009 .

representative johnson ( georgia ) introduced h.r .

3986 on november 3 , 2009 , for himself and representatives nadler , conyers , scott ( virginia ) , weiner , lewis ( georgia ) , and jackson - lee .

the supreme court's decision in boumediene stimulated several proposals in the 111 th congress relating to the judicial review for the guantanamo detainees .

the proposals included the: military commissions habeas corpus restoration act of 2009 ( h.r .

64 ) , introduced by representative jackson - lee ( texas ) ; interrogation and detention reform act of 2008 ( h.r .

591 ) , introduced by representative price ( north carolina ) for himself and representatives holt , hinchey , schakowsky , blumenauer , miller ( north carolina ) , watt , mcgovern , olver , delauro , and larson ( connecticut ) ; enemy combatant detention review act of 2009 ( h.r .

630 ) , introduced by representative smith ( texas ) for himself and representatives boehner , sensenbrenner , franks ( arizona ) , lundgren ( california ) , gallegly , jordan ( ohio ) , poe ( texas ) , harper , coble , and rooney ; terrorist detainees procedures act of 2009 ( h.r .

1315 ) , introduced by representative schiff ; detainment reform act of 2009 ( h.r .

3728 ) , introduced by representative hastings ( florida ) ; and terrorist detention review reform act ( s. 3707 ) , introduced by senator graham .

the court in boumediene v. bush held that foreign nationals detained at guantanamo were entitled to the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus .

they could be denied the benefits of access to the writ only under a suspension valid under the suspension clause , u.s. const .

art .

i , §9 , cl.2 , or under an adequate substitute for habeas review .

section 7 of the military commissions act stripped all federal courts of habeas jurisdiction relating to foreign , enemy combatant detainees ; and except as provided in the detainee treatment act , it also stripped them of jurisdiction to review matters relating to such individuals and concerning their detention , treatment , transfer , trial , or conditions of detention .

the court did not feel that the detainee treatment act provided an adequate substitute for detainee habeas review and consequently concluded that section 7 "effect[ed] an unconstitutional suspension of the writ. .

the court found it unnecessary to discuss the extent to which habeas review might include an examination of the conditions of detention .

it also made it clear that its decision did not go to the merits of the detainees' habeas petitions .

witnesses who submitted statements for the house judiciary committee's recent habeas hearings criticized other aspects of federal habeas law – issues which do not appear to have been the subject of legislative proposals in this congress .

each of the witnesses – justice gerald kogan , retired chief justice of the florida supreme court ; professor john h. blume of cornell university law school ; and mr. stephen f. hanlon , a partner in the law firm of holland and knight and appearing on behalf of the american bar association – were critical of the impact of the one - year statute of limitations in 28 u.s.c .

2244 ( d ) .

they expressed concern over the complexity of the provisions under which being tardy can be fatal .

they also agree that the binding effect given state court determinations of federal law is unfortunate , generally .

two of the witnesses were critical of the "opt in" provisions under which states gain the advantage of streamlined habeas procedures in capital cases , if they satisfy the provision of counsel standards .

chief justice kogan would repeal the provisions , fearing that amendment would only introduce further "confusion , waste , and wheel - spinning. .

mr. hanlon urged alternatively that the role of gatekeeper – the determination of whether a state is qualified to opt in , now vested in the attorney general – be returned to the federal courts .

professor blume and chief justice kogan also urged modification of the habeas "procedural default" bar under which a prisoner's federal habeas petition is barred because of his failure to comply with an applicable state procedural requirement for consideration of his claim at the state level .

mr. hanlon alone recommended federal funding of capital defender organizations and suspension of "all federal executions pending a thorough data collection and analysis of racial and geographical disparities and the adequacy of legal representation in the death penalty system. .

chief justice kogan also had concerns not mentioned in the statements of the other witnesses , i.e . , the teague rule , harmless error , and deference to state fact finding .

with two exceptions , the teague rule denies the use of federal habeas to establish , or to retroactively claim the benefits of , a new rule , that is , an interpretation of constitutional law not recognized before the end of the period for the petitioner's direct appellate review of his state conviction and sentence .

from chief justice kogan's perspective , "the chief problem is deciding what counts as 'new' in these circumstances. .

he expressed the view that habeas treatment of harmless constitutional errors committed at the state level "warrants serious attention. .

finally , he pointed to the apparent incongruity of section 2254 ( e ) ( 1 ) , which asserts that a state court's finding of facts is presumed correct , and section 2254 ( d ) ( 2 ) , which asserts that habeas must be denied with respect to a claim adjudicated in state court unless the state court's decision was based on an unreasonable determination of the facts .

if the history of habeas reform debate holds true , each of the points made by the three witnesses is likely to find a counterpoint in any future debate .

the 111 th congress adjourned without further action on these matters .

