congress is interested in increasing access to care for veterans closer to where they reside .

the establishment of community - based outpatient clinics ( cbocs ) is viewed by some as one method of increasing access to care .

this report provides an overview of the impetus for the department of veterans affairs ( va ) to establish cbocs , describes how they are managed and administered , discusses medical services provided at cbocs , and summarizes what is known about the quality and cost of providing care in cbocs compared to primary care clinics at department of veterans affairs medical centers ( vamcs ) .

lastly , it describes the process for developing a new cboc .

since the early 1920s , the va health care system had been primarily a hospital - based inpatient health care system .

beginning with the 1960s , congress gradually expanded eligibility for outpatient care .

several research studies reported that a "large proportion of va hospital admissions in the mid 1980s and early 1990s were non - acute and could have been treated in an outpatient setting if ambulatory care services had been available geographically. .

another study found that the "lack of geographic access to va outpatient care can lead to higher risk of readmission post - discharge. .

in the mid - 1990s va recognized that its system might want to respond to certain changes taking place in the private health care market and began a process of restructuring its health care delivery network .

va established regional networks ( veterans integrated service networks [visns] ) and decentralized certain budgetary authorities to these networks .

furthermore , advances in medical technology , such as laser and other minimally invasive surgical techniques , allowed care previously provided in hospitals to be provided on an outpatient basis .

va also began developing a strategy to expand its capacity to provide outpatient primary care , especially for veterans who had to travel long distances to receive care at va facilities .

to facilitate access to primary care closer to where veterans reside , vha began implementing a system for approving and establishing cbocs .

in january 1994 , the vha hospital in amarillo , tx — now located in childress , tx — established what is generally recognized as the first vha community based clinic .

prior to the establishment of this clinic , to establish a cboc , a clinic had to have a workload of 3,000 visits or more and had to be located at least 100 miles or three hours travel time away from the nearest vha hospital .

in 1995 , vha issued a directive to eliminate these restrictions and to expand its network of cbocs .

new cboc planning criteria were based on , among other things , ( 1 ) eligible veteran population , ( 2 ) services to be provided , ( 3 ) costs of available alternatives , and ( 4 ) sources of funds .

the current process of developing cbocs is discussed later in this report .

since vha initiated its cboc initiative in 1995 , over 700 clinics have opened .

figure 1 displays the number of active cbocs for each fiscal year from 1999 through projected 2010 .

generally a cboc is defined as a fixed health care site that is geographically distinct or separate from its parent medical facility .

this site can be va - operated , contracted , or a combination of the two ; however , cbocs are required to have the necessary professional medical staff , access to diagnostic testing and treatment capability , and referral arrangements to ensure the continuity of care for current and eligible veteran patients .

a cboc can provide primary care , specialty care , subspecialty care , mental health , and pharmacy benefits .

it should be noted that services can vary from clinic to clinic .

there are currently 783 active cbocs throughout the united states and its territories , including american samoa , guam , puerto rico , and the virgin islands .

over 2.8 million patients were seen at cbocs during fy2008 .

according to various studies conducted by the va , cbocs have been able to serve veterans in a more efficient and effective manner by improving access to health care services and providing high quality primary and mental health care .

the next section discusses how cbocs are managed throughout the va health care system .

all community - based outpatient clinics operate under the supervision and guidance of a single va hospital or medical center ( vamc ) .

the parent vamc maintains administrative responsibility for its cboc ( s ) , specifically with respect to maintaining quality of care ( discussed later in this report ) .

cbocs are operated by va and / or contracted staff .

in general , cbocs fall into three major categories: va - owned — a cboc that is owned and staffed by va personnel .

the facility space is also owned by va. leased — a cboc where the space is leased ( contracted ) but staffed by va personnel .

contracted — a cboc where the space and the staff are not va personnel .

this is typically a healthcare management organization ( hmo ) type provider where there can be multiple sites associated with a single station identifier .

table 1 displays the number and percent distribution of cbocs by these three categories for fy2009 .

in general , all veterans receiving care through va are provided a standard medical benefits package to include preventive care , inpatient and outpatient diagnostic and treatment services , and medication and medical supplies .

services delivered to veterans at cbocs vary , however , primary care and mental health services are generally provided at all cbocs .

primary care includes , but is not limited to , assessment , diagnosis , and medically necessary treatment ( s ) for physiological and pathological conditions not requiring referral to specialty care or inpatient hospital services .

care is directed toward health promotion and disease prevention , management of acute and chronic medical conditions , and pharmacological management .

many sites include at least one mental health provider , most of whom are psychologists .

research has indicated that cbocs have enhanced mental health services through va - mandated routine screening for depression , problem drinking , traumatic brain injury ( tbi ) , post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) , and military sexual trauma ( mst ) .

psychiatrists , social workers , and mental health nurses are also utilized and work together with primary care staff to serve the mental health needs of veterans .

cboc patients requiring specialty care , inpatient hospital services , or extended medical services are often referred to the parent va medical facility .

there have been several research studies on access , quality of care , and cost of providing care through cbocs .

to study if cbocs provide consistent , safe , and high - quality care , performance evaluations were initiated in 1998 at the request of the va undersecretary of health .

a plan was formulated by the department's health services research and development service to create performance measures to evaluate individual cbocs and the program as a whole in several domains: access to care , cost , mental health , quality , satisfaction , and utilization .

based on data obtained from three performance reports , several studies on access and utilization , quality of care , patient perceptions of care , and cost of care were published in 2002 .

these published studies provide some analysis of the quality and cost of care provided through cbocs .

this section discusses the current process for planning and establishing cbocs .

as stated previously , in 1995 , vha reorganized its health care delivery network into 22 geographically defined veterans integrated service networks ( visn ) .

at the same time , vha gave visn directors the decision - making responsibility to establish cbocs .

however , the departments of veterans affairs and housing and urban development , independent agencies appropriations act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-144 ) , changed this , mandating that va notify congress of its intent to open a cboc no later than 14 days prior to taking irrevocable action .

at a recent congressional hearing , va described the current planning process for a new cboc: the cboc process begins with a national analysis of the underserved populations as defined by limited geographic access in areas with projected increases in primary care and mental health services .

the deputy under secretary for health for operations and management ( dushom ) issues a call memorandum to the [visns] for cboc business plan submissions for those areas of the country that meet the national threshold for having underserved populations .

a technical review of each of these business plan proposals is then completed .

those proposals meeting the technical requirements are then reviewed by a cboc national review panel ( nrp ) .

it should be noted that cbocs are funded primarily through existing visn resources .

as a result , the cboc planning process is closely aligned with vha's capital planning and budget cycles .

the following steps briefly describe the review process of new cboc business plans: visns submit cboc business plans for review against national planning criteria ( see below ) .

visns certify that the cboc can be implemented within existing funds once approved .

national review panels ( nrps ) convene to review proposals against national panning criteria .

the national planning criteria include the following: if the cboc is located in a market not meeting va access guidelines ; if there are space deficits at the parent facility ; projected increases in the number of unique veteran patients and enrollees ; market penetration ; unique considerations — such as targeted minority veteran populations , geographic barriers , highly rural and / or low population density , medically underserved , dod sharing opportunities , and parking and transit issues at parent facility ; cost effectiveness of proposed sites ; impact on specialty care , and waiting times .

by june of each budget formulation year , the nrp results of the review and recommendations are completed and forwarded to dushom .

dushom obtains approvals from under secretary for health and secretary .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) reviews the cboc plans .

va provides notice to congress .

figure 2 provides time frames involved in the cboc planning and approval process .

according to va , it generally takes about two years from the planning process to the time when patients start receiving treatment .

for example , in fy2010 vha would begin reviewing plans for cbocs to be opened in fy2012 .

