this report describes the final direction given to the department of homeland security through p.l .

112-10 by title , then goes into more detail by component , outlining president's fy2011 request for funding for dhs programs and activities , as submitted to congress on february 1 , 2010 .

it compares the enacted fy2010 amounts to the request for fy2011 , tracks the senate's recommendations as included in senate's committee report , and notes congressional issues related to the fy2011 dhs appropriations bills with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts .

no house recommendations are available for comparison as no full committee markup was held for the house draft in the second session of the 111 th congress .

the report does not follow specific funding issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor does the report systematically follow any legislation related to the authorization or amendment of dhs programs .

this report will not be updated further .

title i covers the general administrative expenses of dhs .

it includes the office of the secretary and executive management ( osem ) , which is comprised of the immediate office of the secretary and 12 entities that report directly to the secretary ; the under secretary for management ( usm ) and its components , such as the offices of the chief administrative officer , chief human capital officer , and chief procurement officer ; the office of the chief financial officer ( ocfo ) ; the office of the chief information officer ( ocio ) ; the analysis and operations office ( aoo ) ; the office of the federal coordinator for gulf coast rebuilding ( ofcgcr ) ; and the office of the inspector general ( oig ) .

new title i accounts proposed for fy2011 were dhs headquarters consolidation and the national special security event ( nsse ) state and local reimbursement fund .

table 5 , below , shows title i appropriations for fy2010 , the president's request for fy2011 , the senate - reported amounts for fy2011 , and the appropriations for fy2011 .

after discussing the impact of p.l .

112-10 on dhs components under this title , this report will outline the administration's request , senate action on the request in the 2 nd session of the 111 th congress , and possible issues for congress .

as the house position on the administration's full request was never officially ratified by the appropriations committee in 2010 , there is no data available from the house for direct comparison .

title ii contains the appropriations for the bureau of customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the bureau of immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , the u.s. coast guard , and the u.s. secret service .

table 7 shows the fy2010 enacted and fy2011 appropriation action for title ii .

after discussing the impact of p.l .

112-10 on dhs components under this title , this report will outline the administration's request , senate action on the request in the 2 nd session of the 111 th congress , and possible issues for congress .

as the house position on the administration's full request was never officially ratified by the appropriations committee in 2010 , there is no data available from the house for direct comparison .

title iii includes appropriations for the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) , and the office of health affairs ( oha ) .

congress expanded fema's authorities and responsibilities in the post - katrina emergency reform act ( p.l .

109-295 ) and explicitly kept certain dhs functions out of the "new fema. .

in response to these statutory exclusions , dhs officials created the nppd to house functions not transferred to fema , and the oha was established for the office of the chief medical officer .

table 13 provides account - level appropriations detail for title iii .

after discussing the impact of p.l .

112-10 on dhs components under this title , this report will outline the administration's request , senate action on the request in the 2 nd session of the 111 th congress , and possible issues for congress .

as the house position on the administration's full request was never officially ratified by the appropriations committee in 2010 , there is no data available from the house for direct comparison .

title iv includes appropriations for u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) , the science and technology directorate ( s&t ) , and the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) .

table 17 provides account - level details of title iv appropriations .

after discussing the impact of p.l .

112-10 on dhs components under this title , this report will outline the administration's request , senate action on the request in the 2 nd session of the 111 th congress , and possible issues for congress .

as the house position on the administration's full request was never officially ratified by the appropriations committee in 2010 , there is no data available from the house for direct comparison .

sections 1639 through 1647 of h.r .

1473 , the final fy2011 cr ( p.l .

112-10 ) , provide explicit direction and funding level for the title iv components of dhs .

the act appropriates $147 million for uscis , stipulating that $103 million should be used for e - verify and $25 million for processing applications for asylum and refugee status .

this represents a decline of $239 million or 62% from the fy2011 request , and a decline of $77 million or 34% from the fy2010 enacted appropriation of $224 million .

the federal law enforcement training center is provided $235.9 million for salaries and expenses , even with the president's request , and $35.5 million for acquisitions , construction , improvements , and related expenses , $3 million , or 7.8% below the request .

the science and technology directorate is provided $141.2 million for management and administration ( $10.7 million , or 7% below the request ) , and $688 million for research , development , acquisition , and operations ( $178 million , or 21% below the request ) .

the act states that funding for university programs shall not be reduced more than 20% from the fy2010 enacted level .

it also sets aside $40 million of the account as multi - year funding for the national bio - and agro - defense facility's ( nbaf ) central utility plant .

the act goes on in section 1647 to restrict the use of funds it provides for nbaf until dhs has completed 50% of the design planning for nbaf and submitted a revised site - specific biosafety and biosecurity mitigation risk assessment that addresses the shortcomings found by the national academy of sciences' evaluation of the first risk assessment for nbaf .

for dndo , funds were provided as follows , compared to the president's request: management and administration , $37 million ( even ) ; research , development , and operations , $275.4 million ( $67.6 million , or 32.5% above ) ; and systems acquisition , $30 million ( $31 million , or 50.8% below ) .

in addition to the specifically directed reductions in funding levels , all of these accounts are subject to a 0.2% across - the - board rescission of budget authority for fy2011 in p.l .

112-10 , which amounts to a $3.2 million reduction .

section 1656 of p.l .

112-10 rescinds $9.4 million in fy2010 unobligated balances from title ivcomponents , including $7.9 million from uscis .

section 1663 rescinds a further $13 million in unobligated balances from uscis , but states those funds may not come from e - verify , data center migration , and processing applications for asylum and refugee status .

three major activities dominate the work of the u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) : ( 1 ) adjudication of immigration petitions ( including nonimmigrant change of status petitions , relative petitions , employment - based petitions , work authorizations , and travel documents ) ; ( 2 ) adjudication of naturalization petitions for legal permanent residents to become citizens ; and ( 3 ) consideration of refugee and asylum claims , and related humanitarian and international concerns .

uscis funds the processing and adjudication of immigrant , nonimmigrant , refugee , asylum , and citizenship benefits largely through funds generated by the examinations fee account .

as part of the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) , uscis was directed to transform its revenue structure with the creation of the examinations fee account .

although the agency has received annual direct appropriations in the last decade , they have been largely directed towards specific projects such as backlog reduction initiatives .

the agency receives most of its revenue from adjudication fees of immigration benefit applications and petitions .

 table 18 , which presents the fy2010 appropriations and fy2011 request , shows the requested uscis gross budget authority for fy2011 at approximately $2,813 million .

the requested direct appropriation of $386 million included $103 million for the e - verify program , $23 million for data center development , and $18 million for the immigrant integration initiative .

moreover , the agency requested $34 million for a new systematic alien verification entitlements ( save ) program to assist state , local , and federal agencies to determine individuals' eligibility for public benefits based on their immigration status .

uscis also proposed to fund asylum and refugee applications and military naturalizations — all which have no fees attached — with a direct appropriation of $207 million .

the remaining $2,427 million in gross budget authority requested was expected to be funded by fee revenue .

of the fee - collected funds for fy2011 , $1,955 million would fund the uscis adjudication services .

the president's budget request also included requested funding levels of $84 million for information and customer services , and $337 million for administration .

the senate - reported s. 3607 proposed appropriating $172 million for uscis , the same as the administration's request , including $50 million for processing asylee and refugee applications and $103 million for immigration verification programs such as e - verify .

the senate also proposed that immigrant integration funds be limited to assist immigrants lawfully admitted for permanent residence .

for the fy2011 budget cycle , potential issues for congress continue to include declines in immigrant and nonimmigrant applications , the use of fee - generated funding , and the uscis request for appropriations to process refugee , asylee , and military naturalization applications .

because uscis supports itself primarily through fee revenue , it must accurately project the number of anticipated applications to avoid building backlogs or over - budgeting projects .

uscis was criticized for its alleged unpreparedness in the face of surging applications prior to the 2007 fee increases .

more recently , the global economic downturn raised concerns about declining application volume and agency revenue .

such declines would affect future projects and require additional congressional appropriations .

in response , uscis has moved to more accurately project its application volume to better inform the budgeting process .

in its fy2011 presidential budget request , uscis sought direct appropriations of $207 million to fund applications for refugees , asylum - seekers , and military naturalizations .

historically , uscis has funded these no - fee applications through its general application fee revenue .

congress has considered providing uscis with direct appropriations for such application processing and the fees .

this may be an issue of concern to congress as it considers the fy2011 request .

likewise , the fy2011 presidential budget request also included a $34 million appropriation for the save program , currently funded through "surcharges" on immigration application fees .

the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) provides law enforcement instruction , such as firearms training , high - speed vehicle pursuit , and defendant interview techniques , for 85 federal entities with law enforcement responsibilities .

fletc also provides training to state and local law enforcement entities and international law enforcement agencies .

training policies , programs , and standards developed by an interagency board of directors focus on providing training that develop the skills and knowledge needed to perform law enforcement activities .

fletc administers four training sites throughout the united states and employs approximately 1,000 personnel .

the overall request for fletc in fy2011 was $280 million , a decrease of $3 million from the fy2010 appropriation of $283 million .

in fy2011 , fletc officials intend to continue the re - accreditation , begun in fy2010 , for its law enforcement training programs ; and continue to provide professional law enforcement training to its federal , state , local , and international partners .

the senate - reported s. 3607 would provide $274 million to fletc , or $5 million less than the administration request and a $8 million decrease from the fy2010-enacted amount .

the directorate of science and technology ( s&t ) is the primary dhs organization for research and development ( r&d ) .

headed by the under secretary for science and technology , it performs r&d in several laboratories of its own and funds r&d performed by the department of energy national laboratories , industry , universities , and others .

the administration has requested a total of $1,018 million for the s&t directorate for fy2011 ( see table 19 ) .

this is 2% more than the fy2010 appropriation , but it includes $109 million for radiological and nuclear countermeasures r&d , an activity formerly funded in the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) .

funding for the directorate's other activities is 9% below the fy2010 level .

the proposed reduction of $39 million for the infrastructure and geophysical division includes the termination of local and regional initiatives previously established or funded at congressional direction .

the request for laboratory facilities includes no funds for the planned national bio and agro defense facility ( nbaf ) , which received $32 million in fy2010 , but dhs announced plans to request a reprogramming of unobligated prior - year funds to support construction of a utility plant at the nbaf site .

the senate - reported bill would provide $8 million less than requested for the s&t directorate .

relative to the request , the bill would restore $21 million for local and regional initiatives in the infrastructure and geophysical division and add $10 million for university programs .

these increases would be more than offset , however , by an unspecified reduction of $36 million and the elimination of $5 million requested for data center migration in the management and administration account .

the senate committee "strongly endorsed" the transfer of radiological and nuclear r&d from dndo to the s&t directorate but called for an independent review before s&t determines the program's fy2011 research priorities .

the construction of nbaf will likely require significant increases in laboratory facilities funding over the next several years .

it may also result in increased congressional oversight .

for construction of nbaf and decommissioning of the plum island animal disease center ( piadc ) , which nbaf will replace , dhs expects to need further appropriations of $691 million between fy2012 and fy2017 .

the estimated total federal cost of the nbaf project increased from $451 million in december 2006 to $615 million in may 2009 .

additional site - specific infrastructure and utility upgrade costs of $110 million are to be contributed in - kind by kansas state university and its partners .

decommissioning piadc is expected to cost another $190 million .

these estimated costs have not changed since may 2009 , but the completion schedule has been extended by one year because the process of selling plum island is taking longer than dhs had planned .

in the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 , div .

d , sec .

540 ) and the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-83 , sec .

540 ) congress authorized dhs to use receipts from the sale of plum island , subject to appropriation , to offset nbaf construction and piadc decommissioning costs .

similar language is included in s. 3607 as reported .

congress has been interested for several years in dhs policies and procedures for testing and evaluation ( t&e ) of large acquisition projects .

this interest has especially focused on the t&e role of the s&t directorate in acquisitions by other dhs components .

the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 , section 306 ) authorizes the secretary of homeland security , acting through the under secretary for science and technology , to "issue necessary regulations with respect to ... testing and evaluation activities of the department. .

under current dhs policy , in establishing t&e policies and procedures for dhs acquisitions , the under secretary acts through the director of the s&t directorate's test and evaluation and standards division ( tsd ) and a special assistant in the tsd known as the director of operational testing and evaluation ( dot&e ) .

congressional oversight of dhs acquisition and t&e may therefore focus attention on the s&t directorate's funding for test and evaluation and standards .

statutory authority for the homeland security institute ( hsi ) expired in april 2009 .

under its general authority to establish federally funded r&d centers , the s&t directorate has replaced hsi with the homeland security studies and analysis institute ( hssai ) .

it has also established a new homeland security systems engineering and development institute ( hssedi ) .

both institutes are funded mostly on a cost - reimbursement basis by other s&t programs and other dhs and non - dhs agencies .

the institutes attracted outside users in fy2009 at only about one - third the level that dhs had anticipated .

nevertheless , dhs expects them to grow rapidly in fy2010 and continue growing in fy2011 .

the fy2011 budget justification projects reimbursable obligations of $187 million in fy2011 , more than four times the fy2009 level of $42 million .

the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) is the primary dhs organization for combating the threat of nuclear attack .

it is currently responsible for all dhs nuclear detection research , development , testing , evaluation , acquisition , and operational support .

under the administration's fy2011 budget , dndo's research role would be transferred to the directorate of science and technology ( s&t ) .

the administration requested a total of $306 million for dndo for fy2011 ( see table 20 ) .

this is a 20% decrease from the fy2010 appropriation , but excluding transformational r&d , which would be transferred to the s&t directorate , the remaining activities would increase by 12% .

in some cases , however , there would be substantial shifts in emphasis .

systems acquisition would receive $53 million for human - portable radiation detection systems , versus none in fy2010 .

systems development would be reduced by $31 million .

the senate - reported bill would provide $17 million more than the request for dndo .

it would provide the requested amount for research , development , and operations but would rescind $27 million in unobligated prior - year balances .

relative to the request for systems acquisition , the bill would increase funding for radiation portal monitors by $12 million in order to address coverage gaps , restore funding for the securing the cities program , and reduce funding for human - portable radiation detectors by $15 million because of procurement delays .

the senate committee encouraged dhs to review whether the acquisition of nuclear detection equipment should be funded by the operational components rather than by dndo ; in this discussion , the committee characterized dndo as primarily an r&d organization .

congressional attention has focused in recent years on the testing and analysis dndo has conducted to support its planned purchase and deployment of advanced spectroscopic portals ( asps ) , a type of next - generation radiation portal monitor .

congress included a requirement for secretarial certification before full - scale asp procurement in each homeland security appropriations act from fy2007 through fy2010 .

similar language is included in s. 3607 as reported .

the expected date for certification has been postponed several times .

in february 2010 , dhs decided that it will no longer pursue the use of asps for primary screening , although it will continue developing and testing them for use in secondary screening .

the global nuclear detection architecture overseen by dndo remains an issue of congressional interest .

according to the fy2011 congressional budget justification , the proposed reduction in funding for systems development reflects "a shift in dndo priorities to developing a wider range of potential solutions to enduring vulnerabilities in the global nuclear detection architecture" and will result in increased funding for "systems studies , as well as testing and piloting existing technologies in new operational environments. .

congress may consider the basis for and implications of these changes in priorities , including how they may affect other elements of the global architecture .

other agencies with a role in the architecture , in addition to dhs , include dod , doe , the department of state , and the intelligence community .

the mission of dndo , as established by congress in the safe port act ( p.l .

109-347 , title v ) , includes serving as the primary federal entity "to further develop , acquire , and support the deployment of an enhanced domestic system" for detection of nuclear and radiological devices and material ( 6 u.s.c .

592 ) .

the act also eliminated any explicit mention of radiological and nuclear countermeasures from the statutory duties and responsibilities of the under secretary for s&t .

congress may consider whether the proposed transfer of dndo's research activities to the s&t directorate is consistent with its intent in the safe port act .

it may also consider the acquisition portion of dndo's mission .

most of dndo's funding for systems acquisition was eliminated in fy2010 , and that year's budget stated that "funding requests for radiation detection equipment will now be sought by the end users that will operate them. .

in contrast , the fy2011 request for systems acquisition includes more funding than ever before for dndo's procurement of human - portable radiation detectors on behalf of the coast guard , customs and border protection , and the transportation security administration .

the reasons for this apparent reversal of policy are not explained in the fy2011 congressional budget justification for dndo .

appendix a. fy2010 supplemental appropriations p.l .

111-212 on july 29 , 2010 , the president signed into law p.l .

111-230 , making $5,177 million in supplemental fy2010 appropriations available to dhs .

the supplemental appropriations include the following amounts: $66 million for the coast guard ( $50 million for operating expenses , and $16 million for acquisition , construction , and improvements ) ; $5,100 million for fema's disaster relief fund ( of which $5 million is transferred to the dhs oig ) ; and $11 million for uscis .

p.l .

111-230 on august 13 , 2010 , the president signed into law p.l .

111-230 , making $600 million emergency supplemental appropriations available for border security , of which $394 million is allocated to dhs , $196 million to the department of justice ( doj ) , and $10 million to the federal judiciary .

within dhs , p.l .

111-230 provides cbp with a total of $306 million , including $176 million for additional border patrol agents , $39 million for cbp officers at ports of entry on the southwest border , $10 million to support integrity and background investigation programs , $14 million for tactical communications , $32 million for uav acquisition and deployment , and $6 million for the construction of forward - operating bases for the border patrol .

p.l .

111-230  also includes $80 million for ice , of which $30 million is directed toward efforts to reduce the threat of violence along the southwest border , and $50 million for additional ice personnel ; and $8 million for the cbp , bp , and ice basic training at the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) .

administration budget amendment in a june 22 , 2010 , budget amendment the administration requested an additional $600 million for border security along the southwest border of the united states , including added funding to the u.s. border patrol ( usbp ) .

this funding would be partially offset by rescinding $100 million in dhs funds for sbinet ( commonly known as the "virtual border fence" ) , which has been suspended pending the outcome of a technical and cost review .

the administration requested that the remainder be designated as emergency requirements .

of the total , $399 million would have been for dhs and $201 million would go to doj .

within the dhs total , $297 million would have been used to hire 1,000 new border patrol agents , $37 million for two new unmanned aerial detection systems , $53 million for 160 new immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) agents , $6.5 million for 30 new customs and border patrol ( cbp ) officers , and $6 million for 20 new customs and border protection ( cbp ) canine teams to improve border enforcement operations along the southwest border .

the $201 million that was requested for doj would have increased the presence of federal law enforcement in the southwest border districts by adding seven bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives ( atf ) gunrunner teams , five fbi hybrid task forces , additional drug enforcement administration ( dea ) agents , equipment , operational support , and additional attorneys and immigration judges , and supporting additional detention and incarceration costs for criminal aliens in coordination with dhs enforcement activities .

the amendment would also have provided funding to support mexican law enforcement operations with ballistic analysis , dna analysis , information sharing , technical capabilities , and technical assistance .

congressional action on border security the budget amendment by the administration was initially included in the house - passed version of  h.r .

4899 , but the border security provisions were dropped prior to final passage and the identical provisions were re - introduced as a separate bill — the emergency border security supplemental appropriations act of 2010 ( h.r .

5875 ) .

h.r .

5875  included $701 million for border security , $100 million more than the administration's request .

both the administration and the house - amended version included $201 million to doj for border security efforts , largely for more law enforcement personnel , as discussed above .

h.r .

5875  was passed in the house on july 28 , 2010 .

for cbp , house - passed  h.r .

5875  would have provided a total of $412 million , $13 million more than the request , including $208 million for new border patrol agents , $32 million for two new unmanned aerial detection systems , $136 million to hire and retain new cbp officers , and $36 million for tactical communications and infrastructure , as well as for corruption investigations , and $8 million for training .

additionally , the house - passed version would have provided $30 million for ice , $23 million less than requested , to reduce narcotics smuggling and border violence , and it puts $50 million toward supporting state and local law enforcement through operation stonegarden ( distributed through fema ) .

also , the administration's request would have provided fewer border patrol agents and cbp officers than the house july - amended version .

on august 5 , 2010 , the senate took up  s. 3721  as a substitute amendment to house - passed  h.r .

5875 .

the bill was passed by unanimous consent .

senate - passed  h.r .

5875  includes $600 million for border security ( $101 million less than house - passed  h.r .

5875  would provide ) , of which $394 million is allocated to dhs and $196 million to doj .

in contrast to the house version of the bill , senate - passed  h.r .

5875  was reportedly completely offset by increases to h1-b and l visa fees and a rescission .

for cbp , senate - passed  h.r .

5875  would have provided a total of $306 million , including $176 million for additional border patrol agents , $39 million for cbp officers at ports of entry on the southwest border , $10 million to support integrity and background investigation programs , $14 million for tactical communications , $32 million for uav acquisition and deployment , and $6 million for the construction of forward - operating bases for the border patrol .

senate - passed  h.r .

5875  also included $80 million for ice , of which $30 million was directed toward efforts to reduce the threat of violence along the southwest border , and $50 million for additional ice personnel ; and $8 million for the cbp , bp , and ice basic training at the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) .

on august 9 , the house introduced a new border security supplemental bill — h.r .

6080 — which was subsequently passed by the house on august 10 .

h.r .

6080  contained identical language to senate - passed h.r .

5875 .

reportedly , the house took up the bill with a new number to avoid a dispute related to its constitutional obligation to originate all revenue measures .

this dispute arose with the addition of funding provisions in senate - passed  h.r .

5875  that were not included in the house - passed version .

on august 12, the senate passed h.r .

6080  without amendment by unanimous consent .

appendix b. dhs appropriations in context federal - wide homeland security funding since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , there has been an increasing interest in the levels of funding available for homeland security efforts .

the office of management and budget , as originally directed by the fy1998 national defense authorization act , has published an annual report to congress on combating terrorism .

beginning with the june 24 , 2002 , edition of this report , homeland security was included as a part of the analysis .

in subsequent years , this homeland security funding analysis has become more refined , as distinctions ( and account lines ) between homeland and non - homeland security activities have become more precise .

this means that while table b - 1 is presented in such a way as to allow year to year comparisons , they may in fact not be strictly comparable due to the increasing specificity of the analysis , as outlined above .

with regard to dhs funding , it is important to note that dhs funding does not comprise all federal spending on homeland security efforts .

in fact , while the largest component of federal spending on homeland security is contained within dhs , the dhs homeland security request for fy2011 accounts for approximately 51% of total federal funding for homeland security .

the department of defense comprises the next highest proportion at 26% of all federal spending on homeland security .

the department of health and human services at 6% , the department of justice at 6% and the department of energy at 3% round out the top five agencies in spending on homeland security .

these five agencies collectively account for nearly 93% of all federal spending on homeland security .

it is also important to note that not all dhs funding is classified as pertaining to homeland security activities .

the legacy agencies that became a part of dhs also conduct activities that are not homeland security related .

therefore , while the fy2011 request included total homeland security budget authority of $37.1 billion for dhs , the requested total budget authority for dhs was $52.6 billion .

moreover , the amounts shown in table b - 1 will not be consistent with total amounts shown elsewhere in the report .

this same inconsistency between homeland security budget authority and requested total budget authority is true of the other agencies listed in the table .

