the use of military commissions to try suspected terrorists has been the focus of intense debate ( as well as significant litigation ) since president bush in november 2001 issued his original military order ( m.o. ) .

authorizing such trials .

the m.o .

specified that persons subject to it would have no recourse to the u.s. court system to appeal a verdict or obtain any other sort of relief , but the supreme court essentially invalidated that provision in its 2004 opinion , rasul v. bush .

in response , congress enacted the detainee treatment act of 2005 ( dta ) .

the dta did not authorize military commissions , but amended title 28 , u.s. code to revoke all judicial jurisdiction over habeas claims by persons detained as "enemy combatants," and it created jurisdiction in the court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit to hear appeals of final decisions of military commissions .

the supreme court , after finding that congress's efforts to strip it of jurisdiction did not apply to a case already pending before the court , hamdan v. rumsfeld , invalidated the military commission system established by presidential order .

the court held that although congress had in general authorized the use of military commissions , such commissions were required to follow procedural rules as similar as possible to courts - martial proceedings , as required by the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) .

in response , congress promptly passed the military commissions act of 2006 ( mca 2006 ) to authorize military commissions and establish procedural rules that were modeled after , but departed from in some significant ways , the ucmj .

the mca 2006 also amended the detainee treatment act in order to strip the judiciary of habeas jurisdiction in all cases brought by detainees , including pending cases , but the supreme court held that provision to be an unconstitutional suspension of the writ of habeas corpus .

president bush reconstituted the military commissions under the mca 2006 by issuing executive order 13425 .

the department of defense ( dod ) issued regulations for the conduct of military commissions pursuant to the mca 2006 and restarted the military commission proceedings , which resulted in three convictions under the bush administration .

one detainee , david matthew hicks of australia , was convicted of material support to terrorism pursuant to a plea agreement in 2007 .

in 2008 , salim hamdan was found guilty of one count of providing material support for terrorism and sentenced to 66 months' imprisonment , but credited with five years' time served .

both men are now free from detention .

ali hamza ahmad suliman al bahlul of yemen was found guilty of multiple counts of conspiracy and solicitation to commit certain war crimes and of providing material support for terrorism in connection with his role as al qaeda's "propaganda chief. .

he refused representation and boycotted most of his trial , and was subsequently sentenced to life imprisonment .

the latter two convictions were reversed on appeal by the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit .

the government sought and was granted a rehearing en banc in the bahlul case to appeal the decisions .

on rehearing , the d.c .

circuit invalidated bahlul's convictions for solicitation and material support for terrorism on ex post facto grounds , but upheld the conspiracy charge , sending it back to the original panel to resolve additional challenges .

no challenge to military commissions under the mca 2006 reached the supreme court .

president obama halted the proceedings upon taking office in january 2009 in order to review whether to continue their use .

the president issued an executive order requiring that the guantánamo detention facility be closed no later than a year from the date of the order .

the order required specified officials to review all guantánamo detentions to assess whether the detainee should continue to be held by the united states , transferred or released to another country , or be prosecuted by the united states for criminal offenses .

the secretary of defense was also required to take steps to ensure that all proceedings before military commissions and the united states court of military commission review were halted , although some pretrial proceedings continued to take place .

one case was moved to a federal district court .

in may 2009 , the obama administration announced that it was considering restarting the military commission system with some changes to the procedural rules .

dod informed congress about modifications to the manual for military commissions , to take effect july 14 , 2009 .

the senate passed the military commissions act of 2009 ( mca 2009 ) as part of the department of defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fy2010 , s. 1391 , to provide some reforms the administration supported and to make other amendments to the military commissions act , as described below .

the bill that emerged from conference ( h.r .

2647 ) contained some , but not all , of the proposals submitted by the obama administration , and was enacted october 28 , 2009 , p.l .

111-84 .

president obama's detention policy task force issued a preliminary report july 20 , 2009 , reaffirming that the white house considers military commissions to be an appropriate forum for trying some cases involving suspected violations of the laws of the war , although federal criminal court would be the preferred forum for trials of detainees .

the disposition of each case was assigned to a team composed of department of justice ( doj ) and department of defense ( dod ) personnel , including prosecutors from the office of military commissions .

appended to the report was a set of criteria to govern the disposition of cases involving guantánamo detainees .

this protocol identified three broad categories of factors to be taken into consideration: strength of interest , namely , the nature and gravity of offenses or underlying conduct ; identity of victims ; location of offense ; location and context in which the individual was apprehended ; and the conduct of the investigation .

efficiency , namely , protection of intelligence source and methods ; venue ; number of defendants ; foreign policy concerns ; legal or evidentiary problems ; efficiency and resource concerns .

other prosecution considerations , namely , the extent to which the forum and offenses that can be tried there permit a full presentation of the wrongful conduct , and the available sentence upon conviction .

federal prosecutors are to evaluate their cases under "traditional principles of federal prosecution. .

on november 13 , 2009 , attorney general holder announced his decision to transfer the five "9 / 11 conspirators," who include khalid sheikh mohammed , walid muhammed salih mubarak bin attash , ramzi bin al shibh , ali abdul - aziz ali , and mustafa ahmed al hawsawi , to the southern district of new york to stand trial .

five other detainees to be tried by military commission included omar khadr , a canadian citizen captured as a teenager and charged before a military commission for allegedly throwing a hand grenade that killed a u.s. soldier in afghanistan ; abd al - rahim al - nashiri , whose military commission charges related to the october 2000 attack on the uss cole were previously withdrawn in february 2009 ; ahmed mohammed ahmed haza al darbi , accused of participating in an al qaeda plot to blow up oil tankers in the straits of hormuz ; and two other detainees about whom no further information was given .

as the deadline for closing the detention facility at guantánamo passed unmet , the obama administration reportedly completed its assessment , determining that about 50 of the detainees held there would continue to be held without trial , that around 40 detainees would be prosecuted in military commission or federal court , and that the remaining 110 detainees would be released once a suitable country has agreed to take each of them .

however , the transfer of 30 detainees of yemeni nationality was stymied because an al qaeda affiliate in yemen is suspected to have been behind attempt to blow up a civilian airliner on christmas day 2009 .

military commissions are courts usually set up by military commanders in the field to try persons accused of certain offenses during war .

they may also try persons for ordinary crimes during periods of martial law or military occupation , where regular civil courts are not able to function .

past military commissions trying enemy belligerents for war crimes directly applied the international law of war , without recourse to domestic criminal statutes , unless such statutes were declaratory of international law .

historically , military commissions have applied the same set of procedural rules that applied in courts - martial .

by statute , military commissions have long been available to try "offenders or offenses designated by statute or the law of war. .

for the most part , military commissions have been employed where u.s. armed forces have established a military government or martial law , as in the war with mexico , 1846-1848 , the civil war , the philippine insurrection of 1899-1902 , and in occupied germany and japan after world war ii .

president bush's military order setting up military commissions appeared to have been designed to replicate a pair of military commission orders issued during world war ii by president roosevelt for the trial of german saboteurs caught within the territory of the united states after having evaded u.s. coastal defenses .

these tribunals were historically a bit anomalous in that they took place in washington , dc , during a period when the civilian courts were open .

a similar practice during the civil war , which accounted for a small number of the military commission cases , was held unconstitutional .

the supreme court held essentially in ex parte milligan that military trials of persons who had never been members of the armed forces of the united states could never be valid on friendly territory where martial law has not been declared and civilian courts are functioning .

however , the supreme court upheld the f.d.r .

tribunals by explaining that the holding in milligan was limited to cases in which civilians — persons who are not members of the armed forces of an enemy government — were tried by military commission , and did not preclude the government from trying enemy belligerents for violations of the law of war , regardless of the operational status of the civilian courts .

the bush administration established rules prescribing detailed procedural safeguards for the tribunals .

these rules were praised as a significant improvement over what might have been permitted under the language of the m.o. , but some continued to argue that the enhancements did not go far enough .

critics also noted that the rules did not address the issue of indefinite detention without charge , as appeared to be possible under the original m.o. , or that the department of defense may continue to detain persons who have been found not guilty by a military commission .

the pentagon reportedly stated that its inspector general ( ig ) looked into allegations , made by military lawyers assigned as prosecutors to the military commissions , that the proceedings were rigged to obtain convictions , but the ig did not substantiate the charges .

the military commissions act ( "mca" ) grants the secretary of defense express authority to convene military commissions to prosecute those fitting the definition under the mca of "alien unprivileged enemy belligerents. .

the secretary delegated the authority to a specially appointed "convening authority," who has responsibility for accepting or rejecting charges referred by the prosecution team , convening military commissions for trials , detailing military commission members and other personnel , approving requests from trial counsel to communicate with the media , approving requests for expert witnesses , approving plea agreements , carrying out post - trial reviews , and forwarding cases for review , along with other duties spelled out in the mca or in dod's regulation for trial by military commission .

the mca eliminates the requirement for military commissions to conform to either of the two uniformity requirements in article 36 , ucmj , which president bush's military commissions were held in hamdan to violate .

instead , it establishes chapter 47a in title 10 , u.s. code and excepts military commissions under this chapter from the requirements in article 36 .

it provides that the ucmj "does not , by its terms , apply to trial by military commissions except as specifically provided in this chapter. .

while declaring that the enacted chapter is "based upon the procedures for trial by general courts - martial under [the ucmj]," it establishes that "[t]he judicial construction and application of [the ucmj] , while instructive , is therefore not of its own force binding on military commissions established under this chapter. .

it expressly exempts these military commissions from ucmj articles 10 ( speedy trial ) , 31 ( self - incrimination warnings ) , and 32 ( pretrial investigations ) , and the mca 2006 amended articles 21 , 28 , 48 , 50 ( a ) , 104 , and 106 of the ucmj to except military commissions under chapter 47a .

other provisions of the ucmj are to apply to trial by military commissions under chapter 47a only to the extent provided therein .

