construction of new long - distance transmission lines has become a hotly debated energy policy issue .

advocates see enhancements to the transmission grid as necessary for exploiting remote sources of renewable power and improving the reliability of the transmission system .

others argue that there are less costly and intrusive means of meeting energy needs than a large transmission build - out .

estimates of the cost of expanding the transmission grid to increase renewable power delivery and other goals run into the tens of billions of dollars .

for example ( all figures in nominal dollars ) : the estimated transmission cost of the joint coordinated system plan to bring great plains wind power to the east coast ranges from $49 billion to $80 billion .

a department of energy ( doe ) study of expanding the use of wind power estimated transmission expansion costs of $60 billion by 2030 .

a study of transmission funding requirements for all purposes for the period 2010 to 2030 estimated total costs of about $300 billion .

the north american electric reliability corporation ( nerc ) identified 39,000 circuit - miles of projected high - voltage transmission over the next 10 years , with roughly one - third of these transmission facilities used to integrate variable and renewable resources .

perhaps the most contentious transmission financing issue is cost allocation for new interstate transmission lines — that is , determining which customers must bear the costs of building and operating new transmission lines that cross several states .

this report provides background and analysis of current transmission cost allocation policy and issues .

the balance of the report is organized as follows: background and history , including a discussion of federal authority under the federal power act .

cost allocation policy at the federal and state levels in the years prior to the adoption by the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) of order no .

1000 .

a review of the transmission planning and cost allocation reforms in order no .

1000 .

after the ruling in illinois commerce commission v. ferc and legislative efforts to amend the fpa to direct ferc transmission cost allocation decisions , ferc initiated a rulemaking proceeding to formulate a clearer policy for transmission cost allocation .

ferc initiated docket ad09-8 , transmission planning processes under order no .

890 , on june 30 , 2009 .

ferc's first action under this docket , in september 2009 , was to hold technical conferences on transmission planning with transmission owners , operators , and other stakeholders in atlanta , phoenix , and philadelphia .

based on these meetings , the commission concluded that significant issues remained with the effectiveness of transmission planning generally and regional and inter - regional planning specifically ; the treatment of certain types of electricity resources in the planning process ( such as renewable power ) ; and cost allocation for new transmission projects .

in relation to cost allocation , the commission found that: determining the costs and benefits of adding transmission infrastructure to the grid is a complex process , particularly for projects that affect multiple systems and therefore may have multiple beneficiaries .

at the same time , the expansion of regional power markets and the increasing adoption of renewable energy requirements have led to a growing need for transmission projects that cross multiple utility and rto systems .

there are few rate structures in place today that provide the allocation and recovery of costs for these inter - system projects , creating significant risk for developers that they will have no identified group of customers from which to recover the cost of their investment .

[emphasis added] following these meetings , ferc signaled , in an october 8 , 2009 , notice requesting comments on cost allocation and other transmission planning issues , that it may take a more direct approach toward cost allocation processes than in the past .

the commission noted that its "best remaining opportunity to eliminate barriers to new transmission construction may therefore be to provide greater certainty in its policies for allocating the cost of new transmission facilities , particularly for facilities that cross multiple transmission systems . .

the specific questions for which ferc requested comments also provide a window into ferc's thinking .

the questions included , among others: how can the beneficiaries of a specific project be identified , and should the delineation of beneficiaries include generators in addition to loads ? .

the unstated but concomitant question is how should the level of benefits , and therefore the cost responsibility of different customer groups , be determined ? .

this goes to the heart of the issue raised by the seventh circuit's rejection of the pjm interconnection cost allocation process .

should cost allocation processes be designed to cover larger geographic regions ? .

this would seem to raise the contentious issue of whether costs should be allocated over large areas and perhaps interconnection - wide .

should cost allocations be static or change over time ? .

this question was posed by ferc as a general issue , and specifically in respect to transmission lines which are initially built with overcapacity in anticipation of demand growth .

how , if at all , should non - quantifiable costs and benefits be incorporated into cost allocations ? .

by the end of november 2009 ferc had received 103 sets of comments .

the comments manifest a wide range of opinions on how ferc should proceed .

for example: american electric power , a large utility company operating within the pjm , spp , and ercot rtos , argued for interconnection - wide planning and cost allocation for extra - high voltage transmission lines , to be implemented by a ferc rulemaking .

southern company , a large southeastern utility operating outside of rtos , rejected the whole notion that problems with transmission planning and cost allocation were inhibiting transmission development .

southern concluded that: a significant misconception being promoted by certain aspects of the industry in the name of promoting renewable resources is that the current transmission planning processes and cost allocation methodologies are obstacles to the expansion of the transmission grid .

this is not the case .

the reason that more inter - regional transmission projects are not being built , at least in the southeast , is that they have not proven to be economic as compared to other options .

as a result , those who would benefit from these projects desire to have other entities subsidize their costs by seeking to mandate the planning of these projects through restructured "top - down" planning processes and through the broad socialization of the costs of such uneconomic transmission projects .

the new england power pool participants committee ( a committee of stakeholders operating within the ne - iso ) stated that " it would be helpful for the commission to provide policy guidance on how it would treat a range of cost allocation options. .

[emphasis in the original] however , the committee was opposed to the establishment of interconnection - wide or national cost allocation rules , or to the notion of interconnection - wide cost allocation .

the southwest power pool rto suggested that ferc implement standardized rules for inter - regional transmission planning and cost allocation .

it also supported the establishment of cost allocation processes across broad areas , such as the eastern interconnection .

spp stated that: attempts to precisely define benefits are misplaced .

the real benefits of a major transmission project , as part of a robust ehv network , over its useful life will never be fully captured in an economic model as there are many benefits that fall outside the scope of economic modeling .

while precise analysis may be desirable , the limitations of such analysis must be acknowledged .

moreover , it is important to recognize that doing nothing also has a cost… .

currently , spp is working to implement a cost allocation method that would even provide more cost sharing for regional projects and simplify the cost allocation .

in virtually complete contradiction to the position of spp , the electricity consumers resource council ( elcon ) , an association of industrial electricity users , emphasized that cost allocation should follow a fundamental principal of "beneficiary pays. .

rather than viewing the issue of allocating benefits as a stumbling block to transmission project development , elcon stated that: [a]s ferc notes in the request [for comments] , how to allocate costs is "not a new problem. .

indeed , courts have developed a carefully crafted body of law to guide the allocation of the costs of transmission investment , centering on the principle that the beneficiaries of a service are to pay for it .

[t]hose who are allocated costs based on actual , demonstrable benefits are less likely to object to the construction of new transmission facilities than those who are allocated costs based on an assumption that they will receive some general , unquantifiable benefit .

the "beneficiary pays" model is , therefore , more likely to reduce controversy and assure that future transmission would be built where the costs truly are justified .

the diversity of these comments indicated the lack of agreement on how ferc should have proceeded in respect to cost allocation .

in november 2009 , at about the same time these comments were filed , a transmission trade group and a consortium of environmental groups filed separate petitions with ferc asking the commission to establish a rulemaking to set transmission cost allocation standards .

the rulemaking proceeding culminated with the issuance of order no .

1000 on july 21 , 2011 .

order no .

1000 states that the commission is amending order no .

890 to ensure that ferc - jurisdictional transmission services are provided at just and reasonable rates , and on a basis that is just and reasonable , and not unduly discriminatory or preferential .

the following paragraphs summarize the final rule ( which becomes effective october 11 , 2011 ) and its major requirements .

order no .

1000 establishes three requirements for transmission planning: public utility transmission providers are required to participate in a regional transmission planning process that satisfies order no .

890 principles and produces a regional transmission plan .

local and regional transmission planning processes must consider transmission needs driven by public policy requirements established by state or federal laws or regulations .

public utility transmission providers in each pair of neighboring planning regions must coordinate to determine if more efficient or cost - effective solutions are available .

order no .

1000 further requires that each transmission provider participate in a regional transmission planning process that includes both a regional cost allocation method for the cost of new transmission facilities selected in a regional transmission plan and an interregional cost allocation method for the cost of certain new transmission facilities located in two or more neighboring transmission planning regions .

order no .

1000 establishes three additional requirements for transmission cost allocation: regional transmission planning process must have a regional cost allocation method for a new transmission facility selected in the regional transmission plan for purposes of cost allocation .

the cost allocation method must satisfy six regional cost allocation principles .

neighboring transmission planning regions must have a common interregional cost allocation method for a new interregional transmission cost facility that the regions select .

cost allocation method must satisfy six similar interregional cost allocation principles .

participant - funding of new transmission facilities is permitted , but is not allowed as the regional or interregional cost allocation method unless the individual market participants agree to it .

while ferc declines to specify a standard or preferred methodology in order no .

1000 , it does require each regional or interregional cost allocation method to satisfy six generalized cost allocation principles: regional cost allocation principle 1: the cost of transmission facilities must be allocated to those within the transmission planning region that benefit from those facilities in a manner that is at least roughly commensurate with estimated benefits .

interregional cost allocation principle 1: the costs of a new interregional transmission facility must be allocated to each transmission planning region in which that transmission facility is located in a manner that is at least roughly commensurate with the estimated benefits of that transmission facility in each of the transmission planning regions .

regional cost allocation principle 2: those that receive no benefit from transmission facilities , either at present or in a likely future scenario , must not be involuntarily allocated any of the costs of those transmission facilities .

interregional cost allocation principle 2: a transmission planning region that receives no benefit from an interregional transmission facility that is located in that region , either at present or in a likely future scenario , must not be involuntarily allocated any of the costs of that transmission facility .

regional cost allocation principle 3: if a benefit to cost threshold is used to determine which transmission facilities have sufficient net benefits to be selected in a regional transmission plan for the purpose of cost allocation , it must not be so high that transmission facilities with significant positive net benefits are excluded from cost allocation .

interregional cost allocation principle 3: if a benefit - cost threshold ratio is used to determine whether an interregional transmission facility has sufficient net benefits to qualify for interregional cost allocation , this ratio must not be so large as to exclude a transmission facility with significant positive net benefits from cost allocation .

regional cost allocation principle 4 : the allocation method for the cost of a transmission facility selected in a regional transmission plan must allocate costs solely within that transmission planning region unless another entity outside the region or another transmission planning region voluntarily agrees to assume a portion of those costs .

interregional cost allocation principle 4 : costs allocated for an interregional transmission facility must be assigned only to transmission planning regions in which the transmission facility is located .

costs cannot be assigned involuntarily under this rule to a transmission planning region in which that transmission facility is not located .

regional cost allocation principle 5: the cost allocation method and data requirements for determining benefits and identifying beneficiaries for a transmission facility must be transparent with adequate documentation to allow a stakeholder to determine how they were applied to a proposed transmission facility .

interregional cost allocation principle 5 : the cost allocation method and data requirements for determining benefits and identifying beneficiaries for an interregional transmission facility must be transparent with adequate documentation to allow a stakeholder to determine how they were applied to a proposed interregional transmission facility .

regional cost allocation principle 6: a transmission planning region may choose to use a different cost allocation method for different types of transmission facilities in the regional transmission plan , such as transmission facilities needed for reliability , congestion relief , or to achieve public policy requirements .

interregional cost allocation principle 6 : the public utility transmission providers located in neighboring transmission planning regions may choose to use a different cost allocation method for different types of interregional transmission facilities , such as transmission facilities needed for reliability , congestion relief , or to achieve public policy requirements .

the final rule curtails the existing right of first refusal for incumbent transmission providers previously had to build new transmission lines .

ferc concludes in order no .

1000 that retaining a federal right of first refusal for transmission facilities selected in a regional transmission plan for purposes of cost allocation could result in rates for ferc - jurisdictional services that are unjust and unreasonable , or could otherwise result in undue discrimination by public utility transmission providers .

this aspect of the final rule will not affect any state or local laws or regulations regarding the construction of transmission facilities ( including but not limited to siting or permitting ) , or the following types of projects: the transmission facility is not in a regional transmission plan for purpose of cost allocation .

the transmission facility is not a result of an upgrade to existing transmission facilities , such as a tower change out or reconductoring .

the new transmission facility has already been subject to a regional process which allows non - incumbent developers to compete with incumbents .

order no .

1000 will take effect on october 11 , 2011 , 60 days after publication in the federal register .

each public utility transmission provider is required to make a compliance filing by october 11 , 2012 , or within 12 months of the effective date of the final rule .

compliance filing for interregional transmission coordination and interregional cost allocation must be filed within 18 months of the effective date , that is by april 11 , 2013 .

ferc expects that some rto regions may submit their existing procedures as being compliant with order no .

1000's regional cost allocation requirements .

order no .

1000 does not provide details regarding how ferc might enforce the final rule .

public utility transmission providers are given schedules for compliance filings , and revision of oatt schedules to reflect cost allocation methods as transmission providers are required to show that they meet the provisions of the final rule .

it is possible that potential issues regarding the formation of regions could affect transmission provider compliance .

the need for transmission planning has traditionally resulted from load growth and the need to connect new power generation resources to load centers .

more recently , an increased focus on power markets and reliability has caused discussion on the need for new transmission lines .

with order no .

1000 , ferc has issued regulations which seek to add state and federal public policies as a factor in the decision - making process concerning which transmission projects emerge from planning processes as construction projects .

however , ferc's use of the word "consider" with regard to state or federal public policy requirements ( i.e. , as a factor in the planning process ) may not be enough of an imperative to actually push such transmission projects forward .

in the wake of the issuance of the final rule , the american public power association ( appa ) observed that ferc may already have had the authority to move transmission projects forward which are driven by the needs of load - serving entities ( lses ) .

appa believes that transmission planning should also focus on lse needs as stipulated in the fpa , which by necessity may likely include transmission facilities to access renewable resources as mandated by state rps requirements and other clean energy resources necessitated by state and federal environmental regulations .

appa refers to section 217 ( b ) ( 4 ) of the fpa , which states following: the commission shall exercise the authority of the commission under this act in a manner that facilitates the planning and expansion of transmission facilities to meet the reasonable needs of load - serving entities to satisfy the service obligations of the load - serving entities .. .

definition of benefits will likely be key in determinations of cost allocation .

order no .

1000 discusses many different types of potential benefits ( eg , economic , reliability , system - wide , etc. ) .

but does not seek to define specifically what a benefit is .

the definition of benefits will lead to the identification of beneficiaries , and thence to the identification of how much and to whom costs will be allocated to .

ferc is not prescribing a particular definition of "benefits" or "beneficiaries" in this final rule .

ferc noted that "[i]n our view , the proper context for further consideration of these matters is on review of compliance proposals and a record before us. .

ferc does not propose interconnection - wide cost allocation as a regional allocation method for transmission facilities .

the regions will define benefits , and ferc considers at least three primary areas for benefits will be considered — reliability , economics and public policy .

order no .

1000 states there will be no cost allocation where there is no benefit: those that receive no benefit from new transmission facilities , either at present or in a likely future scenario , must not be involuntarily allocated any of the costs of those facilities .

that is , a utility or other entity that receives no benefit from transmission facilities , either at present or in a likely future scenario , must not be involuntarily allocated any of the costs of those facilities .

ferc also believes this final rule will protect transmission customers from free riders , that is , those who receive benefits without paying for them .

order no .

1000 addresses the "free rider" issue by invoking cost - causation principles: in order no .

890 , the commission recognized that the cost causation principle provide that costs should be allocated to those who cause them to be incurred and those that otherwise benefit from them .

we conclude now that this principle cannot be limited to voluntary arrangements because if it were "the commission could not address free rider problems associated with new transmission investment , and it could not ensure that rates , terms and conditions of jurisdictional service are just and reasonable and not unduly discriminatory .

ferc is allowing the regions to define themselves , with the caveat that there must be more than one utility in a region .

existing rtos or isos are considered "natural regions that have agreements in place already that will define those regions. .

ferc expects that these regions will be defined by transmission - owning utilities .

it should also be recognized that some rtos stretch over non - continuous areas , which may lead to some rto / isos or their members being in more than one transmission planning region .

the definition of transmission - owning utility may be a complicating factor as some owners / operators of generation facilities have been designated as transmission owners for reliability purposes .

such entities could also be impacted by aspects of requirements from the final rule .

established regulatory principles may also bear on the definition of benefits , especially if rate recovery extends to state jurisdictions or if states ( or portions of states ) are considered planning regions .

timing is very important to the definition of benefits , as principles of intergenerational equity may arise .

ferc has stated that consideration of public policies should be limited to existing policies .

the time frame to which these existing policies apply would likely be used as the limit to the planning horizon for which benefits and their costs could be allocated to beneficiaries based on established "cost - causation" principles .

alternatively , under "used and useful" ratemaking principles , the allocation of costs could be spread over the life of the transmission facility asset itself , and the benefits timeline may be allocated over such a lifespan .

ferc makes a distinction between a transmission facility in a regional plan , and a transmission facility selected in a regional plan for purposes of cost allocation .

ferc considers the latter a more efficient / cost - effective solution to regional needs , presumably by virtue of being selected pursuant to a commission - approved regional planning process , even though there are no standard procedures for a process likely to be approved by ferc .

ferc assumes that the region will select the most efficient solution since a cost - allocation scheme has been settled on by transmission owning interests .

this distinction also seems to illuminate the partial elimination of a right of first refusal ( rofr ) of a transmission provider to build a transmission facility chosen for regional cost allocation .

ferc is not preempting any state or local law or regulation that establishes a rofr , and only eliminates the rofr in this very limited situation .

order no .

1000 notes that each transmission provider would be required to amend its oatt if a transmission facility project selected in a regional plan for purposes of cost allocation is delayed .

local utilities would then be allowed to consider alternative solutions to ensure that reliability needs and service obligations are met .

order no .

1000 is broadly intended to ensure that there is enough transmission capacity to meet future u.s. electricity needs , and provide for the allocation of new costs to build the transmission facilities by "identify[ing] transmission facilities that more efficiently or cost - effectively meet the region's reliability , economic and public policy requirements. .

in paragraph 29 of order no .

1000 , ferc cites the expectations of the u.s. department of energy and nerc with regard to the expansion of high - voltage transmission lines and facilities , with up to a third of this new transmission capacity intended to serve new variable and renewable energy generation .

state renewable energy portfolio standards are seen as a major driver of this new capacity .

however , with most of the best regions for wind and solar resources located in the western united states , and many of the load centers and many states with rps requirements in the eastern part of the country , some observers have discussed the potential for long , interstate transmission lines to carry renewable energy to markets in the east .

order no .

1000 allows for neighboring transmission planning regions to work out interregional plans for state public policies such as rps requirements .

in the absence of a federal renewable energy or clean energy standard , an imperative for a west - to - east , multistate renewable energy transmission line is unlikely , but a segmented build - out of transmission facilities could accomplish a similar goal if benefits to local regions can be shown .

in that instance , the technologies and facility designs chosen to accomplish the build out could be crucial to a benefits determination since alternating current transmission lines have the potential for future "on - and off - ramps" to serve load growth along such routes , while direct current transmission lines are limited in that capability .

federal regulations may reduce the need for states or regions to have their own regulations to address the same or similar issues .

as such , federal regulations ease interstate commerce because a multiplicity of state regulations is avoided , especially when the regulations developed in states and regions addressing a specific issue can differ substantially .

in order no .

1000 , ferc intends to provide broad guidance on planning transmission facilities and cost allocation , while allowing regions to tailor such arrangements to their own or interregional requirements with consideration given to public policy goals: the cost allocation principles are not intended to prescribe a uniform approach , but rather each public utility transmission provider should have the opportunity to first develop its own method or methods .

also , we recognize that regional differences may warrant distinctions in cost allocation methods .

thus , in providing such discretion , ferc leaves the door open for broad interpretation of the regulations , with the likelihood that a wide variation of plans will result .

ferc states in order no .

1000 that transmission planners should seek the most efficient and cost - effective ways to meet the transmission needs of regions .

order no .

1000 also identifies a transmission facility selected in a regional plan for cost allocation purposes as a "more efficient or cost - effective solution to regional transmission needs. .

sometimes , the optimal location of a power generation facility can ease congestion - related reliability issues , and present a cost effective solution with potential benefits to other regional transmission needs .

it is not clear to what extent the regional transmission planners will be required to think broadly and consider a power generation solution when considering order no .

1000 requirements for the most "efficient or cost - effective solution" to regional power needs .

the final order comes as state renewable portfolio requirements and the upcoming u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) regulations for coal power plants may increase demand for new transmission lines .

the uncertainty regarding the implications for generation resources of upcoming epa regulations has caused some utilities to delay decisions on building new generation , with plans to satisfy ( at least interim ) power needs from power markets until the regulatory clarity they seek is provided .

some commenters expect that shortfalls in transmission capacity in some regions of the united states may have possible impacts on reliability resulting from these additional needs .

state public utility commission decisions authorizing new power plants in rate base to replace retired coal plants will likely impact regional transmission planning decisions .

there are many issues and many questions beyond those discussed in this report which will likely arise as the many different stakeholders involved move to understand and satisfy their obligations under the final rule .

ferc acknowledges that some key questions may only be answered in the compliance filing process .

ferc issued order 1000-a on may 17 , 2012 , to deny many rehearing requests for its order 1000 , affirming that all jurisdictional electric transmission providers must comply with order 1000's requirements to participate in regional and interregional planning processes for planning new transmission facilities .

transmission cost allocation methods specified in order 1000 are to be employed for these new transmission facilities .

ferc subsequently issued order 1000-b on october 18 , 2012 , to uphold its previous orders 1000 and 1000-a , and to make clarifications to its rule .

ferc again denied any requests for rehearing of order 1000 or order 1000-a .

