in the late 1960s and 1970s , advancements in telecommunications technologies enabled the creation of a large - scale , interconnected network called arpanet ( "advanced research projects agency network" ) .

arpanet was created by the defense advanced research projects agency as a government - funded enterprise until the mid - 1990s , when it began commercialization .

today's internet is a direct outgrowth of the technologies developed and lessons learned from arpanet .

during the late 1990s , the internet began having a significant impact on culture and commerce , including the exponential increase of near instant communication by electronic mail ( e - mail ) , text - based discussion forums , and the graphical world wide web .

today , the internet has evolved even further and many people are using newer tools , such as blogs , social networks , video sharing sites , and other aspects of today's communications technology to express their political ideals , many times in conflict with the political opinions and outlook espoused by their governments .

in this way , the internet has proven to be an unprecedented and often disruptive force in some closed societies , as the governments seek to maintain their authority and control the ideas and information their citizens receive .

these regimes are often caught in a dilemma: they need the internet to participate in commerce in the global market and for economic growth and technological development , but they also seek to restrict the internet in order to maintain the government's control .

figure 3 illustrates an assessment by freedom house of the extent to which selected countries restrict freedom on the internet .

in burma during the 2007 saffron revolution , youtube footage , often filmed with cell phone cameras , conveyed to the world the human rights violations against the monks and generated international awareness and reaction .

demonstrations in tehran following the june 12 , 2009 , presidential elections were often organized through twitter and text messages over cell phones .

the iranian government's violent response to the demonstrations was spread around the world through live cell phone pictures , e - mails , and phone calls .

the voice of america ( voa ) reported that during the demonstrations , iranians sent voa over 300 videos a day , along with thousands of still pictures , e - mails , and telephone calls to the agency .

a variety of control mechanisms are employed by regimes seeking to limit the ways the internet is used , ranging from sophisticated surveillance and censorship to threats of retaliation ( which foster self - censorship ) and actual harassment and arrests of internet users .

such regimes often require the assistance of foreign internet companies operating in their countries .

these global technology companies find themselves in a dilemma .

they often must choose between following the laws and the requests of authorities of the host country , or refusing to do so and risking the loss of business licenses or the ability to sell services in that country .

human rights groups have protested that yahoo ! .

and google censor and remove material deemed sensitive by host governments on country - specific search engines .

microsoft is said to censor chinese versions of its blog platforms .

human rights groups also charge that yahoo ! .

has provided chinese authorities personal identifying information about users that has allowed the government to identify and arrest individuals for statements made on the web .

a representative of google , inc. acknowledged the problem of government involvement , noting as our ... burma experiences indicate , our products are platforms for free expression , transparency , and accountability .

because of this , we often face efforts by governments throughout the world to restrict or deny access to our products .

the global online freedom act of 2009 ( gofa ) ( h.r .

2271 ) , introduced by representative christopher smith , would mandate that companies selling internet technologies and services to repressive countries take actions to combat censorship and protect personally identifiable information .

some believe , however , that technology can offer a complementary and , in some cases , better and more easily implemented solution to prevent government censorship .

hardware and internet services , in and of themselves , are neutral elements of the internet ; it is how they are implemented by various countries that makes internet access "repressive. .

for example , hardware , such as routers , is needed to provide internet service everywhere .

however , hardware features intended for day - to - day internet traffic management , conducted by internet service providers ( isps ) and governments for benign purposes , can be misused .

repressive governments are able to use these features to censor traffic and monitor use — sometimes using them to identify specific individuals for prosecution .

it is not currently feasible to remove those features from the product , even when sold to countries that use those features to repress political speech .

on the other hand , internet services , such as google , are often tailored for deployment to specific countries .

such tailoring is done to bring the company's products and services in line with the laws of that country , and not with the end goal of allowing the country to repress and censor its citizenry .

in many cases , tailoring does not raise many questions about free speech and political repression because the country is not considered to be a repressive regime .

under canadian human rights law , for example , it is illegal to promote violence against protected groups ; therefore , when reported , google.ca will remove such links from search results .

internet censorship and the prosecution of individuals who attempt to circumvent that censorship are unlikely to be eliminated in some countries .

however , while some governments are continually looking for new and more thorough methods to restrict or inhibit internet use , citizens in these countries are active in developing techniques to circumvent those efforts .

the organization reporters without borders has listed 15 countries where internet freedom is restricted .

these countries are china , cuba , north korea , belarus , myanmar , egypt , ethiopia , iran , saudi arabia , syria , tunisia , turkmenistan , uzbekistan , vietnam , and zimbabwe .

this report uses china as an illustrative case study .

the people's republic of china ( prc ) has the world's largest number of internet users , estimated at 330 million people , including 70 million bloggers .

it also has one of the most sophisticated and aggressive internet censorship and control regimes in the world .

according to some estimates , between 30 and 40 chinese citizens are serving prison sentences for writing about politically sensitive topics online .

in november 2009 , huang qi , a human rights advocate , was sentenced to three years in prison for "possessing state secrets" after posting online appeals and complaints of families whose children had been killed in school buildings during the sichuan earthquake of may 2008 .

some studies show that the vast majority of internet users in china do not view the medium as a political tool .

nonetheless , chinese internet users are able to access unprecedented amounts of information , despite government attempts to limit the flow , while political activists and others continue to push back against restrictions and find ways to circumvent censorship .

prc officials have argued that internet controls are necessary for social stability and that new restrictions target pornography and other "harmful content. .

chinese official commentary has suggested that the u.s. government has applied a double standard , regulating the internet at home while calling for other countries to eliminate controls .

the prc government also has referred to u.s. criticism of internet restrictions in china as politically motivated and an interference in china's domestic affairs .

the prc government employs a variety of methods to control online content and expression , including website blocking and keyword filtering ; regulating and monitoring internet service providers , internet cafes , and university bulletin board systems ; registering websites and blogs ; and occasional arrests of high - profile "cyber dissidents" or crackdowns on internet service providers .

some analysts argue that even though the prc government cannot control all internet content and use , its selective targeting creates an undercurrent of fear and promotes self - censorship .

blocked websites , social networking sites , and file sharing sites include radio free asia , international human rights websites , many taiwanese newspapers , facebook , twitter , and youtube .

the government reportedly has hired thousands of students to express pro - government views on websites , bulletin boards , and chat rooms .

furthermore , some analysts argue that the internet has enhanced government propaganda and surveillance capabilities .

nonetheless , the internet has made it impossible for the chinese government to restrict information as fully as before ; bulletin boards , comment boards , chat rooms , blogs , and other outlets have allowed for an unprecedented amount of information and public comment on social and other issues .

although the state has the capability to block news of events or to partially shut down the internet , as it did in xinjiang following ethnic unrest that erupted there in july 2009 , it often cannot do so before such events are publicized , if only fleetingly , online .

the threat of public exposure or condemnation through the internet reportedly has compelled some government officials to conduct affairs more openly .

for chinese internet users in search of censored information , circumventing government controls is often made possible by way of "proxy servers" or "virtual private networks" using special software .

furthermore , english language news sites , such as the new york times and the washington post , are generally available .

the iranian government has restricted internet usage since access spread beyond universities and government agencies to the general population in the late 1990s .

today , iran has an estimated 23 million internet users , and watchdog groups and internet activists claim that iran's filtering and monitoring of usage is among the most extensive in the world .

according to the u.s. department of state's 2 009 country reports on human rights practices : the government monitored internet communications , especially via social networking web sites such as facebook , twitter , and youtube , with technology it purchased at the end of 2008 .

the government threatened , harassed , and arrested individuals who posted comments critical of the government on the internet ; in some cases it reportedly confiscated their passports or arrested their family members .

freedom house and other human rights organizations reported that authorities sometimes stopped citizens at tehran international airport as they arrived in the country , asked them to log into their youtube and facebook accounts , and in some cases forced them to delete information… .

the government also imposed limits on internet speed and technology , making it difficult to download internet material or to circumvent government restrictions to access blocked web sites .

after the june election , there was a major drop in bandwidth , which experts posited the government may have caused in its effort to prevent activists involved in the protests from accessing the internet and especially from uploading large video files… .

during the year the government prosecuted and punished persons for peaceful expression of dissenting views via the internet .

during the "show trials," prosecutors often cited activities on the internet or e - mails sent to foreigners as evidence of illegal activity .

according to reporters sans frontieres , seven bloggers remained detained at year's end .

the iranian government tracks online communication and content through a centralized location in the state's telecommunications monopoly , the ministry of communications and information technology ( mcit ) .

in addition to its 23 million internet users , the persian blogosphere is among the world's most robust .

the freedom of internet sites and blogs remains contested under iranian law , but the press law does require that bloggers obtain licenses , and all content on websites and blogs is subject to approval of the ministry of culture and islamic guidance ( mcig ) .

the government also regulates access to the internet by limiting the speed of internet access that isps can provide to households and public access sites ( internet cafes ) to 128 kilobytes per second , making it difficult or impossible to download multimedia content .

iran reportedly is the only country to have imposed a cap on internet access speed for households .

iran also has arrested numerous activists , bloggers , and journalists on charges of "antigovernment publicity," "propaganda against the islamic republic," and "jeopardizing national security. .

the nokia siemens network ( nsn ) sold communication monitoring equipment to the iranian government in 2008 .

the monitoring center , installed into the mcit gateway , was part of a larger contract with iran that included mobile phone network technology .

the iranian government had reportedly experimented with the monitoring equipment prior to the election , but did not use it extensively until after the election .

some experts have argued that the nature of the content inspection following iran's 2009 presidential election went beyond the censorship practices of other countries , including china .

nsn maintains that it sold the technology for the purpose of "lawful intercept" of information used to track criminals and terrorists .

critics argue that in a country like iran , where the population is heavily reliant on internet communication with the outside world due to censorship of other communication , this technology enables the government to intensify repression .

in response to laws and regulations of foreign countries requiring censorship and disclosure of users' personal information , some u.s. technology firms engage in internet censoring and filtering .

some examples include china and other internet - restricting countries such as iran .

in some cases , such as in iran , internet censoring and filtering reportedly involve a practice often called deep packet inspection which is under a great deal of scrutiny in the united states .

doing business in a foreign country subjects the business to the jurisdiction of that country .

nonetheless , concerns have been raised that china's internet filtering could run afoul of world trade obligations .

the global network initiative ( gni ) was formed in october 2008 to respond to criticism of internet service providers and computer manufacturers who had sold technology or services to internet - restricting countries .

gni was launched by a coalition of human rights organizations , academics , investors and technology leaders .

gni adopts a self - regulatory approach to protect and advance individuals' rights to free expression and privacy on the internet .

a set of principles and supporting mechanisms provide guidance to the information and communications technology ( ict ) industry and its stakeholders on how to protect and advance the human rights of freedom of expression and privacy when faced with pressures from governments to take actions that infringe upon these rights .

governments are not members of the gni , but are encouraged to support the principles and encourage their adoption .

organizations participating in the gni include google inc. , microsoft corp. , and yahoo ! .

inc. each initial participating company committed $100,000 per year over the two - year start - up period .

organizations not participating in the initiative who where involved in its development include amnesty international and reporters without borders .

reporters without borders remains skeptical about how much change gni can effect , and pushed for standards that would require all government requests and takedown notices be made in writing .

the gni's principles on freedom of expression and privacy ( "the principles" ) are based on internationally recognized laws and standards for human rights , including the universal declaration of human rights ( udhr ) , the international covenant on civil and political rights ( iccpr ) and the international covenant on economic , social , and cultural rights .

the gni acknowledges that the rights of privacy and of freedom of expression should not be restricted by governments , except in narrowly defined circumstances based on internationally recognized laws or standards .

the implementation guidelines ( "the guidelines" ) of the gni provide guidance to ict companies on how to implement the principles , and describe the actions that constitute compliance .

with respect to government demands to remove or limit access to content or restrict communications , participating companies commit to encourage governments to be specific , transparent , and consistent in the demands issued to restrict freedom of expression online ; encourage government demands that are consistent with international laws and standards ; require governments to follow local legal processes , interpret government demands so as to minimize the negative effect , when required to restrict communications or remove content ; and interpret the governmental authority's jurisdiction to minimize the negative effect .

participating companies commit to operate in a transparent manner when required to remove content or restrict access , and must disclose to users the applicable laws and policies requiring such action , the company's policies for responding to government demands , and provide timely notice to users when access to content has been locked or communications limited due to government restrictions .

with respect to privacy , participating companies commit to assess the human rights risks associated with the collection , storage , and retention of personal information and to develop mitigation strategies .

a system of independent third - party assessment of company compliance with the principles and implementation guidelines will be phased in over three stages: in phase one ( ends december 2010 ) each participating company establishes internal policies and procedures to implement the principles , and the board approves independence and competence criteria for the selection of independent assessors .

in phase two ( 2011 ) independent assessors will conduct process assessments of each participating company to review and evaluate their internal systems for implementing the principles .

in phase three ( january 2012 onwards ) the board will accredit independent assessors to review the internal systems of companies , and company responses to specific government demands implicating freedom of expression or privacy .

each participating company will submit an annual report to the organization .

the assessors will prepare reports explaining each company's responses to government demands , evaluating the effectiveness of the company's responses .

each company will be given the opportunity to respond to the assessor's draft and final report .

the board of the organization will assess whether the company is in compliance with the principles and its determination will be made public .

the board of the organization will publish an annual report assessing each participating company's compliance with the principles .

h.r .

2647 , national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 .

introduced by representative skelton ( by request ) , referred to the house armed services committee .

enacted october 28 , 2009 , p.l .

111-84 .

title xii: matters relating to foreign nations subtitle d: voice act — victims of irani an censorship act or voice act ( sec .

1242 ) expresses the sense of the senate in support of the universal values of freedom of speech , the press , and expression as it pertains to the people of iran , and condemns acts of censorship , intimidation , and other restrictions on such freedom in iran .

 ( sec .

1243 ) states that it shall be the policy of the united states to ( 1 ) support freedom of the press , speech , expression , and assembly in iran ; ( 2 ) support the iranian people as they seek , receive , and impart information and promote ideas in writing , print , and through other media ; ( 3 ) discourage businesses from aiding efforts to interfere with the ability of the iranian people to access or share information or otherwise infringe upon such freedoms ; and ( 4 ) encourage the development of technologies that facilitate efforts of the iranian people to share such information , exercise such freedoms , and engage in internet - based education programs and other exchanges between u.s. citizens and iranians .

 ( sec .

1244 ) authorizes appropriations for the ( 1 ) international broadcasting operations fund to expand farsi language programming and to disseminate accurate and independent information to the iranian people through radio , television , internet , cellular telephone , short message service , and other communications ; and ( 2 ) broadcasting capital improvements fund to expand transmissions of farsi language programs to iran .

 ( sec .

1245 ) establishes in the treasury the iranian electronic education , exchange , and media fund to support the development of technologies that will aid the iranian people in exchanging information and exercising freedom of speech , expression , and assembly .

authorizes appropriations to the fund .

 ( sec .

1246 ) directs the president to report annually to congress on the use of funds authorized under this subtitle .

 ( sec .

1247 ) requires the president to ( 1 ) direct the appropriate officials to examine claims that non - iranian companies have provided hardware , software , or other forms of assistance to the government of iran that has furthered its efforts to filter online political content , disrupt cell phone and internet communications , and monitor the online activities of iranian citizens ; and ( 2 ) report study results to congress .

 ( sec .

1248 ) authorizes appropriations to the secretary of state to document , collect , and disseminate information about human rights in iran , including abuses since the iranian presidential election on june 12 , 2009 .

h.r .

2271 , global online freedom act of 2009 .

introduced by representative christopher smith and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs ; and the house committee on energy and commerce .

makes it u.s. policy to ( 1 ) promote the freedom to seek , receive , and impart information and ideas through any media ; ( 2 ) use all appropriate instruments of u.s. influence to support the free flow of information without interference or discrimination ; and ( 3 ) deter u.s. businesses from cooperating with internet - restricting countries in effecting online censorship .

expresses the sense of congress that ( 1 ) the president should seek international agreements to protect internet freedom ; and ( 2 ) some u.s. businesses , in assisting foreign governments to restrict online access to u.s. - supported websites and government reports and to identify individual internet users , are working contrary to u.s. foreign policy interests .

amends the foreign assistance act of 1961 to require assessments of electronic information freedom in each foreign country .

establishes in the department of state the office of global internet freedom ( ogif ) .

directs the secretary of state to annually designate internet - restricting countries .

prohibits , subject to waiver , u.s. businesses that provide to the public a commercial internet search engine , communications services , or hosting services from locating , in such countries , any personally identifiable information used to establish or maintain an internet services account .

requires u.s. businesses that collect or obtain personally identifiable information through the internet to notify the ogif and the attorney general before responding to a disclosure request from an internet - restricting country .

authorizes the attorney general to prohibit a business from complying with the request , except for legitimate foreign law enforcement purposes .

requires u.s. businesses to report to the ogif certain internet censorship information involving internet - restricting countries .

prohibits u.s. businesses that maintain internet content hosting services from jamming u.s. - supported websites or u.s. - supported content in internet - restricting countries .

authorizes the president to waive provisions of this act: ( 1 ) to further the purposes of this act ; ( 2 ) if a country ceases restrictive activity ; or ( 3 ) if it is the national interest of the united states .

h.r .

4784 , internet freedom act of 20 10 .

introduced by representative wu and referred to the house science and technology committee , subcommittee on research and science education .

directs the national science foundation to establish the internet freedom foundation governed by a board of 12 members , with equal representation from government , academia , and the private sector .

the internet freedom foundation shall — award competitive , merit - reviewed grants , cooperative agreements , or contracts to private industry , universities , and other research and development organizations to develop deployable technologies to defeat internet suppression and censorship ; and award incentive prizes to private industry , universities , and other research and development organizations that successfully develop deployable technologies to defeat internet suppression and censorship .

the internet freedom foundation shall be funded by such sums as may be necessary .

h.res .

590 , expressing grave concerns about the sweeping censorship , privacy , and cybersecurity implications of china's green dam filtering software , and urging u.s. high - tech companies to promote the internet as a tool for transparency , freedom of expression , and citizen empowerment around the world .

introduced by representative wu and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs .

expresses ( 1 ) grave concerns about the sweeping censorship , privacy , and cybersecurity implications of china's green dam filtering software ; and ( 2 ) support for the chinese people in their quest for internet freedom and free expression .

calls on ( 1 ) the chinese government to rescind its requirement for green dam to be preinstalled on all new computers ; and ( 2 ) u.s. high - tech companies to promote the internet as a tool for transparency , freedom of expression , and citizen empowerment around the world .

h.res .

672 , call ing on the government of the socialist republic of vietnam to release imprisoned bloggers and respect internet freedom .

introduced by representative sanchez and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs .

passed on october 21 , 2009 .

supports the right of the citizens of the socialist republic of vietnam to access websites of their choosing and to have the freedom to share and publish information over the internet .

calls on vietnam to ( 1 ) repeal circular 07 , article 88 , and similar statutes that restrict the internet , so as to be in line with the international covenant on civil and political rights , to which vietnam is a signatory ; ( 2 ) become a responsible member state of the international community by respecting individuals' freedom of speech , freedom of press , and freedom of political association ; and ( 3 ) release all political prisoners , including but not limited to 18 named bloggers and cyber activists .

appendix a .

technologies used to monitor and censor web sites and web - based communications key - word list blocking this is a simple type of filtration where a government drops any internet packets featuring certain keywords , such as "protest" or "proxy. .

domain name system ( dns ) poisoning dns poisoning intentionally introduces errors into the internet's directory service to misdirect the original request to another ip address .

ip blocking ip blocking is one of the most basic methods that governments use for censorship , as it simply prevents all packets going to or from targeted ip addresses .

this is an easy technology to implement , but it does not address the problem of individual communications between users .

this method is used to block banned websites , including news sites and proxy servers that would allow access to banned content , from being viewed .

bandwidth throttling bandwidth throttling simply limits the amount of traffic that can be sent over the internet .

keeping data volume low facilitates other methods of monitoring and filtering by limiting the amount of data present .

traffic classification this is a much more sophisticated method of blocking traffic than ip blocking , as governments can halt any file sent through a certain type of protocol , such as ftp .

because the government knows that ftp transfers are most often sent through tcp port 21 , they can simply limit the bandwidth available on that port and throttle transfers .

this type of traffic - shaping practice is the most common one used by repressive governments today .

it is not resource intensive and it is fairly easy to implement .

shallow packet inspection ( spi ) shallow packet inspection is a less sophisticated version of the deep packet inspection ( dpi ) technique ( dpi is described below ) that is used to block packets based on their content .

unlike dpi , which intercepts packets and inspects their fingerprints ( fingerprinting is described below ) , headers , and payloads , spi makes broad generalities about traffic based solely on evaluating the packet header .

although shallow packet inspection can't provide the same refined / detailed traffic assessments as dpi , it is much better at handling volume than dpi .

spi is much less refined than dpi , but it is capable of handling a greater volume of traffic much more quickly .

spi is akin to judging a book by its cover .

this method is prone to exploitation by users because they can disguise their packets to look like a different kind of traffic .

packet fingerprinting this is a slightly more refined method of throttling packets than shallow packet inspection , as it looks not only at the packet header but at its length , frequency of transmission , and other characteristics to make a rough determination of its content .

in this manner , the government can better classify packets and not throttle traffic sent out by key businesses .

deep packet inspection ( dpi ) / packet content filtering dpi is the most refined method that governments have for blocking internet traffic .

as mentioned above , deep packet inspectors examine not only a packet's header but also its payload .

for instance , certain keywords can be both monitored and the e - mail containing them can be kept from reaching its intended destination .

this gives governments the ability to filter packets at a more surgical level than any of the other techniques discussed so far .

while providing the most targeted traffic monitoring and shaping capabilities , dpi is also more complicated to run and is far more labor - intensive than other traffic - shaping technologies .

appendix b .

technologies used to circumvent censorship each of the circumvention methods explained below can , in general , be considered an anonymous "proxy server. .

a proxy server is a computer system or an application program that acts as an intermediary for requests from a user seeking resources from other servers , allowing the user to block access to his or her identity and become anonymous .

web - based circumvention systems web - based circumvention systems are special web pages that allow users to submit a url and have the web - based circumventor retrieve the requested web page .

there is no connection between the user and the requested website as the circumventor transparently proxies the request allowing the user to browse blocked websites seamlessly .

since the web addresses of public circumventors are widely known , most internet filtering applications already have these services on their block lists , as do many countries that filter at the national level .

examples: proxify , stupidcensorhip , cgiproxy , psiphon , peacefire / circumventor .

web and application tunneling software tunneling encapsulates one form of traffic inside of other forms of traffic .

typically , insecure , unencrypted traffic is tunneled within an encrypted connection .

the normal services on the user's computer are available , but run through the tunnel to the non - filtered computer which forwards the user's requests and their responses transparently .

users with contacts in a non - filtered country can set up private tunneling services while those without contacts can purchase commercial tunneling services .

"web" tunneling software restricts the tunneling to web traffic so that web browsers will function securely , but not other applications .

"application" tunneling software allows the user to tunnel multiple internet applications , such as e - mail and instant messenger applications .

examples: web tunneling: ultrareach , freegate , anonymizer , ghost surf .

examples: application tunneling: gpass , http tunnel , relakks , guardster / ssh .

anonymous communications systems anonymous technologies conceal a user's ip address from the server hosting the website visited by the user .

some , but not all , anonymous technologies conceal the user's ip address from the anonymizing service itself and encrypt the traffic between the user and the service .

since users of anonymous technologies make requests for web content through a proxy service , instead of to the server hosting the content directly , anonymous technologies can be a useful way to bypass internet censorship .

however , some anonymous technologies require users to download software and can be easily blocked by authorities .

examples: tor , jap anon , i2 .

