health - related issues before congress have refocused attention on legislative efforts to provide both new as well as lower - cost pharmaceuticals for the marketplace .

p.l .

98-417 , the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 ( commonly known as the hatch - waxman act ) , made several significant changes to the patent laws as they apply to pharmaceutical products in an attempt to balance the need for innovative new drugs and the availability of less expensive generic products .

twenty - five years later , effects of the act on the pharmaceutical industry may have implications for current congressional efforts to facilitate the development of new , inventive products while reducing costs to consumers .

the hatch - waxman act established several practices intended to facilitate the marketing of generic drugs while permitting brand name companies to recover a portion of their intellectual property rights lost during the pharmaceutical approval process .

the legislative changes include methods for extending the term of a patent to reflect regulatory delays encountered in obtaining marketing consent from the fda ; a statutory exemption from patent infringement for activities associated with regulatory marketing approval for a generic version of a patented drug ; establishment of mechanisms to challenge the validity of a pharmaceutical patent ; and a reward for disputing the validity , enforceability , or infringement of a patented and approved drug .

the act also affords the fda certain authority to offer periods of data and marketing exclusivity for a pharmaceutical independent of the rights conferred by patents .

the provisions in the hatch - waxman act differ from traditional infringement procedures associated with other patented products and processes .

the company making a generic product is permitted to rely upon data paid for and compiled by the original manufacturer to establish the drug's safety and efficacy necessary to obtain fda marketing approval .

this expedited approval process may allow a bioequivalent drug to reach the market as soon as the patent on the original pharmaceutical expires .

nowhere else in u.s. patent law does such a robust "experimental use" exemption exist .

title xi of p.l .

108-173 , the medicare prescription drug and modernization act of 2003 , as signed into law by the president on december 8 , 2003 , made several changes to the original hatch - waxman act that were designed to decrease the time needed to bring generic pharmaceuticals to the marketplace .

the new provisions were designed to "close some of the loopholes" critics argued that the brand name companies used to delay the introduction of generic products .

the legislation permits only one automatic 30-month stay on fda approval of drugs for which patents are listed in the orange book at the time of a paragraph iv anda or 505 ( b ) ( 2 ) filing .

the applicant may not amend the paragraph iv certification to include a drug different from that approved by the fda , but may amend the application if seeking marketing consent for a different strength of the same drug .

modifications to the default 30-month stay are allowed based on district court judgments .

the applicant for an abbreviated new drug approval containing a paragraph iv certification must provide the brand name company and any patent owners with notice of such action within 20 days of filing with the fda .

upon receipt of this notice , the brand name manufacturer has 45 days within which to file an infringement suit and thereby be eligible for the automatic 30-month stay .

in a situation where a patent holder does not file an infringement action within 45 days of notification of a paragraph iv anda , the anda applicant may request that a district court issue a declaratory judgment regarding the validity of the patent .

in order to request a declaratory judgment , the generic manufacturer must have made available to the brand name company and the patent owners the confidential information contained in the anda application .

if sued , the generic firm may file a counter claim to require the patent holder make changes in the orange book listings .

the generic firm may request that certain patents be delisted because they do not claim the drug to which they are attached .

no monetary damages are to be awarded .

the food and drug administration may approve the anda or 505 ( b ) ( 2 ) filing containing a paragraph iv certification on the date of an appeals court decision , the date of a settlement order or consent decree , or when a district court decision is not appealed .

the 180-day market exclusivity is to begin with the first commercial marketing of the generic drug ( rather than being triggered by a "court decision" as under the original legislation ) .

this exclusivity can be forfeited in certain situations including failure to market under specific time constraints , withdrawal of the application , amendment of the certification , failure to obtain approval from the fda , expiration of all patents , or the determination by the federal trade commission or the assistant attorney general that an agreement between the brand name and generic firms violates antitrust laws .

subsequent applicants would not be permitted the 180-day exclusivity .

multiple generic firms may qualify for the 180-day market exclusivity if several anda applicants file a substantially complete application on the same day .

agreements tendered between brand name companies and generic firms concerning the production , sale , or marketing of a pharmaceutical or a 180-day market exclusivity must be filed with the federal trade commission and the department of justice within 10 days of the agreement .

many experts agree that the drug price competition and patent term restoration act has had a significant effect on the availability of generic substitutes for brand name drugs .

prior to the law , 35% of top - selling drugs had generic competitors after patent expiration ; now almost all do .

the generic pharmaceutical association ( gpha ) points out that of 12,751 drugs listed in the orange book , 10,072 have generic substitutes available to consumers .

concurrently , the time to market for these generic products has decreased substantially .

according to the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , prior to passage of the act in 1984 , the average time between the expiration of a brand name patent and the availability of a generic was three years .

today , upon fda approval a generic may be introduced immediately after patents on the innovator drug expire , as companies are permitted to undertake clinical testing during the time period associated patents are in force .

"by streamlining the approval process for a generic drug form , the hatch - waxman act reduced the average delay between patent expiration and generic entry into the consumer market from greater than three years to less than three months for top - selling drugs. .

in cases where the generic manufacturer is the patent holder , a substitute drug may be brought to market before the patent expires .

according to one analysis , 18.6% of u.s. prescriptions were written for generic products in 1984 , the year the hatch - waxman act was passed , while today they account for 63% of all u.s. prescriptions .

similarly , cbo found that in 1980 13% of prescriptions for multi - source drugs were filled by generic prescriptions .

by 2009 , gpha maintains that 74.2% of prescriptions were filled by generics ( 65.6% by unbranded generics , 8.6% by generics produced or licensed by the brand name company ) .

the latest data from the ims institute for healthcare informatics demonstrate that in 2011 , 80% of all retail prescriptions were filled by generics .

while generics fill over two - thirds of written prescriptions , they represent a much smaller portion of the sales in the united states .

according to gpha , in 2009 unbranded generics generated 10.5% of u.s. pharmaceutical sales , branded generics generated 12.4% of sales , and brands generated 77.1% of total u.s. sales .

later data from ims institute for healthcare informatics indicates that generics made up 27% of u.s. sales in 2011 .

projecting into the future , ims argues that by 2016 , 44% of 2011 spending on brand products in the u.s. market will shift to generic drugs .

if generic versions of the brand pharmaceutical are easy to produce , multiple competitors often come to market at prices that are up to 80% below the innovator drug .

studies have demonstrated that in the late 1980s a branded drug that went off patent would lose between 15% and 30% of sales volume within the first two years ; in 2001 when prozac faced generic competition , more than 70% of the market for the innovator pharmaceutical was lost within two months .

however , prices for generic drugs themselves tend to fall over time .

in addition , the market share of generic drugs is not just dependent on prices ; other factors such as perception of quality , as well as first to market , may make a difference .

industry funding for pharmaceutical research and development has grown significantly since passage of the act in 1984 .

a congressional budget office report notes that annual spending on r&d by drug companies has increased from approximately $8 billion in 1984 to $50 billion in 2008 ( 2008 constant dollars ) .

in addition , the average increase in private sector r&d over the time period from 1980 to 2008 was almost 9% per year .

however , other studies indicate that that r&d spending has recently declined .

an analysis of the top 50 global pharmaceutical companies ( as determined by their 2010 healthcare revenue ) found that 18 of these firms , including astrazeneca and glaxosmithkline , decreased their annual r&d spending from the previous year .

similarly , research performed by cmr international noted that "r&d expenditure continued to drop in 2010 to an estimated three year low of $68 billion , which is in stark contrast to the growth rate leading up to 2008. .

research and development funding by members of the pharmaceutical research and manufacturers association ( phrma ) dropped an estimated 2.4% in 2011 from the record high spending the previous year .

in the absence of the research , development , and testing performed by the brand name pharmaceutical companies , generic drugs would not exist .

the provisions of the hatch - waxman act permit the generic industry to rely on information generated and financed by the brand name companies to obtain approval for their product by the fda .

however , the pharmaceutical industry today differs from what it was in the early 1980s .

the cost of developing a drug has doubled to where it now takes over $1 billion to bring a new drug to market .

the cost of developing a generic is approximately $1 million to $2 million .

the number of clinical trials necessary to file a new drug application has doubled since 1980 and the number of participants in these trials has tripled .

thus , the rate of return from investment in a new drug has dropped by 12% over this time period .

concurrently , companies appear to be moving away from the development of drugs that address large patient populations , but for which they cannot charge high prices , toward more specialized medicines , primarily biologics , that may be used by fewer patients , but for which high prices can be secured .

in 2007 , 55 blockbuster drugs were considered specialized products , up from 12 in 2001 .

in 2011 , 25% of total u.s. spending for traditional medicines was for specialty products .

"thus , the specialty category continues to be a major focus of new drug development and comprises a significant percentage of new approvals. .

since passage of the hatch - waxman act , the number of patents on each marketed pharmaceutical has increased such that "to shield themselves against competition , manufacturers now carry an average of 10 patents for each drug — as compared with an average of 2 a decade ago. .

similarly , manufacturers are spending r&d dollars to develop new and improved forms of the original drug or new delivery methods ( for example extended release tablets , liquid formulations ) as related patents expire .

the new version of the drug can be patented and users encouraged to switch to the new product .

according to pricewaterhousecoopers , "in 2007 , only eight of the 27 new therapies launched worldwide were the first of their kind.... more than half were 'me - too' treatments with at least three predecessors. .

another study found that in 2004 , more than 20% of the money 10 of the [world's] largest pharmaceutical companies invested in r&d went to line extensions and other work , as distinct from new development projects .

in smaller companies , the percentage was over 40% .

between 1988 and 2006 , over 500 pharmaceuticals received patent term extensions .

in 2006 , 26 of the 40 top selling drugs in the united states had patent terms restored .

during the patent restoration period , about 20% of gross revenues may be generated .

with the extension provided by the hatch - waxman act , total time on the market prior to generic competition has been estimated at 11.5 years for drugs with annual sales of more than $100 million .

additional research indicates ( a ) that newly approved nces have come on to the market with about eight to ten years of effective patent life or market exclusivity , and ( b ) that since 1997 the average exclusivity periods for newly approved nces have declined .

despite the extension of patent protection afforded by the legislation , many drugs will soon lose patent protection .

pricewaterhousecoopers notes that in 2006 , 90% of revenues generated by the large pharmaceutical companies came from drugs that were on the market for more than five years and were therefore rapidly moving toward generic competition .

the estimates on the amount of sales lost by brand name companies when a drug loses patent protection vary .

pricewaterhousecoopers argues that "the leading pharmaceutical companies will lose between 14% and 41% of their existing revenues as a result of patent expiries [sic]," which exposes "an estimated $157 billion worth of sales ( measured in 2005 dollars ) to generic competition. .

evaluatepharma puts the amount of u.s. sales affected by patent expirations between 2011 and 2016 at $133 billion ; 2012 is expected to be the most severe with $33.2 billion in sales affected .

the results of subsequent generic entry can be dramatic: as more [generic] competitors enter the field , prices drop even further .

for example , almost as soon as glaxosmithkline's popular cardiovascular drug coreg ( $1.7 billion in us sales for the 12 months trailing june 2007 , according to ims health , inc. ) lost patent protection in september 2007 , more than a dozen generic competitors entered the market , causing prices to fall immediately and dramatically .

within a month , generics accounted for 85% of the coreg market , with prices substantially lower than those of the branded product prior to its patent expiration .

while there are various compilations of drugs that are expected to go off patent , it is apparent that many innovator pharmaceuticals will be affected .

lipitor , the world's best - selling drug , lost patent protection at the close of 2011 .

among the 2011 top selling drugs in the u.s. market that went off patent in 2012 are plavix ( $5.7 billion ) , singulair ( $4.4 billion ) , seroquel ( $3.8 billion ) , actos ( $2.8 billion ) , lexapro ( $2.7 billion ) , and diovan / diovan hct ( $1.7 billion and $1.5 billion respectively ) .

other drugs that are expected to lose patent protection in the near future include cymbalta ( 2011 u.s. sales of $3.4 billion ) , nexium ( 2011 u.s. sales of $5.5 billion ) , celebrex ( $1.6 billion ) , nasonex ( $1.1 billion ) , abilify ( $4.8 billion ) , enbrel ( 2011 u.s. sales of $1.3 billion ) , crestor ( $3.9 billion ) and humira ( $1.3 billion ) .

the loss of patent protection on these drugs is occurring at a time when some experts claim that innovation and productivity has stalled in the pharmaceutical industry .

according to jean - pierre garnier , chief executive officer of glaxosmithkline , the value of "big pharma" is diminishing because of declining r&d productivity .

the pharmaceutical industry is particularly research intensive .

in 2011 , total worldwide spending on r&d was estimated at $135 billion , with 18.8% of sales reinvested in r&d according to evaluatepharma .

members of phrma invested 21.1% of domestic sales in domestic r&d during 2011 .

the congressional budget office reports that "pharmaceutical firms invest as much as five times more in research and development , relative to their sales , than the average u.s. manufacturing firm. .

however , while pharmaceutical r&d expenditures have increased substantially over the past 15 years , drug approvals have remained relatively flat .

research by standard & poors found that there is a relative dearth of innovative new products launched in recent years relative to funds invested in r&d .

according to the pharmaceutical research and manufacturers association .. .

us drug industry r&d spending expanded 30% from 2004 through 2008 .

yet , the number of fda - approved new molecular entities ( nmes ) and novel biologics declined to 24 from 36 over the same period .

this attrition occurred despite important advances in r&d technology platforms , such as rational drug design and genomics , that occurred earlier in the decade .

in addition to a decline in the number of new drug approvals , there is concern in the healthcare community that the number of products in the pipeline are insufficient to make up for losses to generics after patent expiration .

according to one analysis , only 4 of the 10 major pharmaceutical companies have drugs in clinical trials that are "sufficiently valuable to offset these losses. .

the scarcity of new products in clinical trials may be a result of a situation that as more targets are discovered , the body of knowledge required to understand them , let alone use them for new therapies , increases dramatically , which delays the time when new or better therapies become available .

in short , there can be sharply diminishing returns in drug r&d .

other experts maintain that counting nmes is not an accurate measure of productivity .

it is argued that the number of nme approvals has remained stable over the long term despite year to year changes .

while r&d investments have increased , between 25% and 30% of r&d spending is directed at finding new indications for existing products .

thus , basing an assessment of decreased productivity on the number of new nmes may not be accurate since a significant portion of the r&d spending has led to increased use of already approved drugs .

an additional explanation for the slowdown in new drug approvals may be that the "easy" drugs have been developed .

the targets of new pharmaceuticals are more complex and chronic diseases that require more complicated clinical trials .

the time frame between research and the introduction of a product in the marketplace tends to be particularly long in the pharmaceutical arena .

experts maintain that it generally takes 12 to 15 years to bring a new drug from discovery to market .

the basic research leading to discovery may even begin many years prior to discovery .

therefore , it is argued , any productivity gap is short - term as new drugs move toward approval .

according to boston university's iain cockburn , these concerns about productivity are almost surely overblown: if past experience is any guide , the recent surge in r&d spending should generate a commensurate increase in new drug approvals of the next three to ten [years].... today's new drugs are the result of r&d expenditures stretching back decades into the past , and undertaken by many different institutions .

the implementation of the provisions of the hatch - waxman act has raised several issues that have become the focus of congressional discussion .

among these concerns are an increase in the introduction of "authorized generics" marketed by brand name companies in response to the loss of revenue that accompanies the introduction of a generic product .

additionally , patent - related litigation has been replaced in certain situations by settlements between brand name and generic firms that include payments to the generic company in exchange for an agreement not to market the product .

concurrently , congress is considering legislation to extend the act's accelerated marketing approach to biologic drugs .

these issues are discussed briefly below ; a detailed analysis of each can be found in the referenced crs reports .

the hatch - waxman act has been instrumental in providing patients with lower - cost generic copies of brand name drugs often the day that patents expire on the original product .

at the same time , investment in pharmaceutical research and development has increased in real terms at an average of almost 9% a year .

while the original legislation was amended in 2003 to address what were perceived as loopholes in the process , concerns still remain whether or not the balance achieved by the act remains appropriate over 25 years later .

however , congressional legislation extending a similar accelerated marketing approach to biologic drugs may be indicative of a belief in the overall success of the hatch - waxman act .

