the purpose of the reconciliation process is to enhance congress's ability to bring existing spending , revenue , and debt limit laws into compliance with current fiscal priorities established in the annual budget resolution .

when congress adopts a budget resolution , it is agreeing upon budgetary goals for the upcoming fiscal year .

in some cases , for these goals to be achieved , congress must pass legislation that alters current revenue , direct spending , or debt limit laws .

in this situation congress seeks to reconcile existing law with its current priorities .

the reconciliation process is still a relatively new congressional process in that there have been only 24 reconciliation bills passed by congress since the first use of reconciliation in 1980 .

as described above , congress has the option of including reconciliation directives in its annual budget resolution .

these directives trigger the reconciliation process , and without their inclusion in a budget resolution , no measure would be eligible to be considered under expedited reconciliation procedures .

when reconciliation directives are included in an annual budget resolution , their purpose is to require committees to develop and report legislation that will allow congress to achieve the budgetary goals set forth in the annual budget resolution .

these directives detail which committee ( s ) should report reconciliation legislation , the date by which the committee ( s ) should report , the dollar amount of budgetary change that should exist within the reconciliation legislation , and the time period over which the budgetary change should occur .

they might also include language regarding the type of budgetary change that should be reported ( revenue , spending , or debt limit legislation ) , as well as other procedural provisions , contingencies , and programmatic direction .

in this way , the reconciliation process allows the budget committees to assist congress in implementing the budgetary changes outlined in the budget resolution while , at the same time , protecting legislative committee jurisdiction over direct spending and revenue laws by allowing them to report legislative changes of their choice .

in some years , committees have not formally responded to the reconciliation directive instructing them to report legislation .

there may be several reasons for the lack of a formal committee submission .

for instance , there may have been a shift in policy priorities and congress no longer desires to pass reconciliation legislation .

it could also be that a committee fails to approve reconciliation language , or it may be that although committees did not respond formally to the directive , they reported freestanding legislation that was not considered under reconciliation procedures but may have satisfied the goal of the reconciliation directive .

as explained above , there is no procedural mechanism for requiring a committee to report reconciliation legislation by the date indicated in the reconciliation directive .

each chamber , however , may employ methods of moving forward with reconciliation legislation and include legislative language that falls within the non - reporting committee's jurisdiction in the event that the committee has not yet reported .

these methods vary by chamber .

the following section provides information on the timing of committee responses to reconciliation directives during the period covering 1989-2015 and offers insight on the extent to which the submission due date included in a reconciliation instruction is a predictor for the timing of committee responses .

 table 2 provides information on the timing of house committee responses to reconciliation directives .

the table includes only reconciliation acts that involved multiple committee directives .

it includes the relevant reconciliation act , the number of directives to house committees included in the budget resolution , the number of committee responses that were submitted on time , the number of responses that were submitted late , the number of house committee directives that were not formally responded to , and the number of days before or after the deadline that the last reporting committee submitted its response .

it does not speak to the content of the response .

the table also includes the date the house budget committee reported , the number of days between the final included committee submission to the house budget committee , and the date when the house budget committee reported .

the data in table 2 show that directed committees have sometimes submitted reconciliation legislation before the due date , at the due date , and after the due date , and in some cases , committees never formally responded .

further , the table shows that reconciliation legislation has been passed by the house regardless of whether committees reported late or whether some committees never formally submitted a response .

table 2 illustrates at least three practices of the house budget committee .

first , the budget committee has sometimes delayed the reporting of an omnibus reconciliation bill in order to allow a committee that has missed its directed date to submit its response .

conversely , it shows that in some cases , the budget committee has not waited for all committees to submit before reporting the bill .

lastly , it shows that , except for in one case , once the house budget committee has received the last submission to ultimately be included in the omnibus bill , it reports the legislation without substantial delay .

in the case of omnibus reconciliation bills , the committee responses ranged from all committees submitting on time ( omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ) to all committees submitting late ( deficit reduction act of 1997 ) .

several omnibus bills included both timely and tardy responses .

in some years , reconciliation was included in budget resolutions adopted by one or both chambers , but in the absence of final agreement , the process was not triggered .

such years are not included in this report .

table 4 presents a timeline of four particular stages of reconciliation action in the house for eight different reconciliation acts .

the figure includes reconciliation acts agreed to by both chambers that involved multiple committee instructions with the same due date .

it shows ( 1 ) the date that the budget resolution that directed committees to report reconciliation was agreed to by both chambers , ( 2 ) the date by which the instructed committees were directed to submit their responses to the house budget committee , ( 3 ) the date that the last responding committee submitted reconciliation legislation to the house budget committee , and ( 4 ) the date that the house budget committee reported reconciliation legislation .

figure 2 shows the variability in timing for three of the four stages .

although the first stage shown ( budget resolution agreed to ) tends to occur between april and june , the timing for the other three stages varies .

further , there is considerable variation in the total time taken for all four stages to be completed .

in one case it took only a month ( 1997 ) , and in another other case it took almost 11 months ( 2009 / 2010 ) .

there is also variability in the stages as they relate to one another .

for instance , sometimes the first two stages ( adoption of budget resolution and the due date for committee submission ) have been within the same month , and sometimes they have been several months apart .

this is also true for the relationship between the second and third stages ( committee submission due dates and actual committee submission date ) .

however , the amount of time between stages three and four ( the submission date of the last committee formally submitting and the date the budget committee reports an omnibus bill ) has been fairly consistent , except in one case .

as in table 2 , this shows that , except in one case , the house budget committee has reported the omnibus legislation shortly after it has received the final submission to be included in the omnibus bill .

 table 3 provides information on the timing of senate committee responses to reconciliation directives .

the table includes only reconciliation acts that involved multiple committee directives .

it includes the relevant reconciliation act , the number of directives to senate committees included in the budget resolution , the number of committee responses that were submitted on time , the number of committee responses that were submitted late , the number of committees directives that were not formally responded to , and the number of days before or after the deadline that the last reporting committee submitted its response .

it does not speak to the content of the response .

the table also includes the date the senate budget committee reported the omnibus bill , the number of days between the final included committee submission to the senate budget committee , and the date when the senate budget committee reported .

the data in table 3 illustrate that directed committees have sometimes reported or submitted reconciliation legislation before the due date , at the due date , and after the due date and that , in some cases , committees never formally responded .

further , the table shows that reconciliation legislation has been passed by the senate regardless of whether committees submitted late or whether some committees never formally submitted a response .

table 3 illustrates at least three practices of the senate budget committee .

first , the budget committee has sometimes delayed the reporting of a reconciliation bill to allow a committee that has missed its deadline to submit .

conversely , it shows that in some cases , the budget committee has not waited for all committees to submit before reporting the omnibus reconciliation bill .

lastly , it shows that once the senate budget committee has received the last submission to be included in the omnibus , it reports the legislation without substantial delay .

in the case of omnibus reconciliation bills , the committee responses ranged from all committees submitting on time ( omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ) to all committees submitting late ( deficit reduction act ) .

several omnibus bills included both timely and tardy responses .

table 3 presents a timeline of reconciliation action in the senate for six particular reconciliation acts .

the figure includes reconciliation acts agreed to by both chambers that involved multiple committee instructions with the same due date .

it shows ( 1 ) the date that the budget resolution that directed committees to report reconciliation was agreed to by both chambers , ( 2 ) the date by which the instructed committees were directed to submit their responses to the senate budget committee , ( 3 ) the date that the last responding committee submitted reconciliation legislation to the senate budget committee , and ( 4 ) the date that the senate budget committee reported reconciliation legislation .

figure 3 shows variability in timing for three of the four stages .

although the first stage shown ( budget resolution agreed to ) tends to occur between april and june , the timing for the other three stages varies .

further , there is considerable variation in the total time taken for all four stages to be completed .

in one case , it took only one month ( 1997 ) , and in another case it took eight months ( 2005 ) .

there is also variability in the stages as they relate to one another .

for instance , sometimes the first two stages ( adoption of budget resolution and the due date for committee submission ) have been within the same month , and sometimes they have been several months apart .

this is also true for the relationship between the second and third stages ( committee submission due dates and actual committee submission date ) .

however , the amount of time between stages three and four ( the submission date of the last committee formally submitting and the date the budget committee reports an omnibus bill ) has been fairly consistent .

as in table 3 , this shows that the senate budget committee reports legislation shortly after it has received the last submission to be included in the omnibus bill .

the following tables provide more detailed information on house and senate committee responses to reconciliation directives .

table 4 pertains to the house , and table 5 pertains to the senate .

both include the relevant congress and session , the fiscal year to which the budget resolution pertains , the budget resolution number , the date the budget resolution was agreed to by both chambers , the committees directed to report reconciliation legislation , the date by which the committee was directed to respond , the date on which the committee responded , the date that the budget committee reported a reconciliation bill ( if applicable ) , and the reconciliation legislation that was subsequently passed by congress .

the date of response for each committee has been determined in two ways , depending on whether the committee was directed to report to the full chamber or to submit to the budget committee .

in the case that a committee was instructed to report directly to the full chamber , the date of the committee report was used .

in the case that the committee was directed to report to its budget committee , the date on the submission letters accompanying its reconciliation responses was used .

these letters were found in committee reports and committee prints accompanying the reconciliation legislation .

in some cases these letters had been inserted into the congressional record .

in some cases , the tables do not show a committee response date .

committees have not always formally responded to the reconciliation directive instructing them to report legislation .

there may be a number of reasons for the lack of a formal submission .

for instance , there may have been a shift in policy priorities over the course of the year and congress no longer desired to consider reconciliation legislation within that committee's jurisdiction .

it may also be that even though committees did not respond formally to the reconciliation directive , they did report freestanding legislation that would have satisfied the goal of the reconciliation directive .

