many federal health , safety , and environmental regulations are primarily designed to reduce the risk of death , illness , or injury from exposure to a particular hazard ( eg , arsenic in drinking water , rollover car crashes , or terrorist attacks on airplanes ) .

the agencies issuing these regulations often place a monetary value on these expected health benefits by determining the number of "statistical lives" that the rules are expected to save , and then multiplying that number by an estimated "value of a statistical life. .

the term "statistical life" is used to reflect the degree of risk reduction expected in a given population , and does not refer to any individual's life .

for example , on january 15 , 2010 , the federal railroad administration ( fra ) within the department of transportation ( dot ) published a final rule in the federal register defining criteria for "positive train control" systems that were required on certain passenger and freight rail lines by the rail safety improvement act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-432 , 122 stat .

4854 , october 16 , 2008 ) .

congress enacted the statutory requirement in the wake of several serious rail accidents involving dozens of fatalities and hundreds of injuries .

fra estimated that the rule would reduce deaths and injuries from this type of accident by more than 50% , valued each "statistical life" expected to be saved by the rule at $6 million , and considered each prevented injury a percentage of the value of a statistical life .

the agency ultimately valued the estimated reductions in deaths over the next 20 years at between $175 million and $269 million ( in 2009 dollars ) , and valued the reductions in injuries at between $133 million and $204 million ( also in 2009 dollars ) .

together , these monetized health benefits represented more than 70% of the rule's estimated total benefits .

the monetization of reductions in the number of expected fatalities , injuries , and illnesses in the rulemaking process is often controversial , and the process by which federal agencies place monetary values on such benefits is not widely understood .

this report summarizes current government - wide requirements for benefit - cost analysis and the monetization of health benefits , and describes agency - specific policies in selected health , safety , and environmental agencies .

also , the report provides examples of final rules published by the selected agencies from 2007 through 2009 that monetized expected health benefits , and describes how those values were used in the economic analyses for the rules .

finally , the report offers some concluding observations .

although a variety of statutes and executive orders require some form of economic analysis during the rulemaking process , the most broadly applicable of those requirements is in executive order 12866 , which was issued by president clinton in 1993 .

the executive order requires covered federal agencies to determine the costs and benefits of all "significant" regulatory actions , and requires more complete benefit - cost analyses for all regulatory actions that are expected to be "economically significant" ( eg , have an annual $100 million impact on the economy ) .

in recent years , an average of about 600 federal rules have been considered "significant" each year , of which about 100 have been considered "economically significant. .

the executive order also says that agencies are to adopt a regulation only after determining that the benefits of the rule "justify" its costs .

with regard to regulatory benefits , section 6 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( c ) of executive order 12866 requires the issuing agency to provide to the office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) within the office of management and budget ( omb ) "an assessment , including the underlying analysis , of benefits anticipated from the regulatory action ( such as , but not limited to , the promotion of the efficient functioning of the economy and private markets , the enhancement of health and safety , the protection of the natural environment , and the elimination or reduction of discrimination or bias ) together with , to the extent feasible , a quantification of those benefits. .

the executive order requires similar assessments of regulatory costs , and an explanation of why the planned regulatory action is preferable to potential alternatives .

in addition to the government - wide policies established in omb circular a - 4 , some federal departments and agencies have established their own policies regarding how expected reductions in deaths , illnesses , and injuries are to be valued in their economic analyses .

other departments and agencies have no written policies regarding how such benefits should be valued , but indicated that they rely on the policies of other departments or agencies , or have a consistent approach even without a written policy .

in addition to describing agencies' written or unwritten policies regarding the valuation of health benefits in rulemaking , it is helpful to examine how those policies are carried out in the context of specific regulations .

the rules discussed below were selected by searching the gpo access database using the terms "statistical life" and "statistical lives," and by examining a database of rules considered "major" under the congressional review act .

in most of the rules , the issuing agency stated in the preamble to the rules what vsl , vsly , or other monetization method was used to determine the value of anticipated health benefits .

in other cases , however , the agencies did not clearly indicate in the preamble what vsl or vsly was used , but those values could be determined from the information provided , or from the regulatory impact analysis in the rulemaking docket .

in most of the selected rules , the agencies used the monetized health benefits information to show whether the rules would produce positive net benefits ( i.e. , regulatory benefits that were greater than the costs ) .

in other cases , the agencies used vsl estimates in break - even analyses , or to rule out a regulatory option .

the agencies frequently indicated what central vsl or vsly estimate was used , and sometimes used lower and higher estimates in a sensitivity analysis .

in a few of the rules discussed below , although the agencies indicated that the rules would provide health benefits , the agencies did not monetize those benefits using vsls or vslys .

the government - wide policies regarding the monetization of regulatory health benefits in omb circular a - 4 are often very general , giving federal agencies substantial discretion in how to proceed .

for example , omb circular a - 4 does not require the agencies to use a particular vsl ; it simply notes that academic studies have suggested values between $1 million and $10 million .

the circular also suggests that agencies "consider" providing estimates of both vsl and vsly , but does not require that agencies do so .

it says that agencies should do a cost - effectiveness analysis "wherever possible," and should do a break - even analysis when the agencies conclude that non - quantified benefits are "likely to be important. .

more definitive government - wide requirements would help ensure that agencies' policies and practices are more consistent , but doing so could prevent agencies from tailoring those policies and practices to the particular types of risk and population at issue in their rules .

circular a - 4 does require agencies to take some specific actions , but some of those requirements could arguably be updated or clarified .

for example , the circular requires agencies to discount future costs or benefits to present values , and says that agencies should use discount rates of both 3% and 7% .

the circular says that the 7% rate is the "average before - tax rate of return to private capital in the u.s. economy," and that 7% is the "appropriate discount rate whenever the main effect of a regulation is to displace or alter the use of capital in the private sector. .

while the average pre - tax rate of return may have been 7% in september 2003 when circular a - 4 was issued , rates of return have fallen sharply in recent years .

an appendix to circular a - 94 ( omb's basic guidance on discount rates ) has reduced discount rates used in other types of analyses in recent years , but specifically indicates that those reduced rates are not to be used in regulatory benefit - cost analyses .

the most recent omb update of the discount rate in december 2009 placed the 30-year real interest rate on treasury notes and bonds at 2.7% .

also , although circular a - 4 states that agencies should use a larger vsly estimate for senior citizens , it does not indicate how much larger the value should be , or at what age individuals should be considered "senior citizens. .

as a result , variations could occur in which two agencies addressing similar types of risk for similar populations could reach very different conclusions regarding whether a particular regulatory approach is advisable .

also , as noted earlier in this report , even if a larger vsly estimate is used for senior citizens , it may still result in the "statistical lives" of those citizens being valued less than the lives of younger citizens .

dot and epa have each had written , department - wide policies in place for nearly 30 years regarding the monetization of health benefits in agencies' regulatory analyses .

other departments and agencies , however , do not appear to have such policies , and instead sometimes refer to the policies and values used by other agencies .

for example: hhs does not appear to have a departmental - wide policy , with fda indicating that it tends to follow epa policies , and cms saying in one rule that it used vsl and life - year estimates that fda had used in an earlier rule .

osha said that it reviewed the approaches that other agencies used , and decided to use epa's vsl because "occupational illnesses are analogous to the types of illnesses targeted by epa regulations. .

dhs does not appear to have a departmental - wide policy , and some dhs agencies have cited dot's policy in establishing vsls in break - even analyses .

also , the coast guard cited a study conducted for cbp in establishing a vsl .

agencies have also said that they used a particular vsl because they or another agency had done so previously , sometimes years earlier .

for example , in fda's april 2009 rule on warnings and labels for certain over - the - counter drugs , the agency indicated that it used a $5 million vsl because it had done so in a previous , unrelated rule more than eight years earlier .

adopting earlier vsls , whether from the same agency or another agency , without increasing the value for inflation can result in vsls that are lower than they would be if kept whole for changes in inflation .

agencies' use of other departments' and agencies' vsls and vslys in their economic analyses can provide a degree of consistency across agencies in how economic analyses are conducted .

however , application of the vsl used in one policy area to a completely different area may not accurately reflect the public's "willingness to pay" to prevent a specific mortality risk .

epa's science advisory board indicated in its october 2007 memorandum that before combining vsls from a variety of empirical studies , epa should determine which studies are appropriate "in a specific policy context , depending on the nature of the risk addressed by a policy and the population affected. .

similar care would appear to be appropriate before using vsls and vslys from other agencies , or from earlier unrelated rules within the same agency .

the vsls that agencies used in their regulatory impact analyses were generally somewhat similar , with most agencies using central values ranging from about $5.0 million to $8.0 million ( in 2009 dollars ) .

agencies sometimes did sensitivity analyses using vsls as low as $3 million and as high as $10 million .

one study suggested that dhs conduct sensitivity analyses using values as high as $12.6 million .

there appeared to be some differences in how fatalities were valued , and in how injuries were valued .

for example: in its may 2009 rule on roof crush resistance , nhtsa used the dot vsl at the time of the analysis of $5.8 million , but added $300,000 in "economic savings to represent the comprehensive societal benefit from preventing a fatality. .

it is not clear whether the $5.8 million vsl in dot's policy already included such economic savings .

other dot rules that used the department's vsl did not appear to include the "economic savings" supplement .

in the same roof crush resistance rule , nhtsa converted more than 1,000 non - fatal injuries into 55 "fatality equivalents," each of which the agency valued at $6.1 million .

although the use of such integrated measures of effectiveness are specifically permitted in circular a - 4 , dot's policy indicates that non - fatal injuries should be valued on the mais scale provided in the department's january 1993 guidance .

the agencies' vsls also appeared to vary in age and how they were developed .

for example , whereas the dot vsl has been revised several times in recent years , the epa guidance has not been changed in nearly 10 years .

however , the epa guidance does recommend updating the agency's $6.1 million vsl in 1999 dollars to "the base year of the analysis" ( which would have been nearly $7.9 million in 2009 , using an inflation calculator provided by the bureau of labor statistics ) .

also , epa's september 2000 guidelines were reportedly based on 26 studies published between 1974 and 1991 , 21 of which were market studies that examined the additional compensation that workers received for additional risk .

circular a - 4 cautions against the use of inappropriate literature - based vsl estimates , and characterizes the use of occupational risk premiums to value reductions in risk from environmental hazards as an example of this practice .

the agencies also appeared to vary in how the vsl information was used .

for example , whereas most departments and agencies used vsls to monetize health benefits in a traditional benefit - cost comparison , dhs agencies did not do so in any of the rules that were examined .

instead , the agencies did break - even analyses in which vsl estimates were used as one variable in determining how effective the rule would have to be in order for benefits to equal costs .

the dhs agencies said they did so because key data were not available to estimate the reduction in the probability of a successful terrorist attack , the consequences of an avoided attack , or individuals' willingness to pay for risk reduction .

similarly , although dot agencies monetized health benefits in most of their rules , fmcsa did not do so in its december 2008 rule on intermodal equipment , reportedly because of a lack of data showing which crashes were associated with hauling intermodal freight .

instead , the agency did a "threshold" ( i.e. , breakeven ) analysis showing the number of crashes that would have to be prevented for the rule to produce net benefits .

in other rules , the agencies implicitly or explicitly used vsl information in cost - effectiveness analyses .

for example , in nhtsa's truck tractor air brake systems rule , the agency estimated that the highest net cost per equivalent life saved would be $108,000 ( i.e. , much less than the department's $6.1 million vsl ) .

in its roof crush resistance rule , however , nhtsa concluded that the new standard would cost from $6.1 million to $9.8 million per equivalent life saved ( i.e. , potentially more than the department's vsl ) .

in the fmcsa rule on hours of service for drivers , the agency used vsl information to eliminate a regulatory option ( here , ruling out the prohibition on the 11 th hour of driving ) .

another dot agency also used vsl information in a 2009 advance notice of proposed rulemaking to indicate why a regulatory option did not appear feasible .

in that notice , nhtsa presented its initial research efforts on an initiative to amend federal motor vehicle safety standards on rearview mirrors to improve drivers' ability to see behind a vehicle and reduce backover accidents .

two of the regulatory options that the agency considered were rear object detection sensors ( eg , ultrasonic or radar - based devices ) and rearview video camera systems .

however , nhtsa said "none of the systems are cost effective compared to our comprehensive cost estimate for a statistical life of $6.1 million. .

some of the rules discussed in this report illustrate that the size of the vsl used in the economic analysis and other variables have the potential to affect whether the rule is expected to produce positive net benefits .

for example: the may 2009 nhsta rule on roof crush resistance indicated that raising the vsl from $6.1 million to $8.7 million could , with changes to other variables , cause the upper - level estimate of net benefits to go from about $6 million to $388 million .

on the other hand , lowering the vsl to $3.5 million could cause the upper - level estimate to drop to a net loss of about $376 million .

in its april 2009 rule on over - the - counter drugs , fda initially determined that the benefits exceeded the costs even with the most conservative estimate of health benefits and the highest discount rate .

however , when fda issued a correction two months later , the agency concluded that the annualized costs exceeded the benefits using the most conservative assumptions of regulatory benefits ( eg , a $5 million vsl ) .

in other cases , however , the size of the vsl did not appear to affect whether the rule yielded net benefits .

for example: the november 2008 fmcsa rule on new entrant safety audits indicated that even the smallest vsl resulted in "strong positive net benefits. .

although nhtsa did not mention alternative vsls in its july 2009 air brake rule , the data provided indicated that the use of a vsl one - tenth of that used ( $6.1 million ) would have still provided net benefits .

fda said in its july 2009 rule on salmonella in shell eggs that the estimated monetized benefits of the rule exceeded the estimated costs even when the most conservative vsly value was used .

although circular a - 4 recommends that agencies consider providing estimates of fatality risks using both vsls and vslys , only a few of the rules that were examined appeared to provide both estimates .

instead , the agencies appeared to use life - year measures primarily to determine the value of non - fatal injuries and illnesses .

for example in its june 2007 rule on manufacturing practices for dietary supplements , fda used a base estimate of $300,000 for a quality - adjusted life year , converted that value to "life days" ( $822 per life day ) , and used that information to estimate the average value of preventing a typical illness ( $33,800 ) .

the other way that agencies placed a monetary value on injuries is by viewing them as a percentage of a death ( eg , the mais scale in dot's policy ) , or by assigning a specific average value to an injury .

for example: in the fra highway - rail grade crossing rule , the agency "conservatively" assumed that all of the injuries in grade crossing collisions were minor , and valued each injury at $12,000 in determining the benefits of preventing an average accident .

in the osha rule on personal protective equipment , the agency developed estimates of workers' "willingness to pay" to prevent certain types of injuries , and valued the injuries expected to be prevented by the rule at more than $337 million ( an average of nearly $50,000 per injury ) .

in other rules , however , the agencies did not estimate the number or monetary value of injuries that could be avoided by rules ( eg , osha's electrical standard rule ) .

in a standard benefit - cost analysis , estimates of the expected health benefits of a rule are monetized , added to other expected benefits , and that total is compared to the total estimated costs of the rule to help decision makers determine whether or not the rule should be issued .

executive order 12866 states that agencies should adopt regulations only if the benefits of the rule "justify" its costs .

in some of the rules discussed in this report , even after monetizing the health benefits , the expected costs of the rules were greater than the benefits .

in those instances , the agencies issuing the rules often indicated that the rules were statutorily required .

for example: in the "positive train control systems" rule that was cited at the beginning of this report , fra estimated that the cost of the rule would be about 20 times greater than the estimated benefits .

 ( the 20-year costs of the rule were estimated at between $9.5 billion and $13.2 billion ; benefits were estimated at between $440 million and $674 million. ) .

fra noted this imbalance in the rule , but said it was "constrained by the requirements of [the rail safety improvement act of 2008] , which do not provide latitude for implementing [positive train controls] differently. .

the august 2007 cbp rule on electronic transmission of manifests on commercial flights had estimated 10-year costs of about $126 million , and 10-year estimated monetized benefits of about $15 million ( plus unquantified benefits of "enhanced security" ) .

sections 4012 and 4071 of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) require dhs to establish procedures to allow for pre - departure vetting of passengers onboard aircraft , and passengers and crew onboard vessels , bound for and departing from the united states .

in other cases , however , the agencies appeared to issue rules with quantified net losses even when the underlying statutes did not specifically require them to do so .

for example , the june 2007 fda rule on good manufacturing practices for dietary supplements had a 10-year central estimate of net loss of $120 million , but fda noted that the losses could be as low as $96 million , or as high as $258 million .

the underlying statute , dshea , says that fda "may" establish these practices ; the agency does not appear to have been required to do so .

fda said that it was unable to quantify certain benefits , and that the benefits of the rule "justified" the costs .

also , as osha noted in its february 2006 rule on hexavalent chromium , certain statutes prohibit the consideration of costs in setting a health standard , and such prohibitions have been upheld in court .

therefore , even if the monetized estimated benefits of a rule are less than the estimated costs , the issuing agency cannot use that information in determining whether to regulate .

including such information in the preamble to the rule , however , can improve the transparency of the rulemaking process .

the agencies appeared to vary substantially in the degree to which they used various techniques in the monetization of health benefits .

for example , some agencies discussed cost - effectiveness studies that they conducted in addition to benefit - cost analyses , while other agencies did not mention such studies .

some agencies used vsls at various levels to show the effect on net benefits , while other agencies did not appear to use other vsls .

some showed discounting at 3% and 7% , while others did not discuss discounting or only showed discounting at one level .

these differences may reflect real variations in agency practices , or they may simply reflect differences in the degree to which the agencies disclosed their analytic procedures in the preambles to their rules or elsewhere .

for example , the preamble to the nhtsa rule on air brake systems did not discuss what vsl was used to monetize the projected reductions in fatalities and serious injuries , but that information was included in the regulatory impact analysis that was located in the agency's rulemaking docket .

the agencies that did not mention sensitivity analyses using different vsls may have done so but just did not discuss that effort .

the information provided in this report is drawn primarily from the preambles to the rules and any retrievable final economic analyses that were retrievable from the agency's electronic docket at http: / / www.regulations.gov .

