negotiating parties of the proposed anti - counterfeiting trade agreement ( acta ) have from may 1 , 2011 , until may 1 , 2013 , to sign the agreement .

subsequently , the acta would enter into force after the sixth instrument of ratification , acceptance , or approval ( "formal approval" ) is deposited by the acta participants .

participants to the acta negotiation are submitting the treaty to their respective domestic authorities to undertake relevant domestic processes for ratification , acceptance , or approval .

to date , no negotiating party , including the united states , has submitted a formal instrument of approval .

on july 11 , 2012 , mexico signed the acta .

the acta requires ratification in the mexican congress .

on july 4 , 2012 , the european parliament voted against the acta , meaning that neither the eu nor its individual member states can join the agreement in its current form .

amid widespread protests by advocates of internet free speech , several eu member states decided in early 2012 to suspend or not initiate their domestic adoption of the acta , including bulgaria , the czech republic , germany , latvia , poland , and slovakia .

on february 22 , 2012 , the european commission placed the acta ratification process on hold and submitted the agreement to the european court of justice to determine if the acta is compatible with eu law .

on january 25 , 2012 , the european union and 22 eu member states signed the acta .

at that time , five eu member states ( cyprus , germany , estonia , the netherlands , and slovakia ) did not sign the agreement , reportedly due to procedural issues .

on october 1 , 2011 , the governments of australia , canada , japan , korea , morocco , new zealand , singapore , and the united states signed the acta .

at that time , representatives from the european union , mexico , and switzerland "confirmed their continuing support for and preparations to sign the agreement as soon as practicable. .

in addition , all participants affirmed their goal "to work cooperatively to achieve the agreement's prompt entry into force , and to actively support its goals. .

in may 2011 , acta negotiating parties publicly released a final version of the agreement text .

in october 2010 , the 11 th and final round of negotiation for the acta concluded , nearly three years after the negotiation began .

the proposed anti - counterfeiting trade agreement ( acta ) is a new agreement for combating intellectual property rights ( ipr ) infringement .

negotiated by the united states , australia , canada , the european union and its 27 member states , japan , south korea , mexico , morocco , new zealand , singapore , and switzerland , the acta is intended to build on the standards of ipr protection and enforcement set forth in the 1995 world trade organization ( wto ) agreement on trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips agreement ) and to address emerging ipr issues believed to be not addressed adequately in the trips agreement , such as ipr infringement in the digital environment .

the acta , which was negotiated outside of the wto , focuses primarily on enforcement of trademarks and copyrights ; enforcement of patents generally is outside of the agreement's scope .

the acta establishes a legal framework for ipr enforcement , which contains provisions on civil enforcement , border measures , criminal enforcement in cases of willful trademark counterfeiting or copyright piracy on a commercial scale , and enforcement for the infringement of copyrights or related rights over digital networks .

it also provides for enhanced enforcement best practices and increased international cooperation .

the acta negotiation concluded in october 2010 , nearly three years after it began .

countries have from may 1 , 2011 , until may 1 , 2013 , to sign the agreement .

all negotiating parties , except mexico and switzerland , have signed the agreement .

acta signatories are to proceed with domestic ratification procedures .

the acta would enter into force after the sixth instrument of ratification , acceptance , or approval ( "formal approval" ) is deposited .

no negotiating party has submitted a formal instrument of approval to date .

the united states pursues ipr objectives using a range of trade policy mechanisms , including multilaterally through the wto ; regionally and bilaterally through the negotiation of ftas ; and domestically through u.s. trade laws .

what follows is a discussion of some of the building blocks for the acta found in u.s. trade policy .

the acta negotiation has spurred debates among various stakeholder groups within and among the various countries on both process and substance .

certain stakeholders have voiced concerns about the negotiation's scope , transparency , and inclusiveness .

members of the u.s. business community , such as the entertainment , pharmaceutical , luxury goods , and high technology industries , largely have been supportive of the acta .

they assert that stronger international ipr protection and enforcement through the acta are critical for their competitiveness .

other business groups , including internet service providers , have expressed concerns about the digital enforcement provisions of the proposed agreement .

in addition , various civil society groups , such as public health and consumer rights advocates , have voiced concerns about the implications of the acta for trade in legitimate goods , consumer privacy , and free flow of information .

with the existence of the wto trips agreement and other international agreements on ipr , some question the rationale behind creating a new agreement to combat counterfeiting and piracy .

the following section discusses in greater detail some of these key points of debate .

the 112 th congress may examine the role of congress in the acta approval process beyond oversight .

congress may choose to examine whether implementation of the acta without congressional approval could raise constitutional issues , given that u.s. approval of international agreements concerning foreign commerce and intellectual property rights falls under the article 1 , section 8 powers of congress in the u.s. constitution .

the acta may raise a range of questions for congress: what is the role of congress in the acta approval process ? .

will congressional activity regarding the acta extend beyond oversight ? .

how would the acta affect congressional action in areas covered by the agreement ? .

how does protection and enforcement of ipr rank among other national priorities ? .

within the realm of combating counterfeiting and piracy , there also are questions about what forms of ipr infringements should be given priority in addressing .

rationales cited for the acta include the commercial losses sustained by legitimate businesses from ipr infringement , as well as health and safety concerns associated with counterfeit and pirated products .

among these numerous concerns , what forms of infringement should be given priority if resources are limited ? .

what implications does the proposed acta have for the allocation of federal funds ? .

would implementation of the acta require the appropriation of federal funds , even though changes in federal laws are not necessarily required ? .

what implications does the proposed acta have for the future of u.s. trade policy ? .

does the acta set a precedent for conducting future efforts on ipr protection and enforcement primarily or increasingly outside of multilateral frameworks ? .

how might provisions in the acta coincide or conflict with negotiating objectives set by congress in any future trade promotion authority given to the president ? .

would accession to the acta be a requirement for signatories to future u.s. regional and bilateral ftas ? .

and would a country's fulfillment of acta commitments affect ustr determinations for its special 301 watch lists ? .

given the european parliament's rejection of the acta , what are the prospects for the acta entering into force ? .

