development assistance , which comprises on average less than 1% of the annual federal budget of the united states , serves simultaneously as a component of national security strategy , a tool to promote u.s. commercial interests , and a global expression of american values .

as with other aspects of foreign policy , u.s. development assistance programs and policies are implemented in a complex global environment .

the united states is one of dozens of countries and multilateral financial institutions providing such aid , together with non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) and foundations , and alongside private financial flows to developing countries from investors , international corporations , and diaspora communities .

donors and investors work in overlapping spheres in the developing world , each with their own practices and agenda .

improved coordination of these efforts , many experts argue , would result in greater efficiency and effectiveness in meeting global development objectives .

donor coordination , sometimes called harmonization , is a major theme of international development cooperation agreements of the last decade , including the 2005 paris declaration on aid effectiveness , to which the united states and most other major donors have committed themselves .

it is also a stated goal of u.s. foreign policy .

the december 2010 quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) report includes specific strategies to improve coordination with other aid donors , public and private .

nevertheless , donors on average , and the united states in particular , have had limited success in meeting the coordination goals they established for themselves .

some experts have begun to question whether donor coordination is an achievable or even appropriate goal .

others assert that coordination of foreign aid is now more important than ever , as official donors face increasing budgetary pressures at home and the number and diversity of development actors increases .

the 113 th congress will have the opportunity to address foreign aid funding and policy issues when considering annual state - foreign operations appropriations legislation , and perhaps foreign aid reauthorization or reform legislation .

the benefits and drawbacks of greater u.s. coordination with the foreign aid efforts of other countries and institutions may be a consideration in that debate .

this report provides a summary of official development assistance ( oda ) , discusses coordination goals established by donors at international development policy forums , and provides an overview of u.s. policy and efforts to meet these goals .

the report concludes by identifying key issues in donor coordination , including the growing role of non - traditional donors , such as china , in development cooperation .

data on official development assistance ( oda ) are gathered and reported annually by the organization for economic cooperation and development's ( oecd's ) development assistance committee ( dac ) , currently the preeminent forum for foreign aid donor information sharing .

in 2011 , the most recent year for which complete data is available , the oecd reports that 45 countries and 22 multilateral organizations disbursed oda , the most widely recognized category of foreign assistance .

for a list of bilateral and multilateral oda donors , as well as leading private sector aid donors , see the appendix .

while the oecd dac is the most comprehensive source of information on official development assistance , its data are incomplete .

there are only 34 oecd member states .

annual reporting of oda to the dac has expanded in recent years to include many non - oecd countries , but the non - oecd reporting is voluntary and irregular .

furthermore , it does not include several increasingly important donors , such as brazil , china , russia , india , and south africa .

these nations have been invited to participate in the dac reporting process but choose not to for political and technical reasons , as discussed in the "nontraditional donors" section of this report .

oda data also exclude private aid resources , which are a rapidly growing , though inconsistent , portion of capital flows to developing countries in recent decades .

while comprehensive data on private flows are elusive , private philanthropic donations from dac countries to developing countries have been estimated at about $56 billion for 2010 , and total private capital flows to developing countries that year , including remittances and private investment , are estimated at $329 billion .

oda is estimated to have accounted for less than 20% of total oecd economic engagement with developing countries in recent years , prompting many development experts to call for a development coordination strategy that extends beyond official aid to include trade , migration and foreign investment policies .

the primary argument for better donor coordination is that aid effectiveness is becoming increasingly undermined by fragmentation .

more donors are giving oda than in decades past , and , until recently , many donors were spreading their assistance across a growing number of recipients .

the united states , for example , provided oda to 81 countries in 1990 and to 134 in 2011 .

almost all the top recipients of oda in 2011 hosted dozens of donors , both bilateral and multilateral .

the united states and other donors in recent years have expressed the intent to concentrate their aid in fewer countries and sectors as a means of decreasing fragmentation and improving impact , but significant change is not yet reflected in the oecd data .

coordination advocates argue that the profusion of donor agencies in many developing countries causes problems for donors and recipients alike .

they focus on the following types of problems , both observed and potential , which may undermine aid efficiency and effectiveness .

not all foreign aid professionals are concerned about the growing number of donors in many developing countries .

some contend that the wide variety of independent donors is valuable in demonstrating pluralism in action and reflecting the decentralization of authority that many development plans promote .

others argue that having a range of active donors leads to more ideas , competition , and innovation , as well as a more consistent flow of funding .

some development professionals believe donor coordination is the responsibility of recipient governments , not donors , and that while it may be frustrating to donors when host government officials do not act in concert , failure to coordinate often reflects political and policy differences that must be worked out by the host officials through internal political processes .

others see potential benefits of coordination , but question whether they warrant the time consuming task of donor coordination , particularly in countries for which aid is not a major component of the national budget .

in the context of recent international development forums , however , donor and recipient countries alike have expressed widespread agreement on the desirability in principle of greater donor coordination and consolidation of foreign assistance activities to address fragmentation concerns .

the first formal coordination of official development assistance dates to the establishment of the oecd dac in 1960 , a forum created for the major bilateral aid donors , including the united states , to discuss issues and develop guidance related to aid and development .

with respect to multilateral aid , the united nations development program ( undp ) was established in 1965 through a merger of existing u.n. aid offices to avoid duplication of effort within the multilateral u.n. development programs .

for the most part , early coordination efforts involved tracking how much aid was provided , and to which countries .

over the last decade , however , attention has focused on coordinating the efforts of bilateral and multilateral aid donors for the purpose of improving aid efficiency and effectiveness .

the dac created a working party on aid effectiveness ( wpae ) , in 2003 , to establish an international development cooperation framework .

since its creation , the wpae has sponsored four international high - level forums on aid effectiveness , which established common goals , principles and commitments related to development assistance .

the united states has played a leading role in this process .

donor coordination was a key issue at these gatherings and the products of these forums reflect broadly accepted goals and best practices in donor coordination .

while the paris declaration and subsequent forum agreements focused on specific aid effectiveness goals and measures , they did not indicate how to translate the agreement into change at the country policy and implementation level .

various mechanisms have been established at the international level for enhanced coordination , creating a loose framework , while each donor also works within the framework of its own foreign assistance statutes and agencies to meet its international commitments .

some of these global and u.s. - specific coordination mechanisms are discussed below .

the paris declaration monitoring surveys are imperfect , but the apparent lack of significant progress toward paris declaration harmonization goals is believed by many aid experts to reflect persistent obstacles to a more unified international approach to oda .

almost half of donors surveyed for the paris declaration implementation evaluation in 2008 reported facing significant domestic political and institutional obstacles to establishing coordinated aid arrangements .

among the recurring obstacles , particularly for the united states , are difficulties related to division of labor , concerns about direct budget support , personnel disincentives , lack of inter - agency coordination , and conflicting strategic interests .

researchers have estimated that less than half of all aid that reaches developing countries is now subject to paris declaration commitments .

aid from private foundations and ngos , as well as increasing aid from emerging donors who have not participated in the dac reporting process , and do not necessarily ascribe to dac goals on aid effectiveness and transparency , has changed the development landscape .

in addition to the much - talked about "brics" economies of brazil , russia , india , china and south africa , other non - oecd countries such as south korea , indonesia , turkey and venezuela have become notable aid donors , even as they remain aid recipients .

the role of "south - south cooperation," as aid from one developing country to another is often called , and "triangular cooperation" efforts , involving cooperation between both emerging and traditional donors , is seen as increasingly significant to effective coordination efforts .

as oda becomes an increasingly smaller part of financial flows to developing countries , paris declaration indicators and the oecd dac framework become less relevant .

the shift at the busan hlf away from the oecd dac partnership structure to the global partnership is intended to address this issue by including a broader range of stakeholders .

however , expanding the current donor coordination regime to include private actors and a broader range of donor states is challenging .

this tension was at the heart of negotiations on the busan outcome document .

many traditional donor countries felt that bringing emerging donors into the partnership was essential to the ongoing relevance of the aid effectiveness process .

others felt that the concessions necessary to attract a broader base of partners would result in watered down commitments that were meaningless .

the former view prevailed , and the busan document established a two - tiered commitment in which developing country donors and non - governmental entities accept the provisions of the agreement as voluntary guidance , while traditional donors accept them as commitments .

while many hope that this is a first step toward full integration of emerging donors with the established norms and best practices of dac donors , many are skeptical .

like traditional donors , developing country donors provide aid for a variety of reasons .

because these donors still face significant poverty at home , provide aid primarily to their neighbors , and place few or no conditions on the aid , south - south aid is often viewed as more political and commercial than development oriented .

emerging donors , like traditional donors before them , may use aid to establish themselves as regional leaders , or to boost their standing in international forums .

access to markets and natural resources are also frequently ascribed motives of south - south cooperation , particularly chinese aid in africa .

as with traditional donors , these strategic goals may mean that improved efficiency of development assistance is insufficient incentive to overcome the political and technical obstacles to improved coordination .

for many non - oecd donors , participation in the oecd dac reporting process does not provide any particular advantage and may not be worth the associated responsibilities .

for those who do see advantages to participating in the oda reporting ( perhaps they aspire to be oecd members and wish to demonstrate their support ) , there are technical and political obstacles .

reporting detailed and reliable aid data of the quality expected by the dac requires resources that many smaller donors simply do not have .

donors ineligible for oecd membership because of political and economic requirements may not want to cooperate with an organization that denies them this status .

smaller donors may resist reporting oda data for fear that their assistance will look insignificant compared to larger donors or to their official rhetoric .

others may be reluctant to reveal information about development partners or business models that can be gleaned from oda data and may be politically or commercially sensitive .

in addition , south - south donors do not generally place governance or human rights conditions on their aid , as dac donors often do , demonstrating a sensitivity to the view that such conditions are inappropriate interference in the recipient country's internal affairs .

a fuller integration into the traditional coordination and effectiveness framework may come with pressure to change this approach .

non - governmental donors , such as foundations and faith - based organizations , also face obstacles to full participation on coordination efforts .

according to the oecd , development assistance grants from private voluntary organizations totaled $30.8 billion in 2010 , with the bulk of those flows ( $22.8 billion ) coming from u.s. - based organizations .

the bill and melinda gates foundation alone provided nearly $2.0 billion in 2010 for global health and development programs .

these entities share many of the oecd reporting concerns faced by emerging official donors .

they may not have the resources to devote to dac - quality data collection , and may feel they will not compare favorably to other reporting ngos .

unlike official donors , they may also have concerns about the impact of such reporting on their fundraising efforts .

furthermore , as noted in the report on the civil society conference that ran parallel to the accra hlf in 2008 , many ngos involved in international development see their role as much broader than that of official donors , and are wary of the potential negative connotations of the donor label .

while foreign aid donors for decades have coordinated their efforts by meeting regularly and sharing information on the aid they provide , under the umbrella of the oecd dac , recent efforts to focus on aid quality rather than quantity , and to include a broader range of development actors in coordination efforts , have significantly changed the development cooperation landscape .

commitments made by the united states and other donors at a series of high - level global forums have not been met .

while donors reaffirmed these commitments in busan in 2011 , a variety of challenges , from strategic foreign policy objectives to accountability concerns , make collaborative aid efforts difficult .

the growing role of non - traditional donors , as well as private sector investments and philanthropic financial flows to developing countries , present additional coordination challenges , but may as well become opportunities for a new type of collaboration .

participants at the busan hlf attempted to strengthen the aid effectiveness agenda by incorporating these non - traditional donors and establishing a new global partnership to include civil society organizations and emerging donors , though on a voluntary basis .

as the global partnership settles in to the task of overseeing implementation of this bifurcated agreement , new insights may emerge as to the effectiveness of this broader scope of development cooperation .

in the meantime , the united states may continue efforts to improve aid effectiveness and efficiency through maintaining strong relationships with bilateral donors that share u.s. interests and objectives in the developing world , building on the significant progress that has been made with respect to aid transparency , and considering how best to use multilateral development entities and partnerships to enhance the effectiveness of u.s. foreign assistance .

