the recession that began in the united states in december 2007 and officially ended in june 2009 was one of the deepest and the longest since the great depression .

in response , congress enacted legislation to stimulate aggregate demand and provide assistance to unemployed workers and their families .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) temporarily raised spending by increasing funding for a number of programs , creating new programs , and providing tax benefits for individuals , families and businesses .

congress also authorized a federally funded temporary program ( p.l .

110-252 as amended ) to provide additional weeks of unemployment benefits to those who exhausted their eligibility under the federal - state unemployment compensation ( uc ) program .

although some in the public policy community are concerned that extending benefits may discourage recipients from looking for work , congress has extended the program on multiple occasions .

it is not unusual for improvement in the labor market , as measured by a declining unemployment rate , to begin some months after the official ending date of a recession .

it is also not unusual for the proportion of the labor force unemployed for more than six months ( the long - term unemployment rate ) to continue rising and peak after a recession ends .

what is unusual , however , is that the incidence of long - term unemployment currently is higher than at any time since world war ii .

the purpose of this report is to assist policymakers who may consider legislation to stimulate job growth , provide additional benefits to unemployed workers , or assist families whose incomes have fallen because of a job loss or reduction in hours worked .

the report first compares the prevalence of long - term unemployment across business cycles during the postwar period and offers explanations for its unusually high incidence during the most recent recession .

it next analyzes the likelihood of unemployed workers with different demographic , job , and household characteristics experiencing a very long period without paychecks .

the report closes with a discussion of long - term unemployment's implications for public policy .

the report does not consider the macroeconomic effects of government spending or tax cuts to expand job growth or provide benefits to unemployed workers and families who have experienced a loss of income .

the percentage of the labor force without jobs for longer than six months ( the long - term unemployment rate ) — like the unemployment rate — generally rises as economic activity falls .

this countercyclical pattern was evident during the deep recessions of the 1970s and 1980s , when the long - term unemployment rate rose 0.4 percentage points to 0.8% at the end of the 1973-1975 recession and 1.1 percentage points to 2.1% after the 1981-1982 recession .

the same pattern was evident during milder recessions , when the long - term unemployment rate rose 0.3 percentage points to 0.8% at the trough of the 1990-1991 and 2001 recessions .

as the latest recession unfolded , the long - term unemployment rate increased from 0.9% in december 2007 to 2.9% in june 2009 ( the official end of the recession ) .

after the end of the recession , the long - term unemployment rate continued to rise , peaking at 4.4% in may and june of 2010 .

as of october 2010 , the long - term unemployment rate was 4.0% .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

another way to look at the trend in long - term unemployment is to examine the number of long - term unemployed as a share of all unemployed .

the long - term unemployed as a share of all unemployed was 29.6% in june 2007 , up from 17.3% in december 2007 .

this measure also continued to rise after the end of the recession , rising to 46.0% in may 2010 .

in october 2010 , 41.8% of unemployed workers had been looking for work for more than 26 weeks .

the proportion of unemployed persons out - of - work over 26 weeks has been considerably above the rate recorded during prior downturns and nascent recoveries .

 ( see figure 2 . ) .

the historically high incidence of long - term unemployment observed starting in mid - 2009 coincides with congress' longer than usual temporary extension of uc benefits beyond the duration afforded by the permanently authorized federal - state uc system and extended benefit programs .

the temporary uc benefit programs enacted to mitigate the effects of seven prior recessions provided a maximum of 13 to 33 weeks of benefits .

after the seven recessions ended , the long - term unemployment rate and share of long - term unemployment ranged from 0.8% to 2.6% and from 13.6% to 25.7% , respectively .

the 111 th congress provided a maximum of 33 weeks of benefits from about november 2008 through october 2009 .

both the long - term unemployment rate ( 3.7% ) and the share of long - term unemployment ( 36.0% ) in october 2009 were well outside these ranges .

the subsequent extension of benefits to a maximum of 53 weeks starting in november 2009 has been accompanied by a still higher long - term unemployment rate and share of long - term unemployment in early 2010 .

 ( see figure 1 and figure 2 . ) .

the availability of a maximum of 53 weeks of benefits through the emergency unemployment compensation ( euc ) program probably prompted individuals to continue searching for jobs instead of leaving the labor force after exhausting their regular uc benefits .

but , the currently low hiring rate of employers makes workers refraining from accepting jobs in order to continue receiving euc benefits a less plausible explanation for the historically high incidence of long - term unemployment .

an analysis by valletta and kuang that estimated the difference in duration of unemployment among persons likely to be eligible for uc benefits ( i.e. , job losers ) and those likely to be ineligible ( i.e. , unemployed job leavers and labor force entrants ) concluded that the recent extensions of unemployment benefits contributed little to the historically high level of long - term unemployment .

"it is not surprising that the disincentive effects of ui would loom small in the midst of the most severe labor market downturn since the great depression. .

another study concluded that the 53 weeks of temporary unemployment benefits could account for as much as 0.7 to 1.8 percentage points of the increase in the unemployment rate during the recent recession .

the authors add , however , that the effect of extended benefits on the unemployment rate is probably at the lower end of these estimates .

according to bls data from the job openings and labor turnover survey ( jolts ) , from the beginning to the end of the recent recession , the hiring rate fell from 3.6% in december 2007 to 3.0% in june 2009 .

in september 2010 , the rate was 3.2% ( the latest month for which data were available for this report ) .

in contrast , the hiring rate during the march - november 2001 recession and ensuing "jobless recovery" exceeded the hiring rate reported during and after the 2007-2009 recession .

the hiring rate fell from 4.4% in march 2001 to 3.9% in november 2001 , after which it reached a low of 3.5% in march 2003 before gradually trending upward .

the industry restructuring that arguably characterized the 2001 recession may have characterized the latest recession as well , and made it more difficult for workers to find new jobs as quickly as they did after earlier recessions .

workers displaced by industries permanently reducing their demand for labor will take longer to become reemployed than workers waiting to be recalled by their employers from temporary layoffs .

the period of job search could be especially prolonged when the skills needed for employment in growing industries differ from the skills of workers laid off by restructuring industries and when displaced workers must often lower their wage expectations to obtain new jobs .

the so - called jobless recovery from the 2001 recession prompted several economists to analyze whether increased industry restructuring had led comparatively large numbers of unemployed workers to move from downsizing industries to industries increasing their demand for labor .

no consensus was reached , however .

groshen and potter estimated that , according to their measure , many more industries were undergoing restructuring during the 2001 recession and subsequent recovery than during prior business cycles .

in contrast , aaronson , rissman , and sullivan estimated that , based on a different measure of labor reallocation across industries , the degree of restructuring during and after the 2001 recession was less than that during earlier periods .

although this second group of researchers did not find evidence that the rate of permanent job loss was atypically elevated following the 2001 recession , they noted that "the unusually high duration of unemployment [in 2002 and 2003] is consistent with [an] increased mismatch" between the skills of displaced workers and the skills being demanded by employers in growing industries .

similarly , figura and wascher estimated that workers displaced from industries that were downsizing experienced almost a doubling in the amount of time spent not working ( from 19 to 35 weeks ) between the 1997-1999 and 2001-2003 periods , while workers displaced from other industries experienced a much smaller increase ( from 19 to 28 weeks ) .

the two researchers concluded that while it appears that downsizing industries ( eg , manufacturing , information and data processing services , broadcasting and telecommunications , publishing ) were quick to layoff workers in the early 2000s , "it took a considerable amount of time for these resources to be re - employed elsewhere. .

rissman's more recent work , covering the period from the first quarter of 1984 to the second quarter of 2009 , suggests that the impact of structural realignment on unemployed workers varies by industry .

while restructuring in the finance , insurance , and real estate industries resulted in worker displacement , employees from these industries may be "better able to find alternative employment in other sectors of the economy because the skills they possess are more readily transferable to employment in other industries. .

alternatively , workers who lose jobs in the construction , manufacturing , and transportation and utilities industries "may be less readily absorbed into other sectors," thereby lengthening the time spent unemployed .

distinguishing cyclical from structural unemployment is more than an academic exercise .

if job losses are the result of a temporary ( cyclical ) reduction in the demand for goods and services , the use of fiscal and monetary policies to stimulate economic activity may be sufficient to reduce unemployment .

however , if job losses are also the result of changes in technology , trade , or consumer tastes that cause permanent shifts in the demand for labor across sectors , employment policies may also be appropriate responses .

this matter will be revisited in " implications for public policy " at the conclusion of this report .

knowledge of which jobless workers are more likely to suffer long - term unemployment may help to identify policies that address their plight .

this report compares the long - term unemployed at the end of the three most recent recessions ( 2007-2009 , 2001 , and 1990-1991 ) .

the report uses data from the monthly current population survey ( cps ) , which is a household survey conducted by the u.s. census bureau for bls .

the report also uses data from the annual social and economic ( asec ) supplement to the cps .

the supplement collects information on the sources and amounts of household and family income and benefits .

 ( the asec supplement was formerly called the march supplement. ) .

because of changes in the cps over time , not all variables analyzed in this report can be compared across the last three recessions .

for example , beginning in january 2003 , the cps adopted new industry and occupation classification systems that changed the way in which some industries and occupations are categorized .

in january 2003 , the cps also changed the way survey respondents can respond to the question on race .

in the past , survey respondents had to select one race ( eg , white , black ) .

respondents can now choose more than one race , which makes meaningful comparisons over time difficult .

finally , because the cps is a household survey , sample size ( eg , number of workers with an advanced or professional degree ) limits the detail of the analysis presented below .

recessions are generally characterized by a drop in consumer demand and a decline in investment .

consumers buy fewer cars and homes , cut back on travel and entertainment , and spend less on clothing and dining out .

businesses invest less in new buildings and equipment .

a result of a decline in aggregate demand is an increase in unemployment .

fiscal and monetary policy are the macroeconomic responses to a recession .

fiscal policy consists of changes in government spending and taxes .

monetary policy consists of actions by the federal reserve to affect the supply of money and interest rates .

the strength of an economic rebound largely determines the pace of net job growth ( i.e. , the extent to which additions exceed separations from employer payrolls ) and reduction in unemployment , including long - term unemployment .

in the early stages of an economic recovery , increased demand for goods and services first slows the flow of workers into unemployment .

while short - term unemployment consequently falls , the average duration of unemployment increases for some time after the end of a recession .

once employers become confident that an economic upturn is firmly in place , they go beyond increasing the work hours of current employees to hiring more workers .

but , a return to economic growth may not be sufficient to fully overcome the reemployment problems of the long - term unemployed .

employers may rank job applicants by their duration of unemployment and hire from the front of the queue ( i.e. , the short - term unemployed ) because they consider lengthy unemployment to be a signal of poor worker quality ( i.e. , low productivity ) .

in effect , long - term unemployment can stigmatize workers .

firms may also be reluctant to hire the long - term unemployed because they believe the group's skills have atrophied during their lengthy time away from the workplace .

in addition , businesses may discriminate against older workers , who are more likely than younger workers to be among the long - term unemployed .

a variety of employment policies might be considered to ameliorate these labor market difficulties .

offering wage subsidies to firms that hire the long - term unemployed compensates employers for the group's actual or perceived skill shortcomings .

so , too , does providing a training subsidy to companies that hire workers with arguably deteriorated skills due to their lengthy bout of unemployment .

passage of a temporary public jobs program early in a recession may prevent the skill erosion potentially induced by long - term unemployment .

the latter was one of the rationales for enacting job creation programs during the great depression .

and , employers might be discouraged from failing to hire older displaced workers through stepped up enforcement of workplace discrimination laws .

a return to economic growth also may be insufficient to fully overcome the reemployment problems of the long - term unemployed given the history of structural change coinciding with cyclical downturns .

before the back - to - back recessions of the early 1980s , for example , workers in the steel industry were about half as likely as the average worker to experience long - term unemployment .

with the recessions of the early 80s , long - term unemployment among steelworkers became "among the worst of any worker group.… considerable evidence indicates that the nation's steel industry [was] suffering from some basic problems quite unrelated to cyclical declines in demand. .

one approach that has been suggested to reemploy workers displaced from jobs in restructuring industries is wage insurance .

such a program may encourage high - tenure , high - wage workers to accept lower paying jobs in growing industries by compensating them for the difference in wages from their new and old jobs .

under the alternative trade adjustment assistance ( ataa ) program , older workers who become reemployed within 26 weeks of being laid off can receive one - half of the difference in earnings from their former and new jobs up to a maximum of $10,000 over two years .

another potential policy response is to provide reemployment bonuses to unemployed workers who accept new jobs within a given time frame , thereby shortening their spell of unemployment .

experiments were conducted in a few states in the 1980s to evaluate the efficacy of variously designed reemployment bonus programs .

the evaluations and subsequent reanalyses generally concluded that offering bonuses to uc recipients shortened their length of benefit receipt , especially when uc recipients also were offered job search assistance and when the bonus programs were targeted at those uc recipients most likely to exhaust their benefits .

if restructuring industries are concentrated geographically , economic development and relocation assistance for the unemployed may be appropriate measures as well .

but , these strategies do not necessarily focus on assisting the long - term unemployed .

states typically take the lead in efforts to attract growing industries to reemploy their laid off residents .

to assist the workers and communities adversely affected by the auto industry's restructuring , however , president obama created the position of director of recovery for auto communities and workers within the department of labor to leverage available federal resources ( eg , arra funds ) .

in contrast , providing assistance to unemployed workers to encourage them to take jobs in other areas is not often mentioned today .

relocation assistance currently is one of the benefits offered to taa - eligible workers , those receiving department of labor national emergency grants , and adult and dislocated workers served by the workforce investment act .

lastly , workers laid off due to structural changes in the economy may not possess the skills needed to find jobs in expanding industries .

while these individuals can undertake education and training to acquire the skills that are in demand , these activities may not result in reemploying the long - term unemployed as quickly as some of the approaches discussed above .

the analysis in this report is based on data from the current population survey ( cps ) , which is a household survey conducted by the u.s. census bureau for the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) .

the monthly cps is the source of the national unemployment rate and other labor market information .

the survey is representative of the civilian , noninstitutional population .

the sample does not include persons living in institutions ( such as mental hospitals , nursing homes , or correctional facilities ) .

the monthly survey does not include individuals who are on active duty in the military .

approximately 50,000 households are interviewed each month .

each year , the cps conducts the annual social and economic ( asec ) supplement to the monthly cps .

the supplement collects information on the types and sources of family income , health insurance coverage , and other household information .

the supplement collects information for the previous year .

the sample for the asec supplement is representative of the civilian , noninstitutional population of the united states .

the sample for the supplement includes members of the armed forces living in civilian housing units on a military base or in a household not on a military base .

for the 2010 supplement , 77,000 households were interviewed .

in the supplement , earnings include wage and salary income and income from self - employment .

wages and salaries include earnings from self - employment , tips , commissions , and cash bonuses .

total income includes earnings , interest and dividends , social security and pension benefits , public assistance , unemployment and worker's compensation , alimony and child support , and other types of money income .

money income does not include in - kind transfers for food , housing , healthcare , or energy assistance .

money income does not include capital gains and is income before taxes or other deductions .

in this report , total family earnings and income consist of the sum of earnings and income of all persons in a household or married couple family .

in the cps , a family is defined as a group of two or more persons who are living together and who are related by birth , marriage , or adoption .

in the cps , a family may include a related subfamily , such as a married son or daughter or an unmarried son or daughter with a child .

the cps defines single individuals as either "nonfamily householders" or "secondary individuals. .

following the cps definition of a family , in this report married couples and single parent families may include one or more related subfamilies .

a primary family and an unrelated subfamily living in the same household are treated as two separate families .

unmarried parents are treated as a single parent and a single individual .

unmarried couples without children are treated as two single individuals .

the analysis in this report includes persons in the labor force , either employed or unemployed , who are ages 16 or over .

the analysis of household and family earnings and income includes households and families with positive earnings or income .

topcoding to protect the confidentiality of survey participants , the cps assigns an income amount to higher income persons .

changes in these amounts , or topcodes , over time can affect the observed trend in real income and earnings .

for example , in 1991 , individual earnings were topcoded at $99,999 ; in 2001 , earnings were topcoded at $150,000 ; and in 2009 , earnings were topcoded at $200,000 .

since 1996 , for persons with earnings above the topcoded amounts , the amount of earnings reported in the public cps files is the average earnings of workers with similar characteristics .

average earnings are calculated for persons based on gender , race , ethnicity , and whether or not a person works full - time , year - round .

since 1999 , for persons with incomes above the topcoded amounts , the public cps files report the average income of persons with topcoded income .

for consistency , for the years 2001 and 2009 , this report uses average topcoded earnings and income as reported in the cps and , for 1991 , average earnings and income from a report published by the national bureau of economic research ( nber ) .

confidence intervals estimates based on survey responses from a sample of households have two kinds of error: nonsampling and sampling .

examples of nonsampling error include information that is misreported and errors made in processing collected information .

sampling error occurs because a sample , and not the entire population , of households is surveyed .

the difference between an estimate based on a sample of households and the actual population value is known as sampling error .

when using sample data , researchers typically construct confidence intervals around population estimates .

confidence intervals provide information about the accuracy of estimated values .

with a 90% confidence interval and repeated samples from a population , 90% of intervals will include the average estimate of the population characteristic .

