the documentary requirements for visas are stated in §§221-222 of the ina , with some discretion for further specifications or exceptions by regulation ( as discussed below ) .

generally , the application requirements are more extensive for aliens who wish to permanently live in the united states than those coming for visits .

the amount of paperwork required and the length of adjudication process to obtain a visa to come to the united states are analogous to that of the internal revenue service's ( irs's ) tax forms and review procedures .

just as persons with uncomplicated earnings and expenses may file an irs "short form" while those whose financial circumstances are more complex may file a series of irs forms , so too an alien whose situation is straightforward and whose reason for seeking a visa is easily documented generally has fewer forms and procedural hurdles than an alien whose circumstances are more complex .

the visa application files must be stored in an electronic database that is available to immigration adjudicators and immigration officers in dhs .

there are over 70 u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) forms as well as dos forms that pertain to the visa issuance process .

the visa issuance procedures delineated in the statute require the petitioner to submit his or her photograph , as well as full name ( and any other name used or by which he or she has been known ) , age , gender , and the date and place of birth .

depending on the visa category , certain documents must be certified by the proper government authorities ( eg , birth certificates and marriage licenses ) .

all prospective lprs must submit to physical and mental examinations , and prospective nonimmigrants also may be required to have physical and mental examinations .

all aliens seeking visas must undergo admissibility reviews performed by dos consular officers abroad .

these reviews are intended to ensure that aliens are not ineligible for visas or admission under the grounds for inadmissibility spelled out in the ina .

consular decisions are not appealable or reviewable ; however , some of those seeking visas are able to bring additional information that may be used to overcome an initial refusal .

as previously mentioned , these criteria are health - related grounds ; criminal history ; security and terrorist concerns ; public charge ( eg , indigence ) ; seeking to work without proper labor certification ; illegal entrants and immigration law violations ; ineligible for citizenship ; and aliens previously removed .

each of these grounds is explained more fully following a brief legislative history of the provisions .

to better understand these grounds for inadmissibility , crs has analyzed dos data on all visa determinations from two perspectives .

one approach analyzes all the grounds of inadmissibility for four selected years : fy1996 , fy2000 , fy2004 , and fy2008 .

the other approach analyzes the top grounds for exclusion over a 15-year period .

as in the discussions above , the immigrant determinations are treated separately from the nonimmigrant determinations .

all of these analyses are based on the initial decision and do not take into account initial refusals that might have been overcome with subsequent information .

the rise and fall of the public charge ground is the most striking feature of the 15-year trend analysis .

foremost , many applicants filed affidavits of support that were insufficient in the first few years after iirira went into effect .

as the legal community and the prospective lprs gained a better understanding of the requirement that the affidavit of support must demonstrate the ability to maintain an annual income of at least 125% of the federal poverty line , they may have submitted more complete financial data to support the affidavit .

the statutory change in iirira that made the affidavits of support legally binding may have changed behavior over time as well .

potential sponsors may have become less likely to petition for family members if they lacked adequate resources to support them .

the steady rise in exclusions based on past illegal presence and prior removal is likewise largely due to the statutory change in iirira .

since 1996 , foreign nationals who were unlawfully present in the united states for longer than 180 days but less than a year are inadmissible for three years after their departure .

foreign nationals who were unlawfully present for at least a year are inadmissible for 10 years after their departure .

when these changes were coupled with database improvements and access to databases across agencies , consular officers became better able to identify visa applicants who are inadmissible on these grounds .

the improvements in immigration - related databases as well as the expansion of access to law enforcement databases offer similar explanations for the uptick in criminal grounds of exclusion .

finally , the increase in immigrant exclusions based upon labor market protections may reflect the growth in demand for foreign workers and the competition for these scarce visas .

as of november 1 , 2009 , there were 3,499,964 employment - based lprs visa applications pending .

appendix a. consular databases for screening consular officers use the consular consolidated database ( ccd ) to screen visa applicants .

records of all visa applications are now automated in the ccd , with some records dating back to the mid - 1990s .

since february 2001 , the ccd has stored photographs of all visa applicants in electronic form , and more recently the ccd has begun storing 10-finger scans .

in addition to indicating the outcome of any prior visa application of the alien in the ccd and comments by consular officers , the system links with other databases to flag problems that may have an impact on the issuance of the visa .

these databases linked with ccd include dhs's automated biometric identification system ( ident ) and fbi's integrated automated fingerprint identification system ( iafis ) results , and supporting documents .

the ccd also links to the dhs's traveler enforcement compliance system ( tecs ) for use by cbp officers at ports of entry .

a limited number of consular officers have recently been granted access to dhs'arrival departure information system ( adis ) .

adis tracks foreign nationals' entries into and most exits out of the united states .

dos credits access to adis with its ability to identify previously undetected cases of illegal overstays in the united states .

for some years , consular officers have been required to check the background of all aliens in the "lookout" databases , specifically the consular lookout and support system ( class ) database , which contained over 26 million records in 2009 .

according to janice jacobs , assistant secretary of state for consular affairs , the class database grew by approximately 400% after september 11 , 2001 .

this increase in the quantity and quality of class records is largely the result of improved data sharing between the department of state and the law enforcement and intelligence communities .

in 2001 , only 25 percent of records in class came from other government agencies .

now , almost 70 percent of class records come from other agencies .

the security advisory opinion ( sao ) system requires a consular officer abroad to refer selected visa cases for greater review by intelligence and law enforcement agencies .

the current interagency procedures for alerting officials about foreign nationals who may be suspected terrorists , referred to in state department nomenclature as visa viper , began after the 1993 world trade center bombing and were institutionalized by enactment of the enhanced border security and visa entry reform act of 2002 .

if consular officials receive information about a foreign national that causes concern , they send a visa viper cable ( which is a dedicated and secure communication ) to the nctc .

in 2009 , consular posts sent approximately 3,000 visa viper communications to nctc .

in a similar set of sao procedures , consular officers send suspect names , identified by law enforcement and intelligence information ( originally certain visa applicants from 26 predominantly muslim countries ) , to the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) for a name check program called visa condor .

there is also the "terrorist exclusion list" ( tel ) , which lists organizations designated as terrorist - supporting and includes the names of individuals associated with these organizations .

appendix b .

exceptions to the visa requirements not all aliens are required to have a visa to visit the united states .

indeed , most visitors enter the united states without nonimmigrant visas through the visa waiver program ( vwp ) .

this provision of the ina allows the visa documentary requirements to be waived for aliens coming as visitors from 35 countries ( eg , australia , france , germany , italy , japan , new zealand , and switzerland ) .

thus , visitors from these countries are not required to obtain a visa from a u.s. consulate abroad .

since aliens entering through vwp do not have visas , cbp inspectors at the port of entry are responsible for performing the background checks and making the determination of whether the alien is admissible .

p.l .

110-53 created a waiver allowing the secretary of homeland security ( secretary ) to admit countries with refusal rates under 10% to the vwp .

this waiver authority became available in october 2008 , when the secretary certified that ( 1 ) an air exit system was in place that verifies the departure of not less than 97% of foreign nationals that exit through u.s. airports , and ( 2 ) the electronic system for travel authorization ( esta ) was operational .

the esta is a system through which each foreign national electronically provides , in advance of travel , the biographical information necessary to check the relevant databases and "watch lists" to see whether the foreign national poses a law enforcement or security risk .

as in all vwp cases , cbp inspectors at the port of entry perform the initial admissibility screening .

in addition to the visa waiver program , a number of exceptions to documentary requirements for a visa have been established by law , treaty , or regulation .

the ina also authorizes the attorney general and the secretary of state acting jointly to waive the documentary requirements of ina §212 ( a ) ( 7 ) ( b ) ( i ) , including the passport requirement , on the basis of unforeseen emergency in individual cases .

in 2003 , the administration scaled back the circumstances in which the visa and passport requirements are waived .

in 2004 , congress enacted a provision , now known as the western hemisphere travel initiative , in 7209 of p.l .

108-458 , that affected all citizens and categories of individuals for whom documentation requirements had previously been waived under 212 ( d ) ( 4 ) ( b ) of ina .

the secretary of homeland security , in consultation with the secretary of state , was required to develop and implement a plan as expeditiously as possible to require a passport or other document , or combination of documents , "deemed by the secretary of homeland security to be sufficient to denote identity and citizenship," for all travelers entering the united states .

the law expressly states in 7209 ( c ) ( 2 ) that "the president may not exercise discretion under 215 ( b ) of such act to waive documentary requirements for u.s. citizens departing from or entering , or attempting to depart from or enter , the united states except — ( a ) where the secretary of homeland security determines that the alternative documentation that is the basis for the waiver of the documentary requirement is sufficient to denote identity and citizenship ; ( b ) in the case of an unforeseen emergency in individual cases ; or ( c ) in the case of humanitarian or national interest reasons in individual cases. .

