the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 , aca ) , as amended , includes provisions for the grandfathering of existing health insurance plans .

given that most americans had private health insurance coverage on the date of enactment of aca , most americans' health coverage was affected by the grandfathering provisions .

this report describes grandfathered plans and summarizes the aca insurance reforms that will affect such plans , including the requirements concerning medical loss ratios , dependent coverage , and preexisting health condition coverage .

it also discusses issues addressed during the regulation promulgation process , including the possible loss of grandfathering status .

in addition , the report describes analysis of the potential impact of the grandfathering regulations on existing health plans , and describes a sampling of comments submitted during the public comment period .

a grandfathered health plan is an existing group health plan or health insurance coverage ( including coverage from the individual health insurance market ) in which a person was enrolled on the date of aca's enactment .

therefore , as long as a person was enrolled in a health insurance plan on march 23 , 2010 , that plan has been grandfathered .

current enrollees in grandfathered health plans are allowed to re - enroll in that plan , even if renewal occurs after the date of aca enactment .

family members are allowed to enroll in the grandfathered plan , if such enrollment is permitted under the terms of the plan in effect on the date of enactment .

for grandfathered group plans , new employees ( and their families ) may enroll in such plans .

aca is silent on the question about which plan changes would lead to loss of grandfathered status .

the statutory language does not specify whether changes to covered benefits , cost - sharing requirements , actuarial value , or other plan features would be allowed under a grandfathered plan ( some , but not all , of these plan features are addressed in the regulation on grandfathered plans , as discussed below ) .

also , aca does not address instances when there are changes related to the insurance carrier offering the plan ( eg , new corporate owner ) , so it is not clear from the statutory language whether organizational changes would make grandfathered plans into new plans ( a change in issuer is addressed in the regulation , and later in an amendment to the regulation ) .

the only scenario that the statute specifies loss of grandfathered status is in the case of coverage provided under one or more collective bargaining agreements ( cbas ) .

health insurance provided under cbas that were in effect on the date of enactment is grandfathered until the termination date of the last agreement .

any amendment made to such coverage , solely for the purpose of conforming with aca requirements , will cause neither termination of an agreement nor loss of grandfathered status .

on june 17 , 2010 , the departments of health and human services , labor , and treasury ( "departments" ) issued interim final rules with request for comments regarding grandfathered plans .

the departments identified certain changes to benefits , cost - sharing , employer contributions , and access to coverage that would cause the loss of grandfathered status .

the rules also clarified the loss of grandfathered status in either of the following instances: a plan did not have continuous enrollment since enactment ( does not need to be the same enrollee ) , and termination of an existing collective bargaining agreement under which grandfathered health coverage was provided .

in addition , the rules include transitional rules , a statement regarding federal enforcement , and an estimate of the potential impact of grandfathering rules on group and individual health plans .

comments on the interim final rules were due august 16 , 2010 .

overall , the departments have existing authority ( under three relevant federal statutes ) to promulgate regulations with respect to health insurance market reforms , and issue amendments to such regulations .

moreover , the departments reserved the right to issue administrative guidance ( not in the form of regulation ) to "clarify or interpret the rules contained in these interim final regulations for maintaining grandfathered health plan status. .

nevertheless , the departments did not specify an exact timeline for either amendments to the interim final rules or administrative guidance .

the interim final rules identified certain changes that would cause a plan to lose grandfathered status .

some of the changes that would cause loss of grandfathered status relate to covered benefits , cost - sharing requirements , and employer contribution rates: "elimination of all or substantially all benefits to diagnose or treat a particular condition" ; "any increase … in a percentage cost - sharing requirement ( such as an individual's coinsurance requirement ) " ; "any increase in a fixed - amount cost - sharing requirement other than a copayment ( for example , deductible ) … [that] exceeds the maximum percentage increase" ( defined as medical inflation + 15% ) ; "any increase in a fixed - amount copayment … [that] exceeds the greater of: ( a ) an amount equal to $5 increased by medical inflation … ( that is , $5 times medical inflation , plus $5 ) , or , ( b ) the maximum percentage increase" ; any of the following changes regarding an employer's contribution towards premiums: ( a ) "employer or employee organization decreases its contribution rate based on cost of coverage … by more than 5 percentage points below the contribution rate for the coverage period that includes march 23 , 2010" or ( b ) "employer or employee organization decreases its contribution rate based on a formula … by more than 5 percent below the contribution rate for the coverage period that includes march 23 , 2010" ; and any of the following changes regarding annual dollar limits: ( a ) "a group health plan , or group health insurance coverage , that , on march 23 , 2010 , did not impose an overall annual or lifetime limit … [later] imposes an overall annual limit" ; ( b ) "a group health plan , or group health insurance coverage , that , on march 23 , 2010 , imposed an overall lifetime limit … but no overall annual limit … [later] adopts an overall annual limit at a dollar value that is lower than the dollar value of the lifetime limit on march 23 , 2010" ; or ( c ) "a group health plan , or group health insurance coverage , that , on march 23 , 2010 , imposed an overall annual limit … [later] decreases the dollar value of the annual limit…. .

the regulation also included "anti - abuse" rules that specified instances in which changes to employee access to coverage would cause loss of grandfathered status .

the rules specified that plans or coverage would cease to be grandfathered: "if the principal purpose of a merger , acquisition , or similar business restructuring is to cover new individuals under a grandfathered health plan" ; or if the following changes to the eligibility criteria were made: ( a ) "employees are transferred into the plan or health insurance coverage ( the transferee plan ) from a plan under which employees were covered on march 23 , 2010 ( the transferor plan ) " ; ( b ) "treating the transferee plan as if it were an amendment of the transferor plan" ; and c ) "there was no bona fide employment - based reason to transfer the employees…. .

 ( changing the cost or terms of coverage does not constitute a bona fide employment - based reason. ) .

the regulation provides some flexibility in allowing changes to be made to the terms of a plan or coverage after enactment which do not cause loss of grandfathered status .

such changes include the following: "changes effective after march 23 , 2010 pursuant to a legally binding contract entered into on or before march 23 , 2010" ; "changes effective after march 23 , 2010 pursuant to a filing on or before march 23 , 2010 with a state insurance department" ; "changes effective after march 23 , 2010 pursuant to written amendments to a plan that were adopted on or before march 23 , 2010" ; and "after march 23 , 2010 , a group health plan or health insurance issuer makes changes to the terms of the plan or health insurance coverage and the changes are adopted prior to june 14 , 2010 , … [but later] the changes are revoked or modified effective as of the first day of the first plan year ( in the individual market , policy year ) beginning on or after september 23 , 2010 , and the terms of the plan or health insurance coverage on that date , as modified , would not cause the plan or coverage to cease to be a grandfathered health plan…. .

with respect to enforcement of the grandfathering rules , the departments will consider "good - faith efforts to comply with a reasonable interpretation of the statutory requirements. .

as part of this consideration process , the departments may disregard plan and policy changes that only moderately exceed the changes that would lead to loss of grandfathered status , and are adopted before june 14 , 2010 .

moreover , in the preamble to the interim final rules , hhs stated that it will not enforce aca insurance reforms with respect to retiree - only coverage ( for additional information about the treatment of retiree health plans under aca , see the appendix ) .

the interim final rules include analysis of the potential impact of grandfathering rules on group health plans and coverage provided through the group and individual health insurance markets .

using data from an annual employer survey , the departments analyzed changes to employer - sponsored health insurance from 2008 to 2009 .

they then calculated the proportion of health plans that would lose grandfathered status if the same changes were made under grandfathering rules .

these calculations formed the mid - range estimates .

as indicated in table 1 , the departments estimated that half of all employer health plans would lose grandfathered status by 2013 , if employers did not change their behavior .

there is a notable difference among plans by firm size .

for large employer ( 100 or more employees ) plans , nearly half ( 45% ) would lose grandfathered status by 2013 , based on these estimates .

for small employer ( 3-99 employees ) plans , about two - thirds ( 66% ) would do so .

however , the departments acknowledged that employers may behave differently under grandfathering rules , either wanting to maintain grandfathered status or having other priorities that outweigh the desire to keep grandfathered status .

with these different scenarios in mind , the departments also calculated low - range and high - range estimates for plans losing grandfathered status .

for the individual health insurance market , the departments relied on existing studies that estimated 40% - 67% of individual policies are in effect for less than a year .

applying these same turnover rates under grandfathering rules , and assuming that some policies maintained for a longer period of time would eventually also lose grandfathered status , the departments estimated that the proportion of individual health plans losing grandfathered status would exceed the 40% - 67% range in a given year .

as mentioned previously , the issuance of the interim final rules included a public comment period that ended on august 16 , 2010 .

to date , well over 2,000 submissions have been posted on http: / / www.regulations.gov in response to this regulation .

while it is beyond the scope of this report to review and summarize all submissions , crs analyzed selected comments that reflect a range of perspectives: health plan , employer , consumer , and regulator .

issues that generated comments across the various perspectives include prescription drug formularies , provider networks , cost - sharing , plan design and funding , and the requirement to disclose certain information to plan participants and beneficiaries .

overall , the comments from health plans and employers argued for more flexibility in plan changes that would still allow the maintenance of grandfathered status .

in contrast , consumers generally supported the rules , but in some instances argued for restricting even further the changes that a grandfathered plan could make .

state regulators expressed views and made recommendations that spanned the different perspectives .

notably , across the comments , the assumption was that maintaining grandfathered status is desirable , so the commenter either wanted to be able to make more changes and still be grandfathered , or use the loss of grandfathered status to discourage changes .

plans and employers recommended that changes to prescription drug formularies and provider networks be allowed , in order for coverage to adopt innovation , promote high - quality care , and keep current with a dynamic health care marketplace .

consumers , however , supported the loss of grandfathered status with changes in formularies and networks that negatively affected access to care .

regulators expressed views on both sides of this issue .

for example , one state regulator said that a significant change in the provider network should lead to loss of grandfathered status , while another stated that allowance should be given to a dynamic market where providers enter and exit regularly .

plans and employers recommended more flexibility with changes to cost - sharing that would be allowed .

some suggested that medical inflation was not an appropriate measure , and suggested a standard based on actuarial value .

plans and employers also argued for greater flexibility in general , whether it was plan options , funding of coverage , issuer of coverage , employer contributions , or other features .

consumers supported the grandfathering rules with respect to cost - sharing and plan structure .

in specific instances , consumers identified other cost - sharing changes ( eg , visit limits ) that should lead to loss of grandfathering status , as well as recommended further clarification of the cost - sharing rules .

in keeping with this perspective , consumers generally supported the regulations regarding changes to issuer , employer contributions , and overall plan design .

state regulators , again , expressed different views on these issues ; for instance , one state recommended more flexibility in the cost - sharing rules , while another state recommended that prescription drug copayments be added to the rules .

the same range of concerns and recommendations applied to the requirement to provide enrollees with health plan information , including whether their plan has been grandfathered .

health plans and employers uniformly argued that the notice be issued less frequently and the information streamlined , to minimize the burden and cost .

consumers argued for more information to be included in the notice , specifically which insurance reforms do and do not apply to grandfathered plans .

regulators expressed both of these views .

on november 17 , 2010 , the departments published an amendment to the interim final rules on grandfathered health plans .

after review of the comments concerning the link between a change in health insurance coverage to loss of grandfathered status , the departments amended the rules to allow group health plans to "enter into a new policy , certificate , or contract of insurance" and maintain grandfathered status .

this amendment would allow , for example , an employer plan that currently provides health coverage through insurance carrier a to get coverage through insurance carrier b , and still be considered a grandfathered plan ( provided that there is no other change to the plan that would cause loss of grandfathered status ) .

this amendment included a comment period that ended on december 17 , 2010 .

whether retiree health benefits are subject to aca depends , in part , on the population that is eligible for the health benefits .

generally , retiree health benefits may be offered under a plan that is separate from health benefits offered to current employees ( retiree - only plans ) .

or retiree health benefits may be offered through the same plan offered to current employees ; an example of this is what is offered through the federal employees health benefits plans ( fehbp ) , which covers both retirees and workers under the same plans .

plans that cover workers must comply with the relevant aca provisions that impact employer - provided insurance ( such as the dependent coverage requirements ) .

therefore , if the retiree coverage is offered through the same plan offered to current employees , then those plans , by default , must comply with the same provisions .

alternatively , if the retiree coverage is offered through retiree - only plans , then such plans may ( or may not ) be subject to aca's insurance reforms .

retiree - only plans may not have to comply with aca's insurance provisions: the authority to regulate employer - provided health benefits , including retiree health benefits , rests with the federal government .

aca's insurance reforms are examples of the federal regulation of employer - provided health benefits .

however , states are the primary enforcers of health insurance requirements , even post - aca .

therefore , the states have the authority to enforce aca's insurance reforms on retiree health plans offered through state - licensed insurance companies .

 ( note: self - insured plans are not offered through state - licensed insurers , so they generally are not subject to state law or regulations .

self - insured plans are subject to federal standards. ) .

each state will decide whether it will actively enforce the aca insurance reforms on retiree plans .

for states that do not adequately enforce applicable health insurance requirements , the enforcement responsibility typically falls back to the federal government .

however , hhs has stated that it will not enforce aca insurance reforms with respect to retiree - only coverage .

this statement was made in the preamble to the interim final rules regarding grandfathered plans .

in other words , at this time , there is no federal role in enforcing the aca insurance reforms on retiree - only plans .

however , given the administration's aforementioned authority to promulgate regulations and issue administrative guidance relating to federal health insurance standards , it is possible that the administration may reconsider its position on enforcement .

the federal exemption for retiree - only health plans is not a new exemption .

retiree - only health plans have been exempt from federal health insurance requirements since enactment of the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 .

in the preamble to the interim final rules regarding grandfathered plans , hhs indicates that this exemption still applies .

