many governments acknowledge that environmental degradation and climate change pose international and trans - boundary risks to human populations , economies , and ecosystems that could result in a worsening of poverty , social tensions , and political stability .

to confront these global challenges , countries have negotiated various international agreements to protect the environment , reduce pollution , conserve natural resources , and promote sustainable growth .

while some observers have called upon developed countries to take the lead in addressing these issues , efforts are unlikely to be sufficient without similar measures being implemented in developing countries .

developing countries , however , focused on poverty reduction and economic growth , may not have the financial resources , technological know - how , or institutional capacity to deploy such measures .

therefore , international support for these areas has remained the principal method for governments to assist developing country action on global environmental problems .

the united states and other industrialized countries have committed to financial assistance for environmental initiatives through several multilateral agreements ( eg , the montreal protocol ( 1987 ) , the united nations framework convention on climate change ( 1992 ) , united nations convention to combat desertification ( 1994 ) , and the copenhagen accord ( 2009 ) ) .

international financial assistance takes many forms , from fiscal transfers to market transactions , and includes foreign direct investment ( fdi ) , bilateral overseas development assistance ( oda ) , and contributions to multilateral development banks ( mdbs ) and other international financial institutions ( ifis ) , as well as the offering of export credits , loan guarantees , and insurance products .

error ! .

reference source not found .

outlines recent u.s. financial support for multilateral environmental initiatives .

congress is responsible for several activities in this regard , including ( 1 ) authorizing periodic appropriations for u.s. financial contributions to the institutions , and ( 2 ) overseeing u.s. involvement in the programs .

issues of congressional interest include the overall development assistance strategy of the united states , u.s. leadership in global environmental and economic affairs , and u.s. commercial interests in trade and investment .

as congress considers potential authorizations and / or appropriations for initiatives administered through the department of state , the department of the treasury , and other agencies with international programs , it may have questions concerning the direction , efficiency , and effectiveness of current bilateral and multilateral programs .

this report provides an overview of one of the oldest , largest , and most comprehensive multilateral programs to date — the global environment facility ( gef ) — and analyzes its structure , funding , and objectives in light of the many challenges within the contemporary landscape of global environmental finance .

the global environment facility ( gef ) is an independent and international financial organization that provides grants , promotes cooperation , and fosters actions in developing countries to protect the global environment .

established in 1991 , it unites 182 member governments and partners with international institutions , nongovernmental organizations , and the private sector to assist developing countries with environmental projects related to six areas: biodiversity , climate change , international waters , the ozone layer , land degradation , and persistent organic pollutants ( pops ) .

gef receives funding from multiple donor countries — including the united states — and provides grants to cover the additional or "incremental" costs associated with transforming a project with national benefits into one with global environmental benefits ( eg , choosing solar energy technology over coal technology meets the same national development goal of power generation but is more costly , excluding long - term environmental externalities ; gef grants aim to cover the difference or "increment" between a less costly , more polluting option and a costlier , more environmentally sound option ) .

in this way , gef funding is structured to "supplement" base project funding and provide for the environmental components in national development agendas .

since its inception , gef has allocated $11.5 billion — supplemented by more than $57 billion in co - financing — for more than 3,200 projects in over 165 countries .

each year , billions of dollars in environmental aid flow from developed country governments — including the united states — to developing ones .

gef is one mechanism in the larger network of international programs designed to address environmental issues .

while the efficiency and the effectiveness of these programs are of concern to donor country governments , a full analysis of the purposes , intents , results , and consequences behind these financial flows has yet to be conducted .

international relations , comparative politics , and developmental economics can often collide with environmental agendas .

critics contend that the existing system has had limited impact in addressing major environmental concerns — specifically climate change and tropical deforestation — and has been unsuccessful in delivering global transformational change .

a desire to achieve more immediate impacts has led to a restructuring of the multilateral development banks' role in environmental finance and the introduction of many new bilateral and multilateral funding initiatives .

the effectiveness of gef depends on how the fund addresses its programmatic issues , reacts to recent developments in the financial landscape , and responds to emerging opportunities .

the future of gef remains in the hands of the donor countries that can choose to broaden the mandate and strengthen its institutional arrangements or to reduce and replace it by other bilateral or multilateral funding mechanisms .

the following section investigates some of the current strengths and challenges facing gef and summarizes some of the responses initiated by the program .

rise of climate change issues and funding: the past decade has seen a rise in the significance of global environmental issues — particularly climate change — on the political agendas of many countries .

proposed policies have not only attempted to address the environmental implications of greenhouse gas mitigation and climate change adaptation , but have become linked to energy and infrastructure issues through international economic , trade , and geo - political concerns .

to address these issues , governments have begun to incorporate many global environmental objectives into their sustainable growth and development strategies .

funding for these activities has increased , and various institutional responses for this extensive portfolio are under consideration .

some critics contend that existing environmental funds ( eg , gef ) are unsatisfactory because they do not have experience managing investments of this scope .

the changing role of multilateral development banks in environmental funding: multilateral development banks ( mdbs ) are key actors in the global system of environmental financing .

as commercial lending institutions , some have argued that they dispense funds more efficiently than many institutional programs such as gef ; but as primary mechanisms for economic development , their past environmental lending practices have produced perceived conflicts of interest .

objectives began to shift in 2005 when mdbs were encouraged by the g - 8 leaders to play a more leading role in sustainable development and environmentally friendly technologies .

since this time , mdbs have launched many new initiatives to address the environment , including efforts to ( 1 ) account for ghg emissions and improve energy efficiency ; ( 2 ) support renewable energy ; ( 3 ) manage forests sustainably ; ( 4 ) promote carbon finance ; and ( 5 ) adapt to climate change .

gef programs now find themselves in competition with many of the new initiatives in mdb portfolios .

increase in new bilateral , multilateral , and private funding mechanisms: many donor governments perceive that the existing environmental finance system has not produced satisfactory results .

in searching for new and effective approaches to environmental funding , donors have sought options that can be organized quickly , administered directly , and be demonstrated to produce a more significant impact on the environment .

many have turned to highly specified multilateral programs , bilateral or even private sector measures to accomplish these aims , and no fewer than 15 environmental finance mechanisms have been announced since 2007 .

gef is in competition with many of these new initiatives for a share of environmental funding .

low level of funding by donor countries: donor countries never intended gef to cover all the financing needed to achieve developmental objectives .

rather , it was designed to be a catalyst for additional measures to address global environmental problems .

as such , historical funding provided by donor countries was never at the level required to produce significant progress in reversing global threats .

this experience has demonstrated that the initial assumptions underlying gef — that relatively small amounts of incremental grant financing could leverage multilateral investment for transformational change — may be flawed .

limits of grant - based instruments: gef was set up mostly to finance grants .

grants have proven to be inefficient in many development contexts given the greater leveraging and enhanced financial sustainability obtained from loan - based instruments .

such loans also provide reflows which can be lent again .

difficulties in defining "incremental" and "additional": as stipulated in the "gef instrument," grants cover the "incremental" or "additional" cost of "transforming a project with national benefits into one with global environmental benefits. .

incremental cost calculations have also been used as preference in project selection .

historically , gef's implementing agencies have had difficulty producing a coherent methodology for calculating incremental cost , slowing the rate of project development .

furthermore , countries continue to argue over the requirements of additionality ( i.e. , whether or not the global environmental elements of a project would have taken place in the absence of gef funding ) .

difficulties with adaptation: gef was established to finance global environmental benefits , which has made it difficult to justify gef financing of climate change adaptation projects , which moreover provide local benefits .

inefficient procedures and legal status: gef's two - layer structure means that all funding must be approved twice ( by gef and the relevant gef agency ) , leading to inefficiencies .

gef's lack of legal status ( the trust is held by the world bank ) prevents it from disbursing funding directly to countries with a one - step approval process .

slowness of gef project initiation and implementation: since its inception , most note that gef's project approval process has been long and complex .

a 2006 internal report found a 66-month lapse between entry of a concept into the project pipeline and its initiation .

significant effort has been exerted to reduce the duration of the approval process , and the interval currently stands at 16 to 22 months .

bureaucratic structures , work program frequencies , council deliberations , and consensus politics have all factored into delays .

lack of strategic approach: historically , gef has adhered to a project - by - project approach to allocating funds , wherein over 95% of pledges have been allocated to individual countries and less than 5% have been set aside for regional or global programs .

the dynamic assumes that ongoing negotiations and incremental adjustments could foster transformational change in economies over time .

while a project - by - project approach has allowed gef to fulfill the mandates of many of its conventions , large - scale environmental issues such as climate change and biodiversity may demand more strategic and programmatic funding modalities .

unsuccessful history of leveraging the private sector: while gef has long recognized a need to mobilize investment resources in the private sector , successful collaboration may require a degree of experience and commitment that gef cannot achieve under its existing structure .

the length and uncertainty inherent in the gef project cycle may make participation less attractive to the private sector , and the organization's emphasis on government entities at the expense of forming relationships with investors and manufacturers may serve as a further impediment .

during the 2006 replenishment meetings , gef worked to address many of its program deficiencies .

the council aimed to streamline costs and management fees , ensure project quality upon proposal , and reduce the length of the project pipeline .

a sustainability compact was enacted that would oversee several issues , including ( 1 ) the shift away from a project - oriented approach to a strategic and programmatic one ; ( 2 ) a concentration on financing pre - market innovation in an attempt to leverage private capital ; ( 3 ) a heightened dedication to transparency , accessibility , and equitability ; and ( 4 ) a renewed focus on country - driven ownership through the implementation of a resource allocation framework ( raf ) wherein funding is determined by a country's potential to generate global environmental benefits and its capacity to successfully implement gef projects .

further , in 2007 , gef initiated a pilot public - private partnership ( ppp ) initiative called the "earth fund" to enhance engagement with the private sector .

internal assessment of these reforms has shown promise .

meetings leading up to the fifth replenishment of gef in 2010 saw the development of policy recommendations along two lines: 1 .

enhancing country ownership: a key finding in gef's recent performance evaluation was the relationship between country - driven strategic development and project success rate .

recommendations to strengthen country ownership include ( 1 ) reforming in - country corporate programs to include greater project portfolio identification and enhanced stakeholder coordination , ( 2 ) developing a more flexible and transparent resource allocation framework , and ( 3 ) broadening access to the gef partnership to include national development agencies in developing countries .

2 .

improving the effectiveness and efficiency of gef partnerships: recommendations to strengthen gef partnerships include ( 1 ) enhancing accountability to the conventions and protocols ; ( 2 ) streamlining the project cycle and refining the programmatic approach ; ( 3 ) enhancing engagement with the private sector ; ( 4 ) implementing the results - based management framework ; ( 5 ) clarifying the roles and responsibilities of gef entities , agencies , and conventions ; and ( 6 ) enhancing engagement with civil society organizations .

meetings for the sixth replenishment of gef began on april 3 , 2013 , and continue on september 10 , 2013 .

policy recommendations are currently under development .

