organized retail crime ( orc ) , often referred to as organized retail theft , typically refers to large - scale retail theft and fraud by organized groups of professional shoplifters , or "boosters. .

it is an umbrella term encompassing a variety of retail crimes , including theft , gift card fraud , receipt fraud , ticket switching , and cargo theft , just to name a few .

stolen and fraudulently obtained goods may be taken not only from retailers , but from manufacturers and distributors as well .

the organized crime rings resell this illegally acquired merchandise via a variety of "fencing" operations such as flea markets , swap meets , pawn shops , and online marketplaces ; these goods are sold to both individual buyers as well as retailers — potentially the very retailers from where the merchandise was originally stolen .

orc differs fundamentally from shoplifting in that amateur shoplifters tend to steal merchandise for personal consumption .

boosters , on the other hand , are professional thieves who make money by stealing merchandise from retail and other venues and reselling it to fences who in turn sell the goods — through legal or illegal economic outlets — for a fraction of the retail cost .

organized retail crime exposes the united states to economic , public health , and domestic security dangers .

it is a national problem , not only for retailers , but for manufacturers , consumers , taxpayers , and the states as well .

according to one industry survey , about 96% of retailers surveyed in 2012 reported having been victimized by orc in the previous 12 months .

this is an increase from the about 90% that reported victimization in 2010 and the nearly 95% that reported victimization in 2011 .

estimates of retail losses to orc range from as low as $15 billion to as high as $37 billion annually .

and this is the loss to retailers alone .

the monetary loss , however , extends beyond the retail industry to the taxpayers and states .

consumers pay for these losses in the form of higher prices on goods , and states lose the tax revenue that would otherwise be generated from the sale of these goods by legitimate retailers .

in addition to the economic impact of orc , the theft and resale of stolen consumable or health and beauty products , such as infant formula , may pose safety risks to individuals purchasing such goods from orc fences .

this is because such products may have been repackaged , relabeled , subjected to altered expiration dates , or stored improperly before being reentered into commerce .

in addition , industry experts , law enforcement , and policy makers have expressed concern about the possibility that proceeds from orc may be used to fund terrorist activities .

in particular , federal law enforcement has reputedly traced the illicit proceeds from the theft and resale of infant formula to terrorist organizations and insurgent groups , including hamas and hezbollah .

combating retail theft has traditionally been handled by state law enforcement under state criminal laws .

some , however , have begun to question whether state laws — which vary in the quantity of monetary losses that constitute major theft — are adequate to combat orc .

while many agree that orc is a national problem , there is debate over the federal government's role in deterring orc and sanctioning various actors that may be involved in committing or aiding these crimes .

one policy issue facing congress is whether criminalizing organized retail crime in the u.s. code would allow for more effective investigation and prosecution of these criminals .

another related issue that congress may wish to consider is whether regulating resale marketplaces ( online markets , in particular ) , to require such entities to increase information sharing with retailers and law enforcement , would strengthen investigations and prosecutions of orc as well as decrease the prevalence of retail thieves relying on legitimate online marketplaces to fence stolen goods .

this report provides an overview of organized retail crime rings , their operations , and goods targeted .

it then examines the domestic impact of orc in the arenas of the economy , public health and safety , and domestic security .

the report also outlines current efforts by retailers , resale markets , and the federal government to combat orc .

it then analyzes various policy issues that congress may wish to consider , including whether current federal resources provided for the investigation of orc are adequate , whether to amend the u.s. code to criminalize orc , and whether to regulate resale marketplaces that may be utilized as fences for criminals to sell stolen goods .

the concept of organized retail crime tends to be discussed in terms of criminal networks engaged in large - scale theft .

descriptions of orc also generally entail criminals fraudulently obtaining goods in quantities beyond what would normally be intended for personal consumption ; reselling these ill - gotten goods ; receiving , concealing , transporting , or disposing of these goods ; or coordinating individuals to commit these retail crimes .

there is a lack of consensus , however , on the specific activities — particularly of boosters — that constitute orc .

on the one hand , most agree that orc involves store theft or fraud schemes designed to obtain retail merchandise at a cost significantly below retail value or for free .

however , some also include specific activities , such as cargo theft , in the definition of orc , while others either omit certain activities or do not specify the range of orc activities .

for example , federal law enforcement agencies , such as the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , tend to constrain discussions of orc to situations in which boosters steal merchandise from retail establishments and resell it for profit .

similarly , retail organizations have generally focused on store theft when describing the problem of orc .

one possible explanation for this focus on store theft is that , although orc may encompass multiple activities , including store theft and cargo theft , store theft has been cited as the most common .

because retail organizations , scholars , industry experts , and law enforcement have provided varying definitions of orc , this complicates analysts' abilities to evaluate the exact impact of orc .

as mentioned , organized retail crime rings generally include individuals serving in one of two main capacities: boosters or fences .

generally , boosters act as professional shoplifters who steal or illegally obtain merchandise .

fences pay boosters for stolen goods and then resell them to witting or unwitting consumers and businesses .

boosters work either alone or in groups to steal goods that they will later sell to fences for about 10% to 25% of the ticket value .

they often carry "fence sheets," or shopping lists provided to boosters by fences .

these shopping lists itemize the goods fences desire , the amounts fences will pay for each item , and retail store locations where each item may be .

in some cases , boosters may travel across state lines to target specific establishments in multiple states .

consequently , many boosters will at some point transport stolen merchandise across state lines , either when shipping stolen goods to a fence or when physically delivering merchandise to a fence after stealing it in another state .

fencing operations can be very straightforward or can involve multiple stages and a degree of operational sophistication .

most stolen merchandise is sold to a low - level fence , commonly called a "street fence. .

street fences will either sell these goods directly to the public — through flea markets , swap meets , or the internet — or will sell the merchandise to mid - level fences who run "cleaning operations. .

cleaning operations remove security tags and store labels as well as repackage stolen goods so they appear as though they came directly from the manufacturer .

a notable concern for public health and safety , this cleaning process may even involve changing the expiration date on perishable goods .

the "clean" goods may then be sold to the public or to higher - level fences , who often operate illegitimate wholesale businesses .

through these businesses , the fences can supply merchandise to retailers , often mixing stolen merchandise with legitimate goods .

the illegal activities of fences may be of concern for policy makers and federal law enforcement because — like boosters — fences' activities may cross state lines .

they may , for instance , purchase stolen goods from boosters in one state and send them to another state to be cleaned ; they may then sell this "clean" merchandise to illegitimate wholesalers in another state .

in addition , fences selling goods via online marketplaces may ship stolen goods across state or national lines .

at first glance , the impact of organized retail crime may appear to be limited to monetary losses to retailers .

the economic impact , however , extends beyond the manufacturing and retail industry and affects costs incurred by consumers and taxes lost by the states .

beyond the economic impact , the theft of stolen consumable or health and beauty products may pose safety risks to individuals purchasing such goods from orc fences .

in addition , some industry experts and policy makers have expressed concern about the possibility that proceeds from orc may be used to fund terrorist activities .

when debating the federal government's role in combating organized retail crime , including sanctioning various actors that may be involved in committing or aiding these crimes , there are several issues that policy makers may consider .

one is whether retailers are taking sufficient preventive measures to prevent retail theft .

another issue is whether criminalizing organized retail crime at the federal level would allow for more effective investigation and prosecution of these criminals .

yet another issue is whether regulating online marketplaces to require that such entities increase information sharing with retailers and law enforcement would improve investigations and prosecutions of orc as well as decrease the prevalence of retail thieves fencing stolen goods via legitimate online marketplaces .

the first line of defense against organized retail crime is preventing the crimes from ever occurring .

this involves security at the manufacturing sites , distribution centers , retail stores , and in the transportation throughout this supply chain .

the nrss presents trends in retail industry loss prevention measures since 1991 .

the 2010 nrss reports that retailers spent 0.46% of annual sales on loss prevention measures such as contract services , security equipment , and loss prevention personnel .

this includes about 33 loss prevention employees for every $100 million in annual sales — nearly half of the 70 employees reported in the 2009 survey and less than one - quarter of the 170 employees reported in the 2008 survey .

as mentioned , prior to 2004 , the percent of annual sales spent on loss prevention was consistently above 0.50% , but that amount then decreased through 2008 before rising to 0.46% in 2010 .

some experts explained this trend in loss prevention spending as a reaction to changes in overall inventory shrinkage .

also trending along with the increase in loss prevention budgets , more than 66% of retailers surveyed in 2012 reported an increase in orc activity — an increase over the 64% who reported an increase in 2011 .

it is unknown , however , whether retailers are making changes to their loss prevention budgets and funding allocation based on overall inventory shrinkage or based on specific threats such as orc .

for multiple reasons , it is difficult to empirically determine whether retailers are doing "enough" to combat orc .

for one , retailers typically try to strike a balance between protecting their merchandise from thieves and creating an environment where honest consumers can easily find and purchase the desired products .

if retailers take every precaution to lock up "hot" products and install security measures that make it difficult for consumers to get the desired product in a hassle - free and timely fashion , they may risk losing customers to competitors who provide a more relaxed shopping environment .

if , on the other hand , retailers err on the side of being "customer friendly" by keeping products out in the open , they may open themselves up to thieves .

there are several policy options that may enhance retailers' abilities to combat orc that policy makers may consider .

in the literature , there appears to be a lack of research on the effectiveness of various loss prevention strategies on combating retail theft in general and orc in particular .

understanding the strategies that have proven to reduce retail theft related to orc may enhance retailers' abilities to secure their merchandise .

consequently , one option may be for congress to commission a national study to examine promising loss prevention strategies .

a second option may be for congress to consider establishing a grant program that would provide funding to retailers to install or upgrade security systems and loss prevention measures in their stores .

congress could require that retailers comply with various benchmarks in order to receive grant funding ; for instance , a grant program may require that retailers work with law enforcement to identify and apprehend members of orc rings .

another potential requirement could be that retailers join lerpnet in order to be eligible for grant funding .

yet another eligibility requirement could be that retailers provide matching loss prevention funds .

combating retail theft has primarily been handled by state law enforcement under state criminal laws .

in particular , major theft laws are the statutes that states have relied upon most to investigate and prosecute orc .

these major theft laws , however , vary from state to state with respect to the monetary threshold that constitutes major theft .

while some states , such as new jersey and massachusetts , have relatively low thresholds , other states , such as wisconsin and pennsylvania , have relatively higher thresholds .

over one - third of states have felony theft thresholds that meet or exceed $1,000 , and a number of states have already passed legislation criminalizing orc .

there is currently no federal law specifically prohibiting organized retail crime as such .

there are , however , provisions in the u.s. code that federal law enforcement uses to bring forth cases against orc rings .

examples of such provisions include 18 u.s.c .

section 1956 , "laundering of monetary instruments" ; 18 u.s.c .

section 1957 , "engaging in monetary transactions in property derived from specified unlawful activity" ; 18 u.s.c. , chapter 96 , the racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations ( rico ) provisions ; 18 u.s.c .

section 2314 , "transportation of stolen goods , securities , moneys , fraudulent state tax stamps , or articles used in counterfeiting" ; and 18 u.s.c .

section 2315 , "sale or receipt of stolen goods , securities , moneys , or fraudulent state tax stamps. .

current federal law addressing theft does not criminalize the theft itself , but rather prohibits the transportation of stolen goods across state lines as well as the sale or receipt of these goods .

for these activities to be considered federal crimes , the monetary value of the stolen goods must meet or exceed $5,000 .

when debating the federal government's role in combating organized retail crime , congress may consider whether current law should be amended to create new provisions that would provide penalties for orc .

proponents of such legislation argue that criminalizing orc may benefit law enforcement in several ways , including ( 1 ) illuminating the growing problem of orc and ( 2 ) providing a statutory framework for tracking orc case data rather than lumping these cases into other categories for statistical purposes .

opponents of legislation criminalizing orc argue that already existing statutes allow for effective investigation and prosecution of orc ( as outlined above ) and that creating a separate provision for orc would be redundant .

representatives from federal law enforcement agencies have provided congressional testimony indicating that they indeed have sufficient laws and procedural tools to investigate orc .

as mentioned , impediments to investigating and prosecuting these cases may come more from a lack of resources than from a need for better investigative and prosecutorial tools .

another policy option that congress may consider could be enacting provisions that would lower the monetary threshold from $5,000 for the sale , receipt , or transportation of stolen goods across state lines ( 18 u.s.c .

§2314 and 18 u.s.c .

§2315 ) .

savvy criminals know each state's felony theft level and steal merchandise valuing just under this level so as to avoid state felony charges if caught .

federal investigators and prosecutors may rely upon the sum total of merchandise stolen in various states and moved across state lines in order to prosecute these thieves .

the average value of goods transported , sold , or received by members of orc rings is currently unknown .

if this value were under the current federal threshold of $5,000 , the data may support legislation decreasing the threshold .

one issue that congress may face if it amends the $5,000 limit for the sale , receipt , or transportation of stolen goods across state lines may be whether such a policy shift would also open the doors for the federal government to prosecute individuals not involved in orc rings .

if congress determines that there are sufficient investigative and prosecutorial tools available for law enforcement to combat orc , one issue that policy makers may face is whether to provide dedicated funding to law enforcement to enhance their ability to take on more orc cases .

law enforcement has suggested that although the investigative tools are available , it may prioritize and utilize resources in higher - priority areas — such as counterterrorism and fraud investigations .

therefore , another policy option may be to provide directed resources to federal law enforcement to investigate and prosecute orc cases .

as mentioned , organized retail criminals use both physical and online marketplaces as fences to sell stolen goods .

with an increasingly globalized society , these criminals take advantage of the internet for their illegal activities .

in an effort to curb sales of stolen goods online , one policy option that congress may consider is increased regulation of certain actions on the internet .

in the past , congress has regulated actions on the internet that involve interstate commerce .

for example , congress enacted legislation that prohibited unlawful internet gambling .

among other things , this legislation also included provisions holding certain computer services , internet websites , telecommunications services , and financial transaction providers liable for illegal gambling if they aid or have knowledge of the internet gambling .

along the same lines , congress may consider whether to regulate online auction websites to require them to document , retain , and disclose — to designated law enforcement — information about specified sellers , including those suspected of fencing stolen goods .

proponents of such regulation argue that this could better enable law enforcement to track suspected fences and that it may act as a deterrent , discouraging potential thieves from fencing stolen goods .

opponents of this type of regulation argue that online marketplaces already share such information because it is in their best interests to prevent the sale of stolen goods , promote the business of legitimate sellers , and ensure that customers receive genuine and safe products .

another policy option that policy makers may consider is the regulation of physical marketplaces , such as flea markets .

one the one hand , some may argue that flea markets should be regulated by state laws because the face - to - face transactions at these markets do not directly involve interstate commerce .

others , however , may contend that the federal government could regulate the goods sold at flea markets because they were likely involved in interstate commerce before being sold at the market .

further , it could be argued that the federal government could direct this regulation toward the sale of certain , already - regulated products such as goods regulated by the food and drug administration ( fda ) under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act .

