multilateral development banks ( mdbs ) are international institutions that provide financial assistance , typically in the form of loans and grants , to developing countries in order to promote economic and social development .

the united states is a member and significant donor to five major mdbs .

these include the world bank and four smaller regional development banks: the african development bank ( afdb ) ; the asian development bank ( asdb ) ; the european bank for reconstruction and development ( ebrd ) ; and the inter - american development bank ( idb ) .

congress plays a critical role in shaping u.s. policy at the mdbs through funding and oversight of u.s. participation in the institutions .

this report provides an overview of the mdbs and highlights major issues for congress .

the first section discusses how the mdbs operate , including the history of the mdbs , their operations and organizational structure , and the effectiveness of mdb financial assistance .

the second section discusses the role of congress in the mdbs , including congressional legislation authorizing and appropriating u.s. contributions to the mdbs and congressional oversight of u.s. participation in the mdbs .

the third section discusses broad policy debates about the mdbs , including their effectiveness , the trade - offs between providing aid on a multilateral or bilateral basis , the changing landscape of multilateral aid , and u.s. commercial interests in the mdbs .

mdbs provide financial assistance to developing countries , typically in the form of loans and grants , for investment projects and policy - based loans .

project loans include large infrastructure projects , such as highways , power plants , port facilities , and dams , as well as social projects , including health and education initiatives .

policy - based loans provide governments with financing in exchange for agreement by the borrower country government that it will undertake particular policy reforms , such as the privatization of state - owned industries or reform in agriculture or electricity sector policies .

policy - based loans can also provide budgetary support to developing country governments .

in order for the disbursement of a policy - based loan to continue , the borrower must implement the specified economic or financial policies .

some have expressed concern over the increasing budgetary support provided to developing countries by the mdbs .

traditionally , this type of support has been provided by the international monetary fund ( imf ) .

most of the mdbs have two major funds , often called lending windows or lending facilities .

one type of lending window is primarily used to provide financial assistance on market - based terms , typically in the form of loans , but also through equity investments and loan guarantees .

non - concessional assistance is , depending on the mdb , extended to middle - income governments , some creditworthy low - income governments , and private - sector firms in developing countries .

the other type of lending window is used to provide financial assistance at below market - based terms ( concessional assistance ) , typically in the form of loans at below - market interest rates and grants , to governments of low - income countries .

in recent years , two mdbs ( the asdb and the idb ) have transferred concessional lending to their main , non - concessional lending facilities to increase their lending capacities .

congress plays an important role in authorizing and appropriating u.s. contributions to the mdbs and exercising oversight of u.s. participation in these institutions .

for more details on u.s. policymaking at the mdbs , see crs report r41537 , multilateral development banks: how the united states makes and implements policy , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

the united states has historically played a strong leadership role at the mdbs , including key roles in creating the institutions and shaping their policies and lending to developing countries .

under a number of administrations , the mdbs have been viewed as critical to promoting u.s. foreign policy , economic interests , and national security interests abroad , although various administrations have had different views on the appropriate level of u.s. funding for the mdbs and policy reforms to improve the effectiveness of the mdbs .

there are a number of mdb policy issues that congress may consider during the 115 th congress , particularly as it considers u.s. funding levels for the mdbs and confirmations for u.s. governors and executive directors at the mdbs .

some of these issues are discussed below .

u.s. funding for the mdbs may shift under president trump , who campaigned on an "america first" platform and has signaled a reorientation of u.s. foreign policy .

in march 2017 , the trump administration proposed cutting $650 million over three years compared to the commitments made under the obama administration .

in the fy2019 budget request , the trump administration requested a 20% cut ( $354 million ) from treasury's international programs , which includes the multilateral development banks , compared to the amount enacted in fy2017 .

the bulk of the treasury international programs request ( over 90% ) would fund u.s. commitments to concessional lending facilities at the mdbs .

the request would provide $1.1 billion to ida , compared to $1.2 billion in fy2017 .

it would also provide funding $47 million to the asdf and $171 million to the afdf , among other funding initiatives .

in april 2018 , the world bank members , including the united states , endorsed a capital increase for the ibrd , which would require congressional legislation and appropriations to implement .

this commitment is not reflected in the fy2019 budget request , but would require appropriations and authorization to implement .

congress sets u.s. fundi ng for the mdbs as part of the state and foreign o perations authorization and appropriations process .

there is a broad debate about the effectiveness of foreign aid , including the aid provided by the mdbs .

many studies of foreign aid effectiveness examine the effects of total foreign aid provided to developing countries , including both aid given directly by governments to developing countries ( bilateral aid ) and aid pooled by a multilateral institution from multiple donor countries and provided to developing countries ( multilateral aid ) .

the results of these studies are mixed , with conclusions ranging from ( a ) aid is ineffective at promoting economic growth ; ( b ) aid is effective at promoting economic growth ; and ( c ) aid is effective at promoting growth in some countries under specific circumstances ( such as when developing - country policies are strong ) .

the divergent results of these academic studies make it difficult to reach firm conclusions about the overall effectiveness of aid .

critics of the mdbs argue that they are international bureaucracies focused on getting money "out the door" to developing countries , rather than on delivering results in developing countries ; that the mdbs emphasize short - term outputs like reports and frameworks but do not engage in long - term activities like the evaluation of projects after they are completed ; and that they put enormous administrative demands on developing - country governments .

many of the mdbs were also created when developing countries had little access to private capital markets .

with the globalization and the integration of capital markets across countries , some analysts have expressed concerns that mdb financing might "crowd out" private - sector financing , which developing countries now generally have readily accessible .

some analysts have also raised questions about whether there is a clear division of labor among the mdbs .

proponents of the mdbs argue that , despite some flaws , such aid at its core serves vital economic and political functions .

with about 767 million people living on less than $1.90 a day in 2013 ( most recent estimate available ) , they argue that not providing assistance is simply not an option ; they argue it is the "right" thing to do and part of "the world's shared commitments to human dignity and survival. .

these proponents typically point to the use of foreign aid to provide basic necessities , such as food supplements , vaccines , nurses , and access to education , to the world's poorest countries , which may not otherwise be financed by private investors .

additionally , proponents of foreign aid argue that , even if foreign aid has not been effective at raising overall levels of economic growth , foreign aid has been successful in dramatically improving health and education in developing countries over the past four decades .

some analysts have also highlighted a number of reforms that they believe could increase the effectiveness of the mdbs .

for example , it has been proposed that the mdbs adopt more flexible financing arrangements , for example to allow crisis lending or lending at the subnational level , and more flexibility in providing concessional assistance to address poverty in middle - income countries .

there are also arguments that , as countries continue to develop , there need to be clearer guidelines on when countries should "graduate" from receiving concessional and / or non - concessional financial assistance from the mdbs .

there has been debate about whether u.s. policymakers should prioritize bilateral or multilateral aid .

bilateral aid gives donors more control over where the money goes and how the money is spent .

for example , donor countries may have more flexibility to allocate funds to countries that are of geopolitical strategic importance , but not facing the greatest development needs , than might be possible by providing aid through a multilateral organization .

by building a clear link between the donor country and the recipient country , bilateral aid may also garner more goodwill from the recipient country toward the donor than if the funds had been provided through a multilateral organization .

providing aid through multilateral organizations offers different benefits for donor countries .

by pooling the resources of several donors , multilateral organizations allow donors to share the cost of development projects ( often called burden - sharing ) .

additionally , donor countries may find it politically sensitive to attach policy reforms to loans or to enforce these policy reforms .

multilateral organizations can usefully serve as a scapegoat for imposing and enforcing conditionality that may be politically sensitive to attach to bilateral loans .

additionally , because mdbs can provide aid on a larger scale than many bilateral agencies , they can generate economies of scale in knowledge and lending .

data from the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) development assistance committee ( dac ) show that in 2017 , 14% of u.s. foreign aid disbursed to developing countries with the purpose of promoting economic and social development was provided through multilateral institutions , while 86% was provided bilaterally .

in recent years , several countries have taken steps to launch two new multilateral development banks .

first , brazil , russia , india , china , and south africa ( the brics countries ) signed an agreement in july 2014 to establish the new development bank ( ndb ) , often referred to as the "brics bank. .

the agreement outlines the bylaws of the bank and a commitment to a capital base of $100 billion .

headquartered in shanghai , the ndb was formally launched in july 2015 .

the brics leaders have emphasized that the bank's mission is to mobilize resources for infrastructure and sustainable development projects in brics and other emerging and developing economies .

second , china has led the creation of the asian infrastructure investment bank ( aiib ) .

launched in october 2014 , the aiib focuses on the development of infrastructure and other sectors in asia , including energy and power , transportation and telecommunications , rural infrastructure and agriculture development , water supply and sanitation , environmental protection , urban development , and logistics .

the aiib currently has 66 members , and 21 prospective members .

members include several advanced european and asian economies , such as france , germany , italy , the united kingdom , australia , new zealand , and south korea .

the united states and japan are not members .

the aiib's initial total capital is expected to be $100 billion .

these two institutions are the first major mdbs to be created in decades , and there is debate about how they will fit in with existing international financial institutions .

proponents of the new mdbs argue that the infrastructure and financing needs of developing countries are beyond what can be met by existing mdbs and private capital markets , and that new institutions to meet the financing needs of developing institutions should be welcomed .

proponents also argue that the new mdbs address the long - held frustrations of many emerging markets and developing countries that the governance of existing institutions , including the world bank and the imf , has not been reformed to reflect their growing importance in the global economy .

for example , the ndb has stressed that , unlike the world bank and the imf , each participant country will have equivalent voting rates and none of the countries will have veto power .

other analysts and policymakers have been more concerned about what the new mdbs could mean for the existing institutions and whether they will diminish the influence of existing institutions , where the united states for decades has held a powerful leadership .

they point to an already crowded landscape of mdbs , and express concerns that new mdbs could exacerbate existing concerns about mission creep and lack of clear division of labor among the mdbs .

some analysts have also raised questions about whether the new institutions will adopt the best practices on transparency , procurement , and environmental and social safeguards of the existing mdbs that have been developed over the past several decades .

some analysts have also raised questions about why many emerging markets are top recipients of non - concessional financial assistance from the world bank and regional development banks , if they have the resources to capitalize new mdbs .

the obama administration initially lobbied several key allies to refrain from joining the aiib .

ultimately , these lobbying efforts were largely unsuccessful , as several key allies in europe and asia , including the united kingdom and south korea , joined .

the tone of the obama administration shifted , most notably during chinese president xi's visit to washington in september 2015 when the white house emphasized that "the united states welcomes china's growing contributions to financing development and infrastructure in asia and beyond. .

during the visit , xi also reportedly committed that the aiib would abide by the highest international environmental and governance standards .

xi also pledged to increase china's financial contributions to the world bank and regional development banks , signaling its continuing commitment to existing institutions .

congress may want to exercise oversight of the trump administration's policy on and engagement with these new mdbs .

billions of dollars of contracts are awarded to private firms each year in order to acquire the goods and services necessary to implement projects financed by the mdbs .

mdb contracts are awarded through international competitive bidding processes , although most mdbs allow the borrowing country to give some preference to domestic firms in awarding contracts for mdb - financed projects in order to help spur development .

u.s. commercial interest in the mdbs has been and may continue to be a subject of congressional attention , particularly if the banks expand their lending capacity for infrastructure projects through the gcis .

one area of focus may be the foreign commercial service ( fcs ) representatives to the mdbs , who are responsible for protecting and promoting american commercial interests at the mdbs .

some in the business community are concerned about the impacts of possible budget cuts to the u.s. fcs , particularly if other countries are taking a stronger role in helping their businesses bid on projects financed by the mdbs .

