since early 2010 , the eurozone has been facing a major debt crisis .

the governments of several countries in the eurozone have accumulated what many consider to be unsustainable levels of government debt , and three — greece , ireland , and portugal — have turned to other european countries and the international monetary fund ( imf ) for loans in order to avoid defaulting on their debt .

the crisis now threatens to spread to italy and spain , respectively the third and fourth largest economies in the eurozone .

greece has been at the center of the eurozone debt crisis .

it has the highest levels of public debt in the eurozone , and one of the biggest budget deficits .

greece was the first eurozone member to come under intense market pressures and the first to turn to other eurozone member states and the imf for financial assistance .

over the past year , the imf , european officials , the european central bank ( ecb ) , and the greek government have undertaken substantial crisis response measures .

at the behest of european leaders in july 2011 , holders of greek bonds have also indicated that they will accept losses on their investments to alleviate greece's debt payments in the short - run .

if these plans are carried out , greece will be the first advanced economy to default in almost half a century .

the greek debt crisis is of continuing interest to the u.s. congress .

the united states and the european union ( eu ) have the largest economic relationship in the world , and there are concerns about how economic turmoil in greece and the eurozone more broadly could impact the u.s. economy .

there has been particular concern about the exposure of u.s. financial institutions to greece .

additionally , the united states has the largest financial commitment to the imf of all the imf members .

some members of congress have raised questions about whether greece's imf program is an appropriate use of imf resources .

these concerns have led to a number of congressional hearings and legislation in the 111 th and 112 th congresses .

this report explains the causes of the crisis , the policy responses to the crisis , and assesses crisis response measures to date .

it also highlights the implications of the greek crisis for the broader eurozone debt crisis and eu integration .

it concludes with an analysis of issues of particular interest to congress , including the impact of the greek debt crisis on the u.s. economy , the exposure of u.s. banks to greece and other distressed eurozone economies , and imf involvement in the crisis .

the greek government has a long history of problems with its public debt — it has spent more than half the years since 1832 , when it gained independence from the ottoman empire , in default .

economists point to several deeply entrenched features of the greek economy and greek society in general that have prevented sustained economic growth and created the conditions underlying the current crisis .

chief among these are pervasive state control of the economy , a large and inefficient public administration , endemic tax evasion , and widespread political clientelism ( see text box below ) .

an influx of capital at low interest rates during the 2000s and the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 further exacerbated these problems , straining public finances to an unsustainable degree .

european leaders , the imf , and the ecb agreed that an uncontrolled , disorderly default on greek debt would be extremely risky and should be avoided at all costs .

they feared that such a default could spark a major sell - off of bonds of other eurozone members with high debt levels and that european banks exposed to greece and other eurozone governments would not be able to weather losses on those investments .

fear of contagion and financial turmoil drove a major policy response by the europeans , the imf , the greek government , and central banks in may 2010 to avoid a greek default .

when greece again veered towards default more than a year later , a second crisis response was announced in the summer of 2011 .

to date , the policy responses have succeeded in avoiding a disorderly greek default .

they have been less successful in putting greece on a clear path to recovery and containing the crisis .

greece has a small economy , accounting for only 2.4% of total eurozone gdp , but the implications of its crisis are far - reaching .

fundamentally , greece's crisis has exposed some of the fears expressed by economists when the eurozone was created .

they worried about the tensions that could be created by a group of different countries sharing a common currency and monetary policy , while maintaining national fiscal policies .

greece's debt crisis showed that these concerns were valid and that european leaders and eu institutions were not prepared to swiftly respond to such a crisis .

the greece crisis has sparked larger discussions about how to resolve the tensions between a common monetary policy with national fiscal policies , while keeping the monetary union intact .

greece's crisis has also raised a number of more specific economic and political implications , detailed below: first , the policy responses to greece's debt crisis have set precedents for how the debt crises in other eurozone countries have been handled .

the original crisis response for greece focused on the provision of imf and european financial assistance , in combination with austerity and structural reforms .

this policy response was contentious and took weeks to negotiate .

when ireland and portugal needed assistance , however , their programs were easier to negotiate , because greece served as a template for designing the crisis response .

now that bondholders are being asked to share in the response to greece's crisis response by taking losses on their investments , markets are concerned that there will be losses on irish and portuguese bonds in the future .

european officials deny this to be the case .

second , greece's crisis has exacerbated concerns about the health of the fragile european financial sector .

several large european banks , such as bnp paribas , société générale , deutsche bank , unicredit , and intesa , are believed to be major private holders of greek bonds .

there have been continuing concerns about how these banks would be able to absorb losses on greek bonds should greece default or restructure its debt , particularly given widespread concerns that european banks may be undercapitalized .

specifically , there are concerns that the crisis could be transmitted through the european financial sector , triggering broader instability and requiring governments to recapitalize banks .

european officials conducted two rounds of "stress tests" on european banks in june 2010 and july 2011 .

these tests examined how well european banks could absorb losses on distressed eurozone bonds .

most banks performed well under the various scenarios laid out in the tests , but some questioned whether the tests were stringent enough .

third , greece's debt crisis has created new financial liabilities for other european countries .

eurozone countries have extended bilateral loans to greece , and made financial commitments to the broader european financial stability facility ( efsf ) .

if these financial commitments are called on , they could substantially raise the debt levels in eurozone countries , many of which are grappling with their own debt problems .

for example , france's total financial commitment to the rescue packages is 8% of gdp .

increasing the size of the efsf , as some argue is necessary to give it the firepower it needs to respond to a potential crisis in italy , for example , could increase france's commitments to 13% of gdp .

if these commitments were called upon , france's debt level could rise to above 100% of gdp .

some argue that these commitments explain , at least in part , why french bond spreads have started to widen .

fourth , the greek crisis has highlighted the policy constraints on members of the eurozone .

many analysts have suggested that greece would be better off if it could exit the eurozone and issue a new national currency .

a new national currency , devalued against the euro , could spur greek exports and help growth return to the economy .

as long as greece is a member of the eurozone , it does not have the exchange rate in its policy toolkit for responding to the crisis .

others , including the papandreou government , argue that leaving the eurozone would be a terrible economic decision for greece , triggering a severe banking and financial crisis .

they add that because greece's debt burden is denominated in euros , a new , devalued national currency would increase the value of its debt in terms of national currency .

fifth , the greek crisis has sparked a broader re - examination of eu economic governance , in order to improve the long - term functioning and stability of the currency union .

the eu has been working on new legislation that would introduce significant reforms to economic governance .

a proposed package of reform measures would strengthen enforcement of the stability and growth pact , introduce greater surveillance of national budgets by the european commission , and establish an early warning mechanism that would prevent or correct macroeconomic imbalances within and between member states .

sixth , greece's debt crisis has posed challenges to and opportunities for deeper eu integration .

in some ways , the crisis has highlighted limits to eu integration , revealing fundamental disagreements between member states about how much eu integration is desirable and highlighting the power that member states , particularly germany and france , still leverage compared to eu institutions .

on the other hand , the crisis has spurred tighter integration , through increased powers of the ecb and the creation of a permanent european lending facility .

the greek debt crisis has been an ongoing source of concern for some members of congress .

the crisis has been referenced on the house and senate floor a number of times , led to committee hearings , and resulted in legislation .

member concerns have concentrated on two aspects of the crisis: ( 1 ) the impact on the u.s. economy , particularly u.s. financial institutions ; and ( 2 ) the appropriateness of imf involvement in responding to the greek crisis .

comparisons between the u.s. and eurozone debt situations are addressed in crs report r41838 , sovereign debt in advanced economies: overview and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

the bilateral economic relationship between the eu and the united states is one of the largest and strongest in the world , and economic turmoil in greece and the broader eurozone could have negative implications for the u.s. economy .

at the start of the crisis , it was expected that austerity measures would slow growth in europe and lead to a loss of confidence in the euro , causing a depreciation of the euro relative to the u.s. dollar .

both of these factors would depress demand for u.s. exports to the eurozone and increase u.s. imports from the eurozone , causing the u.s. trade deficit to widen .

likewise , slower growth rates in europe could cause u.s. investors to look increasingly towards emerging markets for investment opportunities .

on the other hand , a weaker euro could make european stocks and assets look cheaper and more attractive , attracting u.s. capital to the eurozone .

figure 3 shows that even though growth has lagged in greece , ireland , and portugal , the strong economic performance in the eurozone "core" countries , including germany , france , and the netherlands , drove strong growth in the eurozone through the first quarter of 2011 .

real gdp growth in the eurozone was 2.0% relative to the same quarter in the previous year in the second , third , and fourth quarters of 2010 .

real growth increased to 2.5% in the first quarter of 2011 , compared to the first quarter of 2010 .

data releases for the second quarter of 2011 , however , suggest that growth in the eurozone may be starting to slow .

there are a number of factors that affect the euro - dollar exchange rate ( including u.s. policies , such as quantitative easing ) , and there has not been a clear , sustained depreciation in the euro against the dollar since the start of the crisis .

figure 4 shows upwards and downward swings in the euro - dollar exchange rate since may 2010 , when greece's financial assistance package was announced .

as the crisis has continued , however , increased perceptions of risk have affected u.s. financial markets .

concerns focus on the interconnectedness of the u.s. and eu financial sectors , and the threat of the crisis spreading to larger eurozone countries , including spain or italy .

if the crisis does spread , the impact on the u.s. economy could be greater .

given the interconnectedness of the u.s. and european financial sectors , another source of concern is how much u.s. banks could lose if greece or other eurozone countries were to default on their debts , or , in other words , how "exposed" u.s. banks are to greece and other vulnerable eurozone countries .

direct exposure of u.s. banks to the greek government is relatively small .

according to the bank for international settlements ( bis ) , it totaled $1.5 billion in december 2010 .

direct u.s. exposure to greece more generally , including the greek government and the greek private sector , was $7.3 billion in december 2010 .

however , u.s. banks may be more heavily exposed to greece through what the bis calls "other potential exposures. .

the bis defines "other potential exposures" as derivative contracts , guarantees , and credit commitments .

u.s. bank exposure to greece through these more indirect channels totaled an estimated $34.1 billion in december 2010 , more than four times its direct exposure to greece .

by comparison , european banks have more direct exposure to greece , and relatively less exposure through more indirect channels , than u.s. banks ( see figure 5 ) .

it is generally believed that for the eurozone , "other potential exposures" primarily captures bank exposure through credit default swaps ( cds ) .

cdss provide insurance against default ; if greece defaulted on its debt , the sellers of cds on greek debt would be required to make payments to the buyers of cds on greek debt .

analysts disagree about whether the bis data overstates u.s. exposure to greece through cdss , or provides an accurate estimate .

because the greek bond exchanges and rollovers announced in july 2011 are to be provided on a voluntary basis , it is not expected to trigger payment on cds contracts .

broader contagion of the greek debt crisis to the eurozone poses a greater risk to u.s. banks .

u.s. banks are much more heavily exposed to the other eurozone countries under market pressure , particularly italy , than they are to greece ( see figure 6 ) .

the bis reports that while direct u.s. bank exposure to italy was $36.7 billion in december 2010 , "other potential exposures" exceeded $230 billion .

total u.s. bank exposure to greece , ireland , italy , portugal , and spain , including "other potential exposures," is $641 billion .

u.s. bank exposure to greece and other vulnerable eurozone countries is only one part of total u.s. financial system exposure .

money market , pension , and insurance funds could also be exposed to greece and other vulnerable eurozone countries , but information on the exposures of these funds is limited .

likewise , data on secondary exposures , such as u.s. bank exposure to german banks , which are in turn exposed to greek banks , is limited .

depending on the exposure of non - bank financial institutions and exposure through secondary channels , u.s. exposure to greece and other eurozone countries could be considerably higher .

there is some indication that u.s. financial institutions have responded to the ongoing economic turmoil in europe by cutting their exposure to the region .

it is reported that u.s. money funds , for example , have withdrawn all but extremely short - term lending to banks in the eurozone .

it is also reported that they have reduced the availability of credit to eurozone institutions , even in stronger countries such as france .

of the 187 members of the imf , the united states has the largest financial commitment to the institution .

the imf program for greece has been supported by the administration , but some members of congress have expressed concern about whether greece's imf program is an appropriate use of imf resources .

the imf program for greece is unusual for a number of reasons .

first , the imf has not generally lent to developed countries in recent decades .

second , the imf loan to greece is unusually large .

the imf has general limits on the size of its programs , but reserves the right to lend in excess of these limits in "exceptional" situations .

the imf loan to greece represents exceptional access to imf resources , at about 3,200% of greece's imf quota .

imf quotas are the main financial commitments that countries make upon joining the imf , and are broadly related to their size in the global economy .

third , because there are questions about the solvency of the greek government , there is concern that the imf is providing resources to a country that will not be able to repay its debt to the imf and other creditors .

on the other hand , others argue that the imf program for greece is not unusual .

the imf lends to countries facing balance - of - payment difficulties , and it is widely agreed that greece was facing substantial balance - of - payments problems when the original rescue program was agreed to in may 2010 .

greece , as a member of the imf , is entitled to draw on imf resources , pending approval by the imf management .

greece followed standard imf procedures for obtaining the loan .

the imf also points out that the size of the loan to greece is large , but that the policy reforms required of greece to access the funds are just as large .

they add that the imf has several safeguards in place to protect imf resources , including making the disbursement of funds conditional upon economic reforms .

they also argue that the imf has a strong historical record of countries meeting their repayment obligations .

member concerns about imf resources being used to "bail out" greece led to the passage of legislation in the 111 th congress as part of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act , signed into law in july 2010 ( p.l .

111-203 ) .

section 1501 of the law requires u.s. representatives at the imf to oppose loans to high - and middle - income countries with large public debt levels ( greater than 100% of gdp ) if it is "not likely" that they will repay the imf .

prospective imf loans to low - income countries are exempted from this requirement .

if the imf does approve a loan to a high - or middle - income country despite u.s. opposition , the law requires the treasury department to report regularly to congress about conditions in that country .

these reports would discuss the debt status of the country , economic conditions affecting its vulnerability , and its debt management status .

the law currently applies to a very small number of countries .

according to imf data from april 2011 , only nine countries in the world meet the conditions set out in the legislation .

some argue that the impact of the law will be limited , because the ability of a country to repay the imf is already a fundamental requirement for imf approval of a loan .

others argue that there could be instances in which the imf and treasury department have different views on the likelihood of a country repaying the imf .

the law would have greater influence in these instances .

other legislation was introduced in the 111 th congress in response to the greek debt crisis , but did not become law .

for example , h.r .

5299 and s. 3383 , among other provisions , called on the treasury secretary to oppose any imf loans to eu member states until all eu member states had public debt levels less than or equal to 60% .

these pieces of legislation did not move out of committee .

continuing concerns about use of imf resources in the greek debt crisis likely contributed , at least in part , to the introduction of legislation into the house ( h.r .

2313 ) and senate ( s.amdt .

501 ; s. 1276 ) .

these pieces of legislation call for rescinding the u.s. financial commitments to the imf approved by congress in 2009 .

the senate voted against the amendment on june 29 , 2011 .

the house version of the legislation has been referred to committee .

the language to rescind u.s. commitments to the imf approved in 2009 is also included in a draft fy2012 state and foreign operations appropriations bill , posted on the house appropriations website .

