in early 2013 , total federal costs were still being compiled to determine if the affected states would receive a cost - share adjustment for the permanent repair work under section 406 .

however , the major disaster declarations for the affected states did contain a cost - share adjustment for the direct federal assistance provided for power and transportation help .

the initial declarations for connecticut , new jersey , and new york were for 10 days with a 100% federal cost - share .

following those declarations , an additional three declarations were made ( one for each state ) which extended that assistance for an additional five days with the same cost - share arrangement .

the consideration of cost - share waivers links closely with the general discussion of how disasters are declared and the role of political favoritism in those decisions .

one observer suggested that the cost - shares in 1992 reflected not only the major damage incurred but the political realities of the time as well .

two weeks after hurricane andrew , hurricane iniki struck hawaii , causing intense devastation on the island of kauai .

no direct legislative response ensued from the andrew / iniki disasters since the bush administration would soon leave office .

in the midst of his re - election campaign , however , president bush enlarged the federal share of disaster assistance in both recovery efforts to virtually 100 percent .

similar suggestions of political influence have been made regarding disaster cost - share assistance decisions made during ensuing administrations , ascribing political motivations , as both disaster damage and disaster costs have grown .

two researchers asserted that presidential and congressional influence have an impact on the decisions for declarations and spending .

we find that presidential and congressional influences affect the rate of disaster declaration and allocation of fema disaster expenditures across states .

states politically important to the president have a higher rate of disaster declaration by the president , and disaster expenditures are higher in states having congressional representation on fema oversight committees .

while those findings comported with suspicions or assumptions of political corruption of the disaster declaration process and disaster spending , follow - up studies have questioned those assumptions .

as two other researches have noted: there was no statistical evidence to suggest that gubernatorial and presidential party similarity , u.s. house of representatives and presidential party similarity , fema congressional oversight committee membership , electoral votes , or fema regional office location influenced success in securing emergency or major disaster declarations .

another researcher who has closely followed disaster declaration activity noted the declining rate of turn downs for governors' requests and concluded: since 1989 , following adoption of the stafford act , the odds that the president will approve a governor's request have risen to about four in five ( 80.3 percent ) chance .

certainly the broader authority to judge what is or is not a disaster under the stafford act has provided president's since 1988 with more latitude to approve unusual or "marginal" events as disasters or emergencies .

this may be one reason for the higher rate of gubernatorial request approvals since 1988 .

an additional reason for the increase in approvals may also rest with the increasing capacity of states to make effective requests and understand and anticipate fema's review process and what would likely constitute a request that would result in a declaration .

while this discussion and these studies focused on various forms of disaster declaration decisions and overall spending , none of these studies has focused on the cost - share adjustments that have been made by the executive and legislative branches .

these changes have generally comported with regulations in place or have been done within a context of overall help to a region .

but some other cost - share waivers for disasters that do not approach the damage per capita threshold indicate a potential openness for increased congressionally directed spending for all disasters .

in a sense , this takes the issue full circle to a time when congress legislated assistance by specific incident and proscribed the form and amount of the assistance .

as one observer has noted: the u.s. congress was not entirely unmoved by these and other disasters: between 1803 and 1947 , 128 specific acts expressed sympathy and sometimes supplied token financial assistance .

obviously now the assistance available is well beyond token , and in fact , the negligible contribution could conceivably be the state's share .

this is the exception since most states have a clear interest in the recovery work that is reflected in their work and commitment .

but regulatory cost - share waivers , if applied broadly and without the compelling support of recent congressional legislative waivers , could chip away at that commitment and complicate , rather than strengthen , the federal - state partnershi .

the cost - shares for the funding of stafford act programs speak to the cooperative working relationship reflected in that legislation between the two levels of government in addressing disaster response and recovery work .

while waivers can grant needed relief to states that have absorbed a great deal of disaster damage , those same waivers can undercut the state's investment , not only in resources but also in its oversight and accountability , in contributing to its own recovery .

the adjustment of cost - shares is likely to remain a subject of interest to all states and localities that receive a major disaster declaration and have an interest in reducing their state commitment of resources during the recovery process .

all discussions of cost - shares over the last four years lead back to the hurricane season of 2005 and the damage inflicted by hurricane katrina .

the damage katrina delivered has also affected public policy expectations .

hurricane katrina was an outlier in its size and impact , yet many legislative modifications meant to adapt solely to that storm and its unprecedented aftermath , are now used as rationale for suggesting identical treatment for subsequent disasters .

congress may continue , after future disasters , to consider legislative adjustments to stafford act cost - share requirements , examining the need for exceptions to current regulatory waivers or expanding such waivers .

congress may wish to consider if the threshold currently employed appropriately reflects state capacities and commitments toward disaster recovery .

recent congressional actions demonstrate a recognition of the financial burdens caused by disaster damage , while also demonstrating a willingness to adjust cost - share amounts for events that are not of the scope and size associated with previous cost - share adjustments .

just as with katrina for large events , these adjustments for lesser damage can also push public policy expectations .

the resulting additional assistance provided to states and localities , through more generous cost - shares , increases the overall disaster costs to the federal government .

for the last decade the federal government has begun to budget for disaster spending through greater annual appropriations .

while not entirely accounting for all disaster spending , the increases in annual budgets for the disaster relief fund reflect a lessening of the dependency on emergency spending for that purpose .

within this new reality , the cost - share adjustments , and their increase of the federal share , could begin to impinge on the annual budget choices faced by the obama administration and congress .

table legen .

