the general education provisions act ( gepa ) contains statutory provisions that are applicable to the majority of federal education programs administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) , as well as provisions related to the powers and responsibilities of ed .

gepa was originally enacted as title iv of the elementary and secondary education amendments of 1967 ( p.l .

90-247 ) , but the statute was not referred to as the "general education provisions act" until the law was amended by title iv of the elementary and secondary education amendments of 1969 ( esea , p.l .

91-230 ) and the relevant provisions were renamed .

gepa has been amended numerous times since its initial enactment in the 1960s .

this report provides a summary of gepa provisions as of the most recent amendments made to the act by the education sciences reform act ( p.l .

107-279 ) .

the first part of this report highlights some of the key provisions contained in gepa .

this is followed by a section - by - section overview of the act .

the report concludes with an analysis of some of the policy issues that have arisen in the past or that may arise in the future with respect to gepa .

gepa includes numerous provisions that apply to applicable programs administered by ed , as well as provisions related to the powers and responsibilities of ed .

while these provisions cover topics as varied as appropriations and evaluations to privacy and enforcement , several provisions are particularly worth noting , especially with respect to the development of new programs or the appropriation of funds for existing programs .

these provisions are highlighted below .

extension of the period available for the obligation and expenditure of appropriation funds ( section 421 ) .

automatic extension of the authorization of an applicable program for one additional fiscal year ( section 422 ) .

prohibition on using funds for transportation of students or teachers to overcome a racial imbalance or to carry out a desegregation plan ( section 426 ) .

prohibition on federal control of education ( section 438 ) .

privacy provisions that require educational agencies that receive federal funds to provide parents with access to children's educational records and that prohibit such agencies from releasing such records without written consent ( section 444 ) .

general prohibition on the use of funds provided to ed or to an applicable program to support a national test unless it is explicitly authorized in statutory language ( section 447 ) .

gepa includes multiple sections , primarily organized under four parts: part a — functions of the department of education ; part b — appropriations and evaluations ; part c — general requirements and conditions concerning the operation and administration of education programs: general authority of the secretary ; and part d — enforcement .

the act begins with a section that includes provisions related to the applicability of the gepa provisions to education programs .

a summary of each section of gepa is provided below .

the summary is not intended to be a comprehensive examination of gepa , but rather an overview of the contents of this act .

this section discusses the practical application of several gepa provisions and issues related to these provisions .

most appropriations are available for obligation during the federal fiscal year of the appropriations bill .

for example , most fy2010 appropriations will be available for obligation from october 1 , 2009 , through september 30 , 2010 .

several applicable programs have authorization or appropriations provisions that allow funding flexibility for program years that differ from the federal fiscal year .

for example , many of the elementary and secondary education formula grant programs receive appropriations that become available for obligation to the states on july 1 of the same year as the appropriations , and remain available for 15 months through the end of the following fiscal year .

that is , fy2010 appropriations for some programs will become available for obligation to the states on july 1 , 2010 , and will remain available until september 30 , 2011 .

this budgetary procedure is popularly known as "forward" or "multi - year" funding , and is accomplished through funding provisions in the annual labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( l - hhs - ed ) appropriations bill .

forward funding in the case of elementary and secondary education programs was designed to allow additional time for school officials to develop budgets in advance of the beginning of the school year .

for pell grants for undergraduates , however , aggregate program costs for individual students applying for postsecondary educational assistance cannot be known with certainty ahead of time .

appropriations from one fiscal year primarily support pell grants during the following academic year ; that is , the fy2010 appropriations will be used primarily to support grants for the 2010-2011 academic year .

unlike funding for elementary and secondary education programs , however , the funds for pell grants remain available for obligation for two full fiscal years .

an advance appropriation , as authorized by section 421 of gepa , occurs when the appropriation is provided for a fiscal year beyond the fiscal year for which the appropriation was enacted .

for example , funds for obligation and expenditure in fy2011 are appropriated in the fy2010 l - hhs - ed act .

in the case of fy2010 appropriations , funds normally would have become available october 1 , 2009 , under regular funding provisions , but may not become available for some programs until july 1 , 2010 , under the forward funding provisions discussed above .

however , if the july 1 , 2010 , forward funding date for obligation was to be postponed by three months — until october 1 , 2010 — the appropriation would be reclassified as an advance appropriation since the funds would become available only in a subsequent fiscal year , fy2011 .

like forward funding provisions , these advance appropriations are specified through provisions in the annual appropriations bill .

at the appropriations level , there is no difference between forward funded and advance appropriations except for the period available for obligation .

at the program or service level , relatively little is changed by the three - month delay in the availability of funds , since most expenditures for a standard school year occur after october 1 .

at the scorekeeping level , however , a significant technical difference occurs because forward funding is counted as part of the current fiscal year , and is therefore fully included in the current 302 ( b ) allocation for discretionary appropriations .

under federal budget scorekeeping rules , an advance appropriation is not counted in the 302 ( b ) allocation until the following year .

in essence , a three - month change from forward funding to an advance appropriation for a given program allows a one - time shift from the current year to the next year in the scoring of discretionary appropriations .

thus , congress is able to provide funding for education and other programs in the appropriations for one fiscal year without having it count against the total amount available for discretionary appropriations in that fiscal year .

section 421 of gepa extends the period of availability of appropriations by one fiscal year for applicable programs .

in practice , this section extends the period of obligation and expenditure of funds for applicable programs from 12 or 15 months to 24 or 27 months , respectively , depending on whether the program is forward funded .

for example , if funds were made available on july 1 , 2010 , these funds would generally be available for obligation and expenditure until september 30 , 2011 .

however , gepa would extend the period for obligation and expenditure of these funds until september 30 , 2012 .

thus , if funds are appropriated for fy2010 , they would generally be available for obligation and expenditure through september 30 , 2010 .

while this provision may be useful to seas and leas in program planning and budgeting , it may also have the effect of providing additional time for funds to be expended in situations where the goal is to have funds expended as quickly as possible .

under these circumstances , statutory language would need to include provisions to override section 421 of gepa .

for example , while funds made available under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) for existing education programs administered by ed were authorized for obligation and expenditure through fy2010 , section 421 of gepa automatically extended the period of obligation and expenditure for these funds .

if the intention of providing the funds was to have them be obligated and expended in the year in which they were appropriated ( i.e. , fy2009 ) , statutory language would have needed to be included in arra to state that section 421 of gepa did not apply .

section 422 of gepa provides for the automatic extension of program authorizations for one year under the conditions specified in the section .

in practice , this provision has been used to extend education programs authorized by major pieces of legislation , such as the elementary and secondary education act and higher education act , by one year .

gepa , however , only provides for a one - year extension of program authorizations .

if congress does not act to reauthorize a program within the one - year extension period granted by gepa , the program is technically no longer authorized .

this does not mean , however , that a program that is no longer authorized may cease to operate .

in practice , as long as a program continues to receive appropriations , the program is considered to be implicitly authorized .

for example , all current esea program authorizations expired after fy2007 .

these authorizations were automatically extended , however , for one additional year under section 422 of gepa .

thus , the authorization period for current esea programs was extended through september 30 , 2008 .

section 422 of gepa also specifies that the amount authorized to be appropriated for a program during the extension shall be the amount that was authorized to be appropriated for the program during the terminal fiscal year of the program .

thus , in the case of the five esea programs with specific authorization levels for fy2007 , those authorizations remained the same for fy2008 .

while current esea programs are no longer authorized under specific statutory provisions , they are considered to be implicitly authorized , as the programs have continued to receive appropriations .

section 438 of gepa explicitly states that no provision included in an applicable program is intended to authorize the federal government to exercise control over curriculum , instructional programs , administration , or school personnel or in the selection of printed material , or in the assignment of transportation of students or teachers to overcome a racial imbalance .

these prohibitions , which are designed to maintain state and local control over education , are particularly relevant to elementary and secondary education programs .

while the federal government provides funding to support education at the state and local levels , this support cannot be conditioned on state educational agencies , local educational agencies , or schools adopting specific curricula or instructional programs .

thus , for example , the federal government can require recipients accepting funds under a program designed to improve the english language acquisition and proficiency of english language learners to implement instructional programs that meet these goals , but the federal government is prohibited from specifying which instructional programs or curricula must be used to meet these goals .

section 444 of gepa , otherwise known as the family educational rights and privacy act , contains privacy requirements regarding access to and release of educational records .

in practice , most of the debate surrounding ferpa focuses on striking a balance between protecting student privacy while simultaneously allowing schools to release educational records under special circumstances .

for example , ferpa does allow schools to release education records without consent in connection with an emergency if the records are necessary to protect the health or safety of the student or other persons .

in the wake of the shootings at virginia tech in april 2007 , there have been several attempts to clarify ferpa's health or safety exception .

indeed , under recent amendments to the hea , the secretary is required to provide guidance clarifying rules regarding disclosure when a "student poses a significant risk of harm to himself or herself or to others , including a significant risk of suicide , homicide , or assault. .

such guidance must clarify that institutions that disclose such information in good faith are not liable for the disclosure .

in addition , ed issued new regulations that contain similar clarifications regarding disclosure requirements in the event of a threat to health or safety .

meanwhile , because ferpa allows , but does not require , postsecondary institutions to disclose the final results of any disciplinary proceeding involving a crime of violence or a nonforcible sex offense , similar efforts to expand disclosure by requiring the release of such records have periodically been proposed .

indeed , recent amendments to the hea essentially override ferpa's optional disclosure rule by requiring ihes to disclose to the alleged victim of any crime of violence or a nonforcible sex offense the results of any disciplinary proceeding conducted by the institution against a student who is the alleged perpetrator of such a crime or offense .

if the alleged victim is deceased as a result of such crime or offense , the next of kin of such victim shall be treated as the alleged victim for purposes of disclosure .

section 447 of gepa contains a specific prohibition on the use of funds provided to ed or to an applicable program being used to develop , implement , administer , or distribute a federally sponsored national test in any subject , including reading or math , unless the test is specifically provided for in enacted authorizing legislation .

thus , unless congress acts to support a federally sponsored national test in a subject area , the secretary is prohibited from using funds for this purpose .

while the secretary is prohibited from using funding to develop such tests , the secretary is not prohibited from providing federal funds to support or incentivize non - federally sponsored efforts to develop a national or common test .

for example , the secretary has already indicated that a portion of the competitive grant funds made available under race to the top , authorized by section 14006 of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) , will be used to support consortia of states working to develop new assessments linked to a set of common standards .

the largest effort being conducted in this area currently is a project being led by the national governors association and the council of chief state school officers to develop common standards and assessments in reading and math .

