the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) provided $7.2 billion primarily for broadband grant and loan programs to be administered by two separate agencies: the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) of the department of commerce ( doc ) and the rural utilities service ( rus ) of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the arra directed broadband grant and loan funding in the following way: $4.35 billion to ntia / doc for a competitive broadband grant program including broadband infrastructure grants , competitive grants for expanding public computer capacity , and grants to encourage sustainable adoption of broadband service .

the ntia grant program is called the broadband technology opportunity program ( btop ) .

$2.5 billion to rus / usda for broadband grants , loans , and loan / grant combinations .

the law states that 75% of the area to be served by an eligible project must be a rural area .

a rural area is defined as any area not located within a city , town , or incorporated area that has a population of greater than 20,000 inhabitants ; or not located within an urbanized area contiguous and adjacent to a city or town that has a population of greater than 50,000 inhabitants .

the rus broadband grant and loan program is called the broadband initiatives program ( bip ) .

subsequently , p.l .

111-226 ( the education jobs and medicaid funding bill ) , signed into law on august 10 , 2010 , rescinded $302 million of unobligated btop money from ntia .

there were two rounds of arra broadband funding .

the first funding round was announced with the release of a notice of funds availability ( nofa ) on july 1 , 2009 .

the second funding round nofas were released on january 15 , 2010 .

the arra mandated that all funding be obligated and awarded by september 30 , 2010 .

as of october 1 , 2010 , all arra broadband funds have been awarded .

this report focuses on the distribution of arra broadband funding .

the following presents a breakdown of applications and awards data as of october 1 , 2010 .

as of october 1 , 2010 , all btop and bip award announcements were complete .

in total , ntia and rus announced awards for 553 projects , constituting $7.5 billion in federal funding .

this included 233 btop projects ( totaling $3.9 billion ) and 320 bip projects ( totaling $3.6 billion ) .

of the $7.5 billion total announced , $6.2 billion was grant funding , and $1.3 billion was loan funding .

the following is a breakdown of awards data by project category and program , broadband technology deployed , and state - by - state distribution of funding .

awards data are derived from ntia and rus press releases , btop project information , the bip round two application directory , bip awards reporting publications , and the broadband usa applications database .

with the broadband awards process concluded , ntia and rus move towards monitoring and overseeing the progression of the funded projects .

projects must be substantially completed within two years and fully completed within three years .

in its fy2011 budget proposal , the administration requested $23.7 million for ntia to continue operating its grant management office .

the continuing appropriations and surface transportation extension act , 2011 ( p.l .

111-322 ) , which funds the federal government through march 4 , 2011 , includes a $20 million addition to the salaries and expenses account which can be used for btop oversight .

meanwhile , ntia has awarded a $5 million , four - year contract to potomac , md - based asr analytics to measure the impact of btop grants on broadband availability , adoption , and on economic and social conditions in areas served by grantees .

funding for the award was obtained through the department of interior's national business center .

the 112 th congress is likely to provide oversight on ntia and rus efforts to monitor the funded projects .

in the longer term , the fcc's national broadband plan has recommended an expansion of federal funding for broadband deployment in unserved areas .

to the extent that congress may consider whether broadband grant and loan programs should be continued , modified , reduced , expanded , or eliminated , the funding patterns and trends that emerged during rounds one and two , as well as the ultimate successes and failures of funded btop and bip projects , could provide insights into whether and how such programs might be addressed , and how these or similar programs might be fashioned within the context of a national broadband policy .

