prior to the april 19 , 1995 , bombing of the alfred p. murrah building in oklahoma city , the federal government had no formally established security standards for federally owned or leased facilities .

immediately following the bombing , president william j. clinton directed the department of justice ( doj ) to assess the vulnerability of federal facilities to terrorist attacks or violence and to develop recommendations for minimum security standards .

the u.s .

marshals service ( usms ) , within doj , coordinated two working groups to accomplish these presidential directives .

the working groups identified and evaluated various security measures and activities that could address potential vulnerabilities , and minimum security standards were also proposed for federal facilities .

additionally , usms deputies and general services administration ( gsa ) security specialists conducted inspections at more than 1,200 federal facilities to obtain security data on buildings for use in upgrading existing conditions to comply with the proposed minimum standards .

the result of the working groups' efforts was the report vulnerability assessment of federal facilities .

this report was significant because it represented the first time that broad security standards were applied to federal facilities .

after the report was issued , president clinton directed all executive branch agencies to begin upgrading their facilities to meet the recommended minimum security standards .

following the doj recommendations , president clinton also required gsa to establish building security committees for all gsa facilities .

in the 112 th congress , legislation was introduced in the house of representatives and senate to improve the federal protective service ( fps ) , the agency charged with responsibility to protect federal buildings .

in the house , h.r .

176 , the federal protective service improvement and accountability act of 2011 , was introduced on january 5 , 2011 .

similar legislation , s. 772 , the supporting employee competency and updating readiness enhancements for facilities act of 2011 ( secure facilities act of 2011 ) was introduced in the senate on april 8 , 2011 .

the purpose of both bills is to strengthen the security of federal facilities and improve the safety of employees who work there and public visitors by enhancing the ability of fps to provide the necessary security .

the two bills are discussed in this report under the section , " legislation in 112 th congress: federal protective service . .

because of the differences among federal buildings and their security needs , usms categorized federal facilities into five classes based on building size , agency mission and function , tenant population , and the degree of public access to the facility , and developed security standards corresponding to the security level needed for each class: level i — buildings with no more than 2,500 square feet , 10 or fewer federal employees , and limited or no public access ; level ii — buildings with 2,500 to 80,000 square feet , 11 to 150 federal employees , and moderate public access ; level iii — buildings with 80,000 to 150,000 square feet , 151 to 450 federal employees , and moderate to high public access ; level iv — buildings with 150,000 square feet or more , more than 450 federal employees , and a high level of public access ; and level v — buildings that are similar to level iv but are considered critical to national security ( for example , the pentagon ) .

the interagency security committee was established in 1995 , originally as part of gsa , and was transferred to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) in 2003 .

the following two sections describe the isc's work under gsa and dhs chairmanships .

numerous agencies have responsibility for federal building security entities .

among them are such law enforcement agencies as the central intelligence agency's ( cia ) security protective service , the department of defense's ( dod ) pentagon police directorate , and the state department's diplomatic security service's uniformed law enforcement officers .

these agencies and facilities are usually limited in scope and size , involving a single location or a limited number of buildings .

however , the primary agency for protecting federal facilities is the federal protective service ( fps ) , which is responsible for protecting almost half ( 48% ) of all gsa owned or leased property .

the safe conduct of court proceedings and the security of judges , court personnel , and visitors in courtrooms , as well as the safety of judges off - site , continue to be a concern .

the 2005 murders of family members of a federal judge in chicago ; the killings of a state judge , a court reporter , and a sheriff's deputy at an atlanta courthouse ; and the 2006 sniper shooting of a state judge in his reno office all spurred efforts to improve judicial security .

other threats against judges and court facilities have not stopped .

for example , in september 2009 , a plan to bomb the paul findley federal building and courthouse in springfield , il , was uncovered and an arrest was made .

on january 4 , 2010 , a gunman wounded a deputy u.s. marshal and killed a court security officer at the lloyd d. george u.s .

courthouse and federal building in las vegas .

possible threats in the first week of 2010 included suspicious substances in letters sent to courthouses in alabama .

these recent incidents may result in review and increased oversight of judicial security at court facilities to ensure that adequate protective policies , procedures , and practices are in place .

additionally , increased security enhancements may be necessary for federal courthouses where trials of individuals charged with acts of terrorism are to be held .

each of the three branches of the federal government plays a unique role in helping to ensure the safety of judges and the security of the federal courts .

the role of congress is to authorize programs that enhance security , appropriate funds , and provide oversight of judicial security .

the judicial conference's committee on judicial security monitors the security of the judiciary ( including the protection of court facilities and proceedings , judicial officers , and court staff at federal court facilities and other locations ) and makes policy recommendations to the conference .

the administrative office of the u.s. courts implements judicial conference policies , including security matters .

by statute , the united states marshals service within the department of justice has primary responsibility for the security of the federal judiciary , including the safe conduct of court proceedings , as well as the security of federal judges and court personnel at court facilities and off - site .

usms is charged with the protection and security of more than 2,000 federal judges and approximately 5,250 other court officials at over 400 court facilities nationwide .

within usms , the judicial security division ( jsd ) is specifically responsible for providing security services and staff support for the federal judiciary , including personal protection for judges and physical security for federal courthouses .

other space in the court facilities under the control of usms includes holding cells adjacent to courtrooms , interview rooms used by attorneys and prisoners , cellblocks , prisoner elevators , and office space for usms use .

an appointed u.s. marshal , confirmed by the senate , has security responsibility in each of the 94 federal judicial districts and the district of columbia superior court .

district u.s. marshals provide and oversee security of the judiciary using usms resources and court security officers ( cso ) , who are employees of private security companies under contract with usms .

over 4,500 csos provide various types of security ( eg , fixed posts , roving patrols , entry screening , and mail and package screening ) in courthouses and at multi - tenant facilities .

also under usms jurisdiction are the design , installation , and maintenance of security systems , and the oversight of communications equipment .

usms conducts investigations of threats made against federal judges , u.s. attorneys , court staff , and their family members to determine the level of security that is necessary for developing security plans .

in accordance with these findings , usms assigns the required resources to ensure the safety of these people .

a deputy marshal is required to attend any session of court at the request of the presiding judge .

a judicial security inspector ( a senior - level deputy marshal ) is assigned to each judicial district to evaluate courthouse security and procedures and to coordinate scheduling , posting , and other matters related to csos .

the inspectors also conduct security surveys at judges' homes and recommend improvements .

on june 1 , 2004 , usms established the office of protective intelligence ( opi ) to review and analyze intelligence information about the security of those under usms protection .

opi issues daily security advisories , intelligence bulletins , and law enforcement alerts to usms district offices and senior staff at headquarters so that protective measures can be taken .

when threats are made , usms works with the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) to evaluate the threats .

within the department of homeland security , fps has overall responsibility for security in gsa - managed , multi - tenant federal buildings .

when the buildings include court facilities , usms and fps share security responsibilities ; this is authorized by a series of memoranda of agreement and understanding ( moa and mou ) between gsa and doj .

when the court is the sole tenant in a gsa - managed building , usms has primary responsibility for security , although fps may provide some support for the perimeter security , or it may delegate this responsibility to usms .

the manner in which the responsibilities are shared varies case by case , depending on the differing requirements of tenants , functions , and locations of occupied space .

these shared responsibilities and jurisdictions at individual court - occupied buildings are further determined by agreements ( sometimes in writing ) , and coordinated to avoid duplication .

generally , usms is responsible for and controls access to judicial space , while fps is primarily responsible for perimeter security and for other interior space that is not court - related space .

fps conducts risk assessments of multi - tenant buildings to deter threats and take countermeasures .

uniformed fps officers and hired contract guards ( similar to court security officers ) protect the buildings and their assets , and investigate crime at the facilities .

other than perimeter responsibilities , fps duties may include visitor entry processing , roving patrols , garage access control , and mail and package screening .

these principal entities communicate and coordinate at the national and district levels to ensure the security of the courts .

at the national level , the judicial conference's committee on judicial security coordinates security issues involving the federal courts with usms , doj , and dhs .

according to usms , the marshals service works daily with the aousc office of court security and the office of facilities and security , and the committee on judicial security also consults and coordinates over national and district - level security matters .

at semi - annual meetings , the committee on judicial security and usms senior management discuss security , legal , and budget issues .

in addition , usms and aousc hold working sessions to discuss issues that include the purchase and installation of security systems , cso staffing , and budget matters .

at the local level , u.s. marshals routinely meet with the district chief judge at court security committee meetings including representatives from the magistrate , district , and bankruptcy courts ( and sometimes circuit judges and u.s. attorneys ) to review and implement security plans .

aousc and usms also consult on security considerations ( eg , design and installation of security systems ) in the construction of new or renovated courthouses .

on january 5 , 2009 , usms implemented a pilot program to assume primary responsibility for perimeter security at selected courthouses that were previously the responsibility of the fps .

this pilot was undertaken in accordance with fy2009 enacted legislation as a result of the judiciary's concerns that fps was providing inadequate perimeter security .

the pilot program , expected to cover an 18 – month period , includes five courthouses located in chicago , detroit , phoenix , new york , and tucson , and two in baton rouge .

the judiciary submitted a report to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees on financial services and general government on the implementation progress of the pilot program and is currently working with usms on assessment tools for the program .

as the supreme court's general manager , paymaster , and chief security officer , the marshal of the supreme court oversees the administration and operations of the court building .

the marshal manages over 200 court employees and supervises the federal property used by the court .

the marshal also directs the supreme court police force , which comprises a chief of police and approximately 80 officers .

the police force jurisdiction covers the court building , its grounds , and adjacent streets .

federal building security includes such activities as the daily interaction of fps and its federal customers , the coordination between usms and the fps in federal multi - use buildings , and the federal agency interaction with contract security guard companies .

it should be noted that some members of congress have state and district offices in multi - tenant federal buildings and recently the fbi has coordinated with members due to an increase in threats to members and their offices .

federal agencies communicate with one another and state , local , and private sector entities to coordinate federal building security .

it is important to note that the federal government's communication of potential and imminent terrorist and criminal threats to states , localities , and private sector entities is an important aspect of federal building security because the majority of federal agencies and departments lease , build , and occupy facilities located in local jurisdictions and are not segregated from the general populace , private industries and businesses , and state and local government facilities .

not only would local jurisdictions be susceptible to collateral damage in a terrorist attack on a federal building , but some federal agencies and departments also rely on state and local law enforcement entities in the event of criminal or terrorism activities at federal facilities .

one established way the federal government communicated threats was through the use of the homeland security advisory system ( hsas ) , which was managed by dhs .

hsas , established on march 12 , 2002 , was a color - coded terrorist threat warning system .

the system , which federal departments and agencies were required to implement and use , provided recommended protective measures for federal departments and agencies to prevent , prepare for , mitigate against , and respond to terrorist attacks .

dhs disseminated hsas terrorist threat warnings to federal departments , state and local agencies , the public , and private - sector entities .

dhs , however , only provided protective measures for federal departments .

this dissemination of warnings was conducted through multiple communication systems and public announcements .

hsas had five threat levels: low , guarded , elevated , high , and severe .

in 2009 , dhs's homeland security advisory council established a task force to review the hsas and recommend changes to the administration and use of the system .

upon review , dhs replaced the hsas with the national terrorism advisory system ( ntas ) .

ntas is a new system that is to communicate terrorism threat information by providing "timely , detailed information to the public , government agencies , first responders , airports and other transportation hubs , and the private sector. .

some federal entities , in response to targeted and specific threats , have developed mechanisms for notifying other federal departments and agencies , such as the u.s. nuclear regulatory commission's office of nuclear security and incident response , which coordinates with dhs , the federal intelligence and law enforcement communities , and the department of energy ( doe ) .

in 2005 , john e. lewis , deputy assistant director of the fbi's counterterrorism division , testified before the house committee on homeland security about the fbi's coordination with other federal agencies concerning potential nuclear threats or incidents .

mr. lewis stated that the fbi has developed liaison relationships with dhs , doe , and dod , and he detailed how the fbi and these departments would coordinate their response efforts if there was a nuclear threat or incident .

within dhs , the office of operations coordination is responsible for monitoring the nation's security situation daily , through the national operations center ( noc ) , and coordinating activities among dhs , governors , homeland security advisors , law enforcement entities , and critical infrastructure operators .

information on domestic incident management is shared with emergency operations centers at federal , state , and local levels through the homeland security information network ( hsin ) , and state and local intelligence fusion centers .

due to recent attacks on federal buildings and continued terrorism threats , congress may wish to address issues associated with federal building security .

some of these issues include fps's operations and use of contract security guards , coordination and sharing of federal building security information , facility security committees , and appropriations and resources .

these issues are discussed below .

the federal government faces , daily , the task of securing a portfolio comprising 446,000 buildings .

accordingly , congress could address concerns , some of which are addressed in this report , to ensure effective federal agency operations and the health , well - being , and safety of federal employees and the public .

