on may 25 , 2009 , north korea announced that it had conducted a nuclear test .

the test produced seismic signals characteristic of an explosion , indicating that they were generated by human activity .

they were detected by at least 61 seismic stations .

however , no radioactive materials were reportedly detected , in contrast to the first north korean test on october 9 , 2006 .

such materials could confirm that the test was nuclear .

although a sample size of one is not sufficient to draw conclusions with high confidence , the possible ability of north korea to contain radioactive materials from a nuclear test could be of value for that nation .

this report presents what is known publicly about the tests , discusses detection and containment of nuclear tests , explores the possible significance of containment for north korea , and raises , as issues for congress , implications for the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty ( ctbt ) and possible means of improving u.s. and international ability to monitor nuclear testing .

states currently possessing nuclear weapons would probably need to conduct nuclear tests to develop more advanced designs and , some argue , to ensure that existing weapons are safe , secure , and reliable .

states with fledgling nuclear weapon programs could design and deploy the simplest type of nuclear weapon without testing , but such weapons make very inefficient use of scarce fissile material and are heavy and bulky .

to develop small , rugged , powerful warheads for long - range missiles , these states would need to conduct nuclear tests .

nonnuclear experiments can answer some questions important to the design of nuclear weapons , but many processes essential to the functioning of a nuclear weapon can only be studied under the conditions of an actual nuclear test .

each test not only shows whether a device "works" or "fails," but also provides much more data .

many technical disciplines contribute to a test , and each gains data from it .

weapon designers learn how the design might be improved , physicists gain data on the science underlying nuclear explosions , metallurgists gain data on how uranium or plutonium deforms under pressure , engineers can discover unanticipated flaws arising from manufacturing processes , physicists who design computer models of nuclear weapon performance gain data to refine their models , electrical engineers gain data to improve the instrumentation for collecting nuclear test data , radiochemists can analyze radioactive samples from the test for data on the yield and performance of the device , and those involved in preventing radioactive material from escaping from the test gain data to improve containment .

because testing is crucial for developing weapons , efforts to ban nuclear tests have been underway for decades as an arms control measure .

the multilateral 1963 limited test ban treaty banned atmospheric , space , and underwater tests .

the u.s. - soviet threshold test ban treaty and peaceful nuclear explosions treaty , signed in 1974 and 1976 , respectively , limited underground nuclear explosions to a yield of 150 kilotons .

both entered into force in 1990 .

in an attempt to extend these bans to cover all nuclear tests , negotiations on the ctbt were completed in 1996 .

the treaty's basic obligation is to ban all nuclear explosions .

it establishes an international monitoring system ( ims ) to monitor signs of an explosion .

the treaty contains procedures for authorizing and conducting on - site inspections ( osis ) , which would search the site of a suspected nuclear test for evidence of the test , and permits data from national technical means of verification as well as from the ims to be used to support a request for an osi .

as of november 2010 , 182 nations had signed the treaty and 153 of them had ratified .

to enter into force , 44 specified nations , basically those with a nuclear reactor in 1995 or 1996 , must all ratify .

as of november 2010 , 35 had done so ; the others are china , egypt , india , indonesia , iran , israel , north korea ( the democratic people's republic of korea , dprk ) , pakistan , and the united states .

the u.s. senate voted not to give its advice and consent to ratification of the treaty , 48 for , 51 against , and 1 present , in 1999 .

two uncertainties that led to its defeat concerned u.s. ability to verify compliance with the treaty and u.s. ability to maintain its nuclear stockpile without testing .

in april 2009 , president obama pledged to pursue u.s. ratification of the ctbt "immediately and aggressively. .

the ability to contain radioactive material from the 2009 test offers several potential benefits for north korea .

first , careful attention to containment should reduce the likelihood of a major venting of fallout similar to baneberry .

venting would arguably not be in north korea's interests .

fallout reaching china could harm north korea's relationship with its major ally , perhaps leading china to increase pressure on north korea to halt nuclear testing or even its nuclear weapons program .

fallout reaching russia could have a similar effect .

fallout on japan or south korea would likely antagonize them .

fallout on north korea could contaminate land .

avoiding fallout is reason enough for north korea to try to improve its containment capabilities .

second , if particulates containing uranium or plutonium vented and could be collected at a distance , other nations could analyze them in an attempt to gain data on weapon characteristics , helping to track problems and progress of north korea's nuclear weapons program .

this is another reason for north korea to focus on containment of its underground explosions .

third , absence of radionuclides from a nuclear test , as a result of containment , could make it harder to muster the 30 votes in the 51-member ctbto executive council needed to authorize an osi by providing scientific cover to nations that wanted to deny a request for an osi on political grounds .

this approach could be more significant for a nation with more allies than north korea has .

on the other hand , a lack of radioactive noble gases combined with a nuclear explosion - like seismic signal and other technical evidence would provide a compelling technical case for requesting an osi .

of course , the surer way for north korea to avert osis would be for that nation not to ratify the ctbt , keeping it from entering into force .

fourth , and more speculatively , successful containment could enable other nations to conduct nuclear tests in north korea .

this does not appear to have happened , but iran is a possible candidate .

the two have a record of conventional arms trade and missile cooperation .

events in 2009 , such as the discovery of a covert facility for uranium enrichment , increased suspicions that iran is pursuing nuclear weapons .

it is not unprecedented for one nation to "host" another's nuclear tests: the united kingdom conducted 24 tests jointly with the united states at the nevada test site between 1962 and 1991 .

iranian testing in north korea would aid the latter by providing data for weapons development and giving the impression that its nuclear weapons program was proceeding rapidly .

such testing would aid iran by helping it develop nuclear weapons while potentially avoiding consequences of a test in iran , such as an attack on its nuclear facilities .

in particular , an extremely low yield test ( eg , 0.5 kilotons ) conducted in iran might be interpreted as a failure , inviting attack before the weapons program developed further , while a larger test ( eg , 20 kilotons ) in iran might deter attack .

conducting one or two tests in north korea might avert the former contingency .

this arrangement would demand high confidence in north korea's containment ability so as to deny radioactive samples by which the test could be attributed to its partner .

analysis of these samples might reveal if the bomb fuel was uranium or plutonium , details of the bomb design , and perhaps which reactor produced the fuel .

while particulate samples convey more data than do gases , the ability to contain gases would imply a strong ability to contain particulates .

several factors argue against this scenario .

iran might use nuclear tests in iran to demonstrate its nuclear capability as a deterrent , to gain leverage in the middle east , and to show its people that other nations could not dictate its nuclear policies .

iran might believe it could deter a u.s. strike on its nuclear facilities by its nuclear threat or the prospect of retaliation against u.s. forces in the area .

iran might discount the threat of an israeli strike if it felt that israel could only inflict a temporary setback to its nuclear program .

north korea might halt nuclear tests if it thought it could make major gains in the six - party talks .

north korea and iran might not have high confidence in north korea's ability to contain nuclear tests .

there are questions about the reliability of media reports on iranian - north korean cooperation in the nuclear area .

developments of late 2010 may soon render this scenario overtaken by events .

according to a report of november 2010 , north korea is pursuing uranium enrichment but not plutonium reprocessing .

as a result , it would be difficult to use uranium debris collected from a nuclear test to determine whether the test device was manufactured by north korea , iran , or another nation .

details are as follows .

siegfried hecker , co - director , center for international security and cooperation , stanford university , and director emeritus of los alamos national laboratory , reported on a visit to north korea's nuclear complex at yongbyon .

north korean officials showed him and other u.s. visitors "a new facility that contained a modern , small industrial - scale uranium enrichment facility with 2,000 centrifuges that was recently completed. .

further , "we were told that they began construction in april 2009 and completed the operations a few days ago. .

hecker reported that the chief process engineer told him that the centrifuges were not of a first - generation p - 1 design , and inferred that they were most likely of the more advanced p - 2 design .

he wrote , "i expressed surprise that they were apparently able to get cascades of 2,000 centrifuges working so quickly , and asked again if the facility is actually operating now — we were given an emphatic , yes. .

he stated that "the greatest concern is that a facility of equal or greater capacity , configured to produce heu , exists somewhere else .

such a facility would be difficult to detect as demonstrated by the fact that this facility was undetected in the middle of the yongbyon fuel fabrication site. .

another analysis also raised the possibility that the enrichment facility at yongbyon "may not be the first gas centrifuge plant that north korea has built .

it is possible that north korea built another plant previously and either transferred it to yongbyon or simply built another one based on its experience of bringing the first , perhaps smaller , one into operation. .

north koreans told hecker that the centrifuges were being used to produce low - enriched uranium ( leu ) as fuel for a nuclear power plant .

 ( leu cannot be used for a nuclear weapon. ) .

however , hecker stated that the centrifuges could be rearranged to produce up to 40 kg of highly - enriched uranium ( heu ) per year ; heu can be used in a nuclear weapon .

regarding plutonium , he saw no activity at the facility for reprocessing plutonium ; that and other data led him to conclude that "pyongyang has apparently decided not to make more plutonium or plutonium bombs for now .

my assessment is that they could resume all plutonium operations within approximately six months and make one bomb's worth of plutonium per year for some time to come. .

it might in theory be possible to determine the provenance of a weapon from analysis of particulate debris , but this could be difficult in practice .

for example , detecting uranium in debris from a nuclear test conducted inside north korea would not be proof that the weapon was north korean , even if it could be determined that the uranium was of north korean manufacture: "david asher , who helped direct efforts to counter north korea's proliferation activities in the george w. bush administration … [said] 'my fear is that just as iran's demands for enriched uranium for a bomb are expanding , north korea may be in the position to begin supplying.' .

the 2009 north korean test raises at least two issues for congress .

what does the test imply for u.s. ability to verify compliance with the ctbt ? .

and what unilateral and multilateral steps might congress mandate or encourage to improve monitoring and verification capability ? .

supporters and opponents of the ctbt will likely draw opposing conclusions on what the absence of detectable radionuclides from the 2009 test indicates .

here are points they might raise in a future debate .

opponents might argue that without detection of radionuclides there is no proof that north korea conducted a nuclear test .

for example , the may 2009 event might have been a large conventional explosion conducted to inflate the appearance of progress in north korea's weapons program .

the treaty's supporters might respond that the ability of the ims seismic component to pick out signals characteristic of an explosion originating in the area of the suspected test from the many seismic signals occurring each day shows the capability of the ims .

as another example , the ims detected the 2009 event seismically , and identified it as an explosion , before north korea announced it .

more generally , the 2009 test shows that an attempt to evade detection would also have to contain radionuclides and suppress other signatures , a more difficult task than suppressing only one signature .

suspicious seismic signals and an absence of radionuclides , it is argued , would surely lead to calls for an osi .

opponents might counter that osis could not happen unless the treaty entered into force , and that north korea is unlikely to ratify the treaty , thereby preventing entry into force , as long as it has any interest in future nuclear tests .

even if north korea ratified the treaty , it could bar inspections of its territory , and if it allowed them , inspectors might not find proof that a test occurred .

while the case could be referred to the united nations , ctbt opponents would see only a slim likelihood of that body taking effective action .

supporters recognize that osis could not be conducted under the treaty without entry into force , and see that as a benefit of entry into force .

they believe that osis have a good chance of finding a "smoking gun," and that the u.n. would adopt stringent sanctions on north korea in response to nuclear tests conducted after the treaty had entered into force .

they see a refusal by a state party to permit inspections as prima facie evidence of a violation .

one generally - accepted means of evading detection of nuclear tests , especially low - yield tests , is "decoupling," testing in a large underground cavity to muffle the seismic signal .

opponents could argue that a decoupled test conducted in a manner that prevented release of radionuclides , such as deep under a mountain , might go undetected by radionuclide sensors as well as seismographs , and that the other two ims technologies , infrasound and hydroacoustic , would not be expected to detect a test of this sort , so all ims technologies might be circumvented simultaneously .

opponents might argue further that the ability of the ims to detect the 2006 and 2009 tests does not show that that system can detect clandestine tests because neither test was conducted evasively .

 ( north korea announced both of them. ) .

in this view , any cheater would use evasive methods , so the ims has merit only insofar as it can detect evasive tests .

supporters question the feasibility of decoupling , or otherwise hiding , a test of more than 1 or 2 kilotons .

they note that the ims has detected seismic signals down to a small fraction of a kiloton ; that it is difficult to hide the rock that must be removed to create an underground cavity ; and that , despite precautions , an evader cannot count on near - perfect containment .

the merits of various evasion techniques have been debated for decades .

entry into force requires ratification by north korea , among others , yet that nation's ratification may be difficult to obtain .

to circumvent the problem , some ctbt supporters have suggested bringing the treaty into force provisionally .

this apparently would mean that states that had ratified the treaty would behave among themselves as if the treaty had entered into force , permitting osis among these states and formal operation of the structures of the ctbto .

but there are problems with provisional entry into force .

first , a state not party to provisional entry into force might conduct a large conventional explosion designed to simulate a nuclear explosion so as to give the impression of progress on its nuclear program .

since the ims is designed to detect nuclear tests only , it would not detect signatures that would identify a test as nonnuclear .

second , since a state could conduct a test in a host state that was not party to provisional entry into force , it would be important to attribute the test to learn if a state party to provisional entry into force had conducted the test ; that would be difficult to do if the test were well contained .

"regular" entry into force would address both concerns .

osis could reveal if the test was nuclear or conventional , and attribution would not matter for the treaty's verification regime because any nuclear test would violate the ctbt .

key problems for analyses of the 2009 north korean event were determining whether it was a nuclear explosion and learning more about it .

in examining budgets and programs , congress may wish to consider various means of improving u.s. and international ability to monitor nuclear testing by north korea and other nations .

the preceding sections of this report lead to several possible means to do this .

they fall into several categories: ( 1 ) conduct research to better characterize nuclear explosions and containment , ( 2 ) deploy more monitoring equipment , ( 3 ) improve the performance of monitoring systems , and ( 4 ) look for new signatures to help determine if a test is nuclear .

note that government agencies that conduct programs to improve monitoring and verification capability develop strategic plans for their work and update them annually ; the options presented here would need to be prioritized against existing programs .

radioactive gases , and especially radioactive noble gases , are an important sign of a nuclear explosion .

yet raymond jeanloz , professor of earth and planetary science , university of california at berkeley , said: "the science underlying the containment of gases in the earth's crust is poorly understood .

the u.s. nuclear test program focused on containment of particulates .

the program did not try to gain a full understanding of what determines how or when gases are contained , but instead developed practical solutions to containment. .

a better understanding of the science of how the earth contains gases , especially in the case of nuclear tests , should help evaluate north korean containment efforts .

given the potential significance of north korean efforts to contain radioactive material from nuclear tests , it may be of value to have the intelligence community analyze the first two north korean nuclear tests to see what containment methods were used , and in what ways , if any , north korea modified those methods for its second test .

similarly , it may be of value for that community to pay particular attention to containment methods in monitoring north korean preparations for any future nuclear test .

the intelligence community could report its findings on a classified basis to the congressional committees of jurisdiction .

improving atmospheric transport modeling could improve the accuracy with which it could track radionuclides back to their location of origin , or predict the path of an air mass carrying radioactive materials .

breakthroughs in analysis could enable seismologists to extract more information from seismic data and lead to improved concepts for future seismic networks .

however , such advances , as well as maintaining long - term monitoring capability more generally , will require training of graduate students in nuclear explosion monitoring disciplines .

one expert stated , the past decade has seen sharp fluctuations in funding of programs in this area by two key sources , the air force research laboratory and the national nuclear security administration , and funding has been far below the level recommended by a 1997 national research council report .

low and erratic funding has disrupted graduate student training .

as a result , it is becoming hard to sustain adequate numbers of experts in nuclear explosion monitoring , as evidenced by recent difficulties in replacing seismologists who retired .

to address this issue , the united states could support , at a steady level , fellowships and programs adequate to produce enough experts in nuclear explosion monitoring to meet national needs .

similarly , congress , in p.l .

111-140 , nuclear forensics and attribution act , found , "the number of radiochemistry programs and radiochemists in united states national laboratories and universities has dramatically declined over the past several decades. .

in response , this act would establish a national nuclear forensics expertise development program .

since venting or seepage of radioxenons is more likely than venting of particulates , many agree that it would be desirable for the ims to have radioxenon equipment at all 80 radionuclide stations instead of the 40 currently planned .

the treaty ( protocol , paragraph 10 ) provides for this expansion once it enters into force: "at its first regular meeting , the conference [of the states parties] shall consider and decide on a plan for implementing noble gas monitoring capability throughout the network. .

the ctbto prepcom indicates that adding radioxenon equipment to the remaining 40 particulate stations would not be technically difficult , but is more a matter of political will and financial resources .

the prepcom also states , "there has been a strong interest in building up and strengthening the noble gas capability since the 2006 dprk declared test within the ctbto prepcom. .

the european union has made voluntary contributions for this purpose , and the united states has made technical contributions to this effort .

it may also be desirable to equip all 80 stations with radioxenon equipment , or to increase the number of radionuclide stations with radioxenon equipment beyond 80 , before the treaty enters into force .

additional stations in japan and south korea , and in areas of china and russia close to north korea , would be of particular value for monitoring any testing by that nation .

even completing the ims and having radioxenon equipment at all 80 radionuclide stations would leave gaps in coverage , as figure 2 shows for north korea .

these gaps pose a problem for monitoring and verification .

for example , a test might release radioactive material that wind currents blow away from ims stations , or the wind might loft such material high above these stations , which are at ground level .

mobile detection systems ready to deploy immediately after detecting a nuclear test would help address this problem .

these systems could include ships and radionuclide collection aircraft to deploy on or over international waters , and land - mobile systems to deploy in nations near the suspected test .

these systems might or might not be part of the ims depending on how they were handled pursuant to article iv ( verification ) , paragraphs 23-25 of the treaty , "changes to the international monitoring system. .

even if these systems were not included in the ims , states could still share the resulting data with the international data center pursuant to article iv , paragraphs 27 and 28 , "cooperating national facilities. .

mobile systems offer many advantages .

the ability to collect over broad ocean areas would close some gaps in the ims .

since mobile systems could collect data close to and soon after a suspected detonation , they might be able to collect particulates before they dropped back to earth .

particulates can provide high confidence that the material originated from a nuclear test ; they can also provide data on certain weapon characteristics .

gathering radioxenons quickly is of particular value for analyzing the ratio of xenon - 135 to xenon - 133 , which can also provide high confidence that a test was nuclear .

the rapid decay of xenon - 135 ( half - life , 9.14 hours ) , plus the decay of iodine - 133 and - 135 into xenon - 133 and - 135 , respectively , precludes such analysis after a short time .

close - in , rapid collection should result in higher concentration of radionuclides , facilitating analysis , because they would have less time to dilute in the atmosphere .

hafemeister states that airborne sensors or ground sensors closer to a test can enhance the concentration of radionuclides by a factor of more than a million .

close - in collection should also result in more confident determination of which nation conducted a test by greatly reducing the number of countries from which the radionuclides could have originated .

there could be obstacles to airborne or seaborne collection systems operating on or over international waters .

for example , according to press reports , north korea fired several surface - to - air missiles around the time of the 2009 nuclear test that "appeared to be aimed at keeping u.s. and japanese surveillance planes away from the nuclear test site. .

while the capability to detect radioactive noble gases is very good , it could be improved .

so doing would increase the probability of detection , both remote and onsite , by enabling a detector to pick up a signal from a radioisotope at a lower concentration or for a longer time .

figure 5 illustrates the point for onsite detection .

it shows a detection limit or threshold for argon - 37 and xenon - 133 ( horizontal lines ) .

it shows the signal from these two isotopes diminishing over time ( diagonal lines ) , with the xenon signal diminishing faster than the argon signal because the former has a shorter half - life , 5.3 days vs. 34.8 days .

the "window," or the period in which an isotope can be detected ( vertical lines ) , opens when the gas reaches the surface , with xenon and argon reaching the surface about 50 and 80 days , respectively , after a detonation as a result of barometric pumping , and closes when the amount of either gas falls below the detection threshold .

thus if the detection threshold can be lowered , the window closes later .

while the graph shows the signal as starting out at its peak , in practice the signal would begin at zero and at some point would rise rapidly .

as a result , a more sensitive detector might also "open" the window slightly earlier .

the air force technical applications center ( aftac ) operates two wc - 135 "constant phoenix" aircraft , which are designed to collect particulates and gases from a nuclear explosion .

the wc - 135 is a component of the u.s. atomic energy detection system .

aftac states , the air force maintains one primary and one backup wc - 135 to support airborne nuclear collections .

the aircraft are operated by the 55 th wing , 45 th reconnaissance squadron at offutt air force base , neb .

both the primary and backup aircraft are equipped with an aftac collection suite that provides the capability to collect the gaseous and particulate debris that might be released from a nuclear explosion .

the air force is conducting an analysis of alternatives to determine solutions that can support changing mission requirements and will provide long term , viable alternatives to the current capability as it reaches end of life ( the wc - 135 airframes are almost 50 years old ) .

the air force elaborated on the preceding statement: "currently , the wc - 135 must be evaluated for re - skinning the wings in around 2022 , and afmc [air force materiel command] asserts tf - 33 engine sustainment through 2040 .

otherwise , there is not an explicit end - of - life date. .

the analysis of alternatives "will examine the wc - 135 , plus other manned and unmanned aircraft , and assess the number of each aircraft appropriate for the mission. .

one of the two wc - 135s is the primary aircraft ; the other is a backup .

the air force stated , "either aircraft can fly the mission .

also both aircraft can be flown simultaneously .

however , one of the aircraft is usually in primary depot maintenance ( pdm ) and therefore would be unavailable .

if both aircraft are out of pdm then they both can support mission. .

thus the usaeds airborne collection asset at most times is a single aircraft nearly 50 years old based thousands of miles from north korea and also from iran .

given the prospect that several nations , over a vast geographic area , might conduct nuclear tests , it would be of value to collect samples as soon as possible to narrow the region where the test occurred , to minimize the loss of samples with time , and to have a chance of obtaining samples of xenon isotopes with forensic value .

accordingly , it may be desirable to have more than two aircraft for this purpose , and to have some forward - based .

forward basing might be less costly for large , long - range reaper - or global hawk - type drones than for wc - 135s and similar aircraft .

for example , since these drones are remotely operated , personnel controlling the mission and operating the sensors ( as distinct from the ground crew ) would not have to be forward - based .

also at issue is whether to extend the service life of wc - 135s or procure new aircraft .

finally , it may be worth considering whether to add airborne sensors to the ims , which would have to be done in accordance with article iv , paragraphs 11 and 23 , of the ctbt .

congress is aware of the importance of collecting samples promptly .

in the nuclear forensics and attribution act , it found , many of the radioisotopes produced in the detonation of a nuclear device have short half - lives , so the timely acquisition of samples is of the utmost importance .

over the past several decades , the ability of the united states to gather atmospheric samples — often the preferred method of sample acquisition — has diminished .

this ability must be restored and modern technologies that could complement or replace existing techniques should be pursued .

since the previous administration did not seek entry into force of the ctbt but did favor improving means of monitoring nuclear testing , it requested only those funds for the ctbto preparatory commission that directly supported the ims .

it requested these funds in the state department's international affairs function 150 budget in the nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining , and related programs account .

the fy2007 budget justification , for example , stated that the requested funds , $19.8 million , would "pay the u.s. share for the ongoing development and implementation of the international monitoring system ( ims ) , which supplements u.s. capabilities to detect nuclear explosions .

since the united states does not seek ratification and entry - into - force of the ctbt , none of the funds will support preparatory commission activities that are not related to the ims. .

while the prepcom budget shows no nation - by - nation link between funds received and funds spent , this quotation illustrates the attitude toward expenditures that would be of value only if the ctbt were to enter into force , such as osis .

consistent with this policy , the administration directed u.s. r&d funding away from osi issues and toward ims technologies .

with the obama administration favoring the ctbt , and with osis a key part of the verification regime , more might be done to make them more effective .

one approach would be to develop more sensitive detectors .

a second would be to integrate geophysical methods for detecting anomalies hundreds of feet underground with gas sampling techniques to help inspectors locate a suspected test more precisely .

a third would be to conduct field experiments on how noble gases reach the surface .

the only osi - type gas sampling experiment was performed in conjunction with the 1993 npe ( see " increase the sensitivity of detection equipment " ) .

conducting similar experiments ( perhaps releasing gases in mine shafts to reduce costs ) under various geologic , containment , hydrologic , and barometric conditions would help develop and calibrate computer models of gas leakage from underground tests , making results of the type found in 1993 applicable to a wider range of conditions under which osis might be conducted .

given the immense value of data provided by satellites , congress might explore whether additional r&d might be warranted on satellite - borne means of detecting signatures that a clandestine nuclear program or test , or preparations for a nuclear test , might produce .

while the ims does not include satellites , the provisional technical secretariat , which operates the ims , might want to conduct such r&d as well , both because it can utilize commercial satellite imagery and because the ims might , at some point , have access to its own satellite data .

the ctbt provides ( article iv , paragraphs 11 and 23 ) for the possibility of adding monitoring technologies such as satellites to the ims if agreed pursuant to article vii ( amendments ) .

the united states is presumably conducting classified r&d in areas related to the subject matter of this report .

the relevant congressional committees may wish to determine what efforts , if any , are being made along these lines and whether the level of effort in each such area is appropriate .

for example , many evasion scenarios set forth by ctbt opponents were created decades ago , some in the 1950s .

they have been studied and debated ever since , and study of such scenarios remains a daily concern of the intelligence community .

the ability to defeat evasive scenarios would increase confidence in detection capability , while an inability to defeat them would help guide detection r&d .

either way , efforts to develop and to defeat these scenarios would challenge scientists working on detection , just as with any other offense - defense competition .

however , few new evasion scenarios or technologies appear in the public record out of concern that public discussion of them could aid would - be evaders .

as noted earlier , it may be feasible and useful to detect argon - 37 at a distance .

however , moving from "may be feasible" to an operational system would require characterizing background levels of this isotope ; determining the value that might be gained by detecting this isotope in addition to detecting xenon - 133 ; studying the worldwide distribution of calcium , especially at likely test sites ; developing automated detection equipment that could be used at remote locations , such as at ims radionuclide stations ; and determining whether the cost of this effort is worth the benefit .

as the case of the 2009 north korean test shows , it would be useful to determine if an explosion was nuclear or chemical in order to reveal if a nation had conducted a nuclear test or was bluffing .

effluents of a chemical explosion would probably not permit making that determination because they would be hydrocarbons and there is a huge atmospheric background of such materials from vehicles , industry , forest fires , mining explosions , etc .

however , there might be other signatures , such as in the preparation , seismic waves , or post - event activity .

for example , detailed study of seismic waves might reveal slight differences between those generated by nuclear or chemical explosions .

this was a goal of the 1993 npe , though the apparent inability to prove conclusively that the 2009 north korean event was or was not nuclear indicates that more work along these lines may be warranted .

at the same time , it would be important to guard against the prospect that a nation could create signatures of a chemical explosion as cover for a nuclear test .

the ability to monitor signatures of nonnuclear explosions is especially important in situations like the 2009 event prior to ctbt entry into force .

after entry into force , should it occur , onsite inspections would be available to help resolve such situations .

