in a speech on april 22 , 2009 ( earth day ) , president obama linked the importance of winning the technological race to develop clean energy sources with the economic problems associated with u.s. dependence on an oil - based society .

the president said that the federal deficit and the trade deficit , as well as global warming , were all related to u.s. dependence on oil , especially imported oil .

he also described a fickle attitude held by american consumers , who typically are outraged by high gasoline prices or shortages , while displaying apathy toward the issue of oil prices during periods of low prices .

in a market economy , governments can , and do , alter the behavior of consumers and producers through tax and subsidy policies .

if the government wants to discourage the consumption of a commodity , it can raise the cost of the good to consumers by levying taxes at various stages of the production process , or by levying a direct tax at the point of sale .

typically , the higher cost faced by the consumer will lead to reduced consumption .

if the government chooses to encourage the development , or consumption , of a good , it can lower the price consumers face through subsidies , typically applied to the producers of the good , who then may pass the benefit of reduced costs on to consumers in the form of lower prices .

given the president's position on shifting u.s. energy consumption patterns toward renewable energy sources , his fy2011 budget proposal includes both subsidies for alternative energy sources and increased taxes on the oil and natural gas industries .

this report analyzes the likely economic effects that might occur if the president's proposed tax increases on the oil industry are enacted by congress .

during most of the 20 th century , the oil industry enjoyed favorable tax treatment in comparison with other u.s. industries through tax provisions such as the percentage depletion allowance and the write - off of intangible drilling expenses .

these benefits helped to keep petroleum product costs low and encouraged consumption .

low gasoline prices were , and are , a factor in both residential and business location decisions , holiday travel , and other aspects of american life .

many of these decisions represent economic investments that might no longer be viable if the relative price of gasoline and oil increases .

for example , when the price of gasoline rose to over $4 per gallon , based on oil prices that rose to over $145 per barrel in 2008 , consumers shifted their spending away from sport utility vehicles and light trucks toward more fuel efficient vehicles , reducing the sales and profitability of the u.s. automobile industry , accelerating the collapse of the industry .

shifting the u.s. energy consumption pattern from oil to alternative fuels is unlikely to occur without adjustment costs to consumers and u.s. industry .

in addition , available technology makes it unlikely that rapid large - scale transformations of usage patterns can be achieved .

although hybrid fueled automobiles are becoming popular , gasoline - powered vehicles promise to dominate the u.s. auto stock for some time .

over two - thirds of u.s. oil consumption is in the transportation sector , and it is unclear how renewable fuels can be utilized to substantially alter that pattern .

under the pressure of an economic recession , which began at the end of 2007 and continues to affect the united states in 2010 , a financial crisis that has required federal support for the banking system and financial markets , and the costs of new policy initiatives in health care , carbon emissions , and other areas , the level of projected federal revenues and deficits is a matter of concern in terms of achieving a structural change in preferences for petroleum products and alternative energy .

the desire to shift the nation away from oil , and to try to control the federal deficit , has led to a number of proposals to increase taxes on the oil industry .

table 1 identifies the proposed tax changes for the oil industry , and the white house's estimates of the impact of each on projected deficit effects to 2015 , if enacted .

many of these measures also have the effect of equalizing the treatment of the independent oil producers to that of the major oil companies .

this equalization is accomplished through eliminating preferential tax treatment of the independent companies compared to that of the major oil companies .

in some cases — for example , the expensing of intangible drilling expenses — the major oil companies have been excluded from the benefits of the tax provision while the benefit was still in effect for the independent oil producers .

although the white house prefers to call these proposals deficit reductions , or the elimination of tax preferences , they , for the most part , eliminate tax expenditures and would actually , or potentially , under certain market conditions , increase tax revenues .

compared to the fy2010 federal budget request , the 2011 document differs in that it eliminates the excise tax provisions on gulf of mexico oil and gas production .

this tax provision was intended to equalize the royalty rate on certain deepwater drilling projects that were allowed to pay a zero royalty rate until specified production targets had been reached .

as shown in table 1 , the proposed revenue changes would have immediate effects in 2011 of raising over $2.6 billion .

over half of the total proposed deficit reduction from 2011 to 2015 would come from only two of the proposals .

these two proposals could increase taxes on the oil industry , and influence its behavior .

the repeal of the expensing of intangible drilling expenses , and the rescinding of the manufacturing tax deduction for the oil industry , would increase the industry's tax payments by $25 billion through 2020 .

the department of interior ( doi ) budget proposal contains several changes in fees and other revenue - generating items that would affect the oil and natural gas industries .

the 2011 budget proposal includes provisions to transfer part of the cost of both onshore and offshore drilling inspection fees to involved companies .

however , the costs to industry are relatively minor .

the onshore fee expected to generate $10 million in revenues , or 25% of the cost of inspections .

the offshore inspection fee is to be doubled from the current level ; it is expected to generate $10 million in revenues .

in addition , the budget proposal includes a $4-per - acre fee on nonproducing leases .

this fee is expected to yield $2.5 million in receipts .

the budget proposal also seeks congressional repeal of section 365 of the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) .

section 365 prohibits the bureau of land management from charging producers for processing onshore drilling permit applications .

although these fees and charges would increase the cost of exploring , developing , and operating oil and natural gas facilities under doi's management and hence are likely to reduce those activities , as suggested by opponents of the proposals , the effects are likely to be minor , as these fees represent only a fraction of a percent of revenues , profits , or other taxes and fees paid to the government .

supporters of these fees might make the argument that they represent "user charges" consistent with environmentally sound management of resources on federal lands .

on the one hand , the tax changes proposed in table 1 would increase tax collections from the oil and natural gas industries and may have the effect of decreasing exploration , development , and production , while increasing prices and increasing the nation's foreign oil dependence .

these same proposals , from an alternate point of view , can also be considered to be the elimination of tax preferences that have favored the oil and natural gas industries over other energy sources and made oil and gas products artificially inexpensive , with consumer costs held below the true cost of consumption , when the costs associated with climate change and energy dependence , among other effects , are included .

whichever view is adopted , the real effects of these proposals on oil production , consumption , and imports are likely to be small relative to both the federal deficit and the revenues of the oil and natural gas industries .

