the purpose of the reconciliation process is to enhance congress's ability to bring existing spending , revenue , and debt - limit laws into compliance with current fiscal priorities established in the annual budget resolution .

when congress adopts a budget resolution , it is agreeing upon budgetary goals for the upcoming fiscal year .

in some cases , for these goals to be achieved , congress must pass legislation that alters current revenue , direct spending , or debt - limit laws .

in this situation , congress seeks to reconcile existing law with its current priorities .

the reconciliation process is still a relatively new congressional process in that there have only been 23 reconciliation bills passed by congress since the first use of reconciliation in 1980 .

as described above , congress has the option of including reconciliation directives in its annual budget resolution .

these directives trigger the reconciliation process , and without their inclusion in a budget resolution , no measure would be eligible to be considered under expedited reconciliation procedures .

when reconciliation directives are included in an annual budget resolution , their purpose is to require committees to develop and report legislation that will allow congress to achieve the budgetary goals set forth in the annual budget resolution .

these directives detail which committee ( s ) should report reconciliation legislation , the date by which the committee ( s ) should report , the dollar amount of budgetary change that should exist within the reconciliation legislation , and the time period over which the impact of the budgetary change should be measured .

they might also include language regarding the type of budgetary change that should be reported as well as other procedural provisions , contingencies , and programmatic direction .

the budget act includes a budget process timetable stating that congress is to complete action on reconciliation legislation on or before june 15 .

there is no corresponding enforcement mechanism , however , for ensuring that reconciliation legislation be completed by that date , and congress has instead followed a timetable established by the committee due dates in reconciliation directives in the budget resolution .

another provision in the budget act , prohibits house consideration of any resolution providing for adjournment of more than three days during the month of july if the house has not completed action on any required reconciliation legislation .

there is no procedural mechanism , such as a point of order , for enforcing the date specified in the reconciliation directive as it appears in the budget resolution .

committees sometimes have reported reconciliation legislation in response to their directives after the date specified in the directive with no impact on whether the resultant legislation was considered as reconciliation legislation .

in other words , the late response of one or more committees did not cause the bill to lose its privileged status as a reconciliation bill .

in the case of omnibus reconciliation measures , the house and senate budget committees have at times delayed reporting a bill until tardy committee submissions were received .

in some years , committees have not formally responded to the reconciliation directive instructing them to report legislation .

there may be several reasons for the lack of a formal committee submission .

for instance , there may have been a shift in policy priorities and congress no longer desired to pass reconciliation legislation .

it could also be that a committee fails to approve reconciliation language or it may be that although committees did not respond formally to the directive , they reported freestanding legislation that was not considered under reconciliation procedures but that may have satisfied the goal of the reconciliation directive .

as explained above , there is no procedural mechanism for requiring a committee to report reconciliation legislation on time , or at all .

each chamber , however , may employ methods of moving forward with reconciliation legislation , and to include legislative language that falls within the non - reporting committee's jurisdiction , in the event that the committee has not yet reported .

these methods vary by chamber .

in the house , if a committee has not responded to a reconciliation directive , it still may be possible to consider reconciliation legislation on the house floor that would satisfy the committee's directive .

in the case of omnibus reconciliation legislation , the budget act states that the house rules committee may make in order amendments to a reconciliation bill to satisfy reconciliation directives if a committee has not submitted reconciliation legislation to the house budget committee .

in the senate , if a committee has not responded to a reconciliation directive , it still may be possible to consider reconciliation legislation on the senate floor that would satisfy the committee's directive .

this would be in order on the floor in the form of a motion to recommit the bill to that committee with instructions that it report the measure back to the senate forthwith with an amendment .

unlike amendments to the reconciliation bill , the motion to recommit would not have to be germane if it were made in this situation .

such a motion to recommit would allow any senator to craft legislative language within the directed committee's jurisdiction on the floor .

