the federal home loan bank system is a cooperative , government - sponsored enterprise , created to provide liquidity to the nation's lenders with a special focus on low and moderate - income housing and community development , all under the supervision of the recently created federal housing finance agency .

the federal home loan bank ( fhlbank ) essentially acts as a lender to lenders .

the 12 regional banks engage in no direct lending to the public .

instead , member banks turn to the fhlbank for on - demand low interest loans which the member bank can then use to issue mortgages or other loans to the general public .

the 12 regional banks that make up the fhlbank system , though unfamiliar to many , have been key players throughout the financial crisis and are likely to continue to play an important role in the ongoing economic recovery .

many of the fhlbanks , however , like so many other entities involved in providing or financing mortgages , are suffering serious financial stress as a result of the collapse of the housing market .

with the regional fhlbanks suffering various degrees of financial difficulty , and a number reporting capital shortages , concerns have been raised as to the stability of the fhlbank system as well as the consequences of an fhlbank failure .

anxiety over a struggling fhlbank system may be warranted , as the banks as a whole are equal in size to failed mortgage giants fannie mae and freddie mac and just as interconnected with the national mortgage market .

this report discusses the fhlbanks' creation , purpose , structure , and position within the overall financial system so as to clarify the functions of the fhlbank .

the report then outlines the fhlbanks' current financial state and the statutory options for handling a potential failure .

the fhlbanks played an active role in efforts to stabilize the financial system throughout the financial crisis .

as other sources of funding fell , financial institutions increasingly turned to the fhlbank as a source for capital both to help cover losses and to allow members to continue making mortgages .

fhlbank advances to member banks likely prevented a number of financial institutions from collapsing , and delayed the failure of other institutions long enough to allow a merger or acquisition by a third party .

one result of the fhlbanks' role in the financial crisis has been an increased concentration of advances .

for example , 62% of the san francisco fhlbank's advances were to citigroup , jp morgan chase , and wachovia ( currently owned by wells fargo ) .

this concentration increased the potential losses to fhlbanks if a member , such as wachovia , were to become insolvent .

in modern finance , banks seek to have a large number of relatively small borrowers instead of a few large customers because they are better able to sustain more small losses than one large loss .

another result has been that because of mergers , advances will decline for some banks and other banks will increase advances .

for example , the seattle fhlbank lost its largest member and largest advance user when jp morgan chase purchased washington mutual .

the fhlbank system ( along with fannie mae and freddie mac ) continue to be in various degrees of financial difficulty due to declining home prices , rising delinquencies and foreclosures , and previous decisions that turned out badly .

all three balance profitability against providing support for the housing finance system and affordable housing opportunities .

according to preliminary , unaudited 2009 financial reports , combined new operating income for 2009 was $1.9 billion compared to $1.2 billion for 2008 .

four fhlbanks reported preliminary net losses: boston ( - $187 million ) , chicago ( - $65 million ) , pittsburgh ( - $37 million ) , and seattle ( - $162 million ) .

according to the fhlbank office of finance , most of these losses were due to declines of fair market value of certain assets .

in recent years , the fhlbanks' income has decreased for a number of reasons: mergers between member banks have reduced the number of members and shifted membership ( and borrowing ) between the regional fhlbanks .

fhlbank profitability has decreased because the difference ( "spread" ) between fhlbanks' cost of borrowing funds and the interest rate charged on advances to members has been smaller than in previous years .

the fhlbanks purchased private label mbs ( mbs not issued by fannie mae , freddie mac or the federal government ) , which have not been as profitable as anticipated .

the chicago and seattle fhlbanks developed programs to sell mbs in competition with fannie mae and freddie mac , but these programs produced losses and have since been terminated .

more specifically , the chicago fhlbank signed a consent order to cease and desist repurchasing capital stock , and the seattle fhlbank is officially considered to be undercapitalized .

des moines and pittsburgh are , also , considered to be in less than satisfactory condition .

boston and atlanta have suspended dividends to conserve capital .

table 1 provides more details on the conditions of each of the 12 banks .

in the first nine months of 2009 , fhlbank system assets decreased to $1,062 billion from $1,349 billion ( 21% ) and total capital decreased to $45 billion from $50 billion ( 12% ) .

for the first nine months of 2009 system net income was $1.3 billion compared to $1.9 billion for the same period in 2008 .

decreasing mortgage market activity led to a reduction of bonds and notes outstanding ( used mainly to finance advances to members ) to $980 billion from $1,258 billion .

appendix table a - 1 contains more detailed financial information .

the fhlbanks' recent financial troubles have led to questions as to what options would be available to handle the failure of one , or all , of the regional fhlbanks .

both the structure of the fhlbank system itself and federal law provide for certain procedures to stave off any system wide collapse .

if necessary , however , fhfa has the same authority under hera to seize control of one or more fhlbanks as it used to take over management of fannie mae and freddie mac .

the fhlbanks utilize the many benefits of their gse status to provide their member banks with access to low - cost funding .

during the recession that started in 2008 and the current liquidity crunch , the fhlbanks are likely to continue to play a large role in the ongoing recovery of the national housing market .

the mortgage crisis , however , has left some fhlbanks in a precarious financial situation , with billions in unprofitable mbs weakening their financial books .

were an fhlbank to fail , the existing internal cooperative structure of the fhlbank may be able to stabilize the system as a whole .

if internal corrections fail , however , statutory authority exists for a government intervention targeted at containing the disruption by stabilizing or liquidating the affected fhlbank .

as of september 30 , 2009 the fhlbank system had assets of slightly less than $1.1 trillion , with over 70% of those assets tied up in advances or mortgage loans .

the fhlbank exercises no oversight over their advances once they are distributed to member banks .

a member bank is limited , however , on how much it can borrow from the fhlbank based on the amount of stock the bank has purchased and the percentage of mortgage - related assets it holds .

