the united states witnessed an increase in sex offender management policy at the federal , state , and local levels beginning in the 1990s .

as a result , laws have been enacted which impose a variety of post - incarceration controls on sex offenders .

three such controls — residency restrictions , registration requirements , and civil commitment — are especially at issue in judicial decisions in recent years .

in two cases decided in the spring of 2010 , united states v. comstock and united states v. carr , the u.s. supreme court addressed questions raised by federal civil commitment and registration requirements .

residency restrictions are a matter of state law but also implicate federal constitutional guarantees .

proponents of strong post - incarceration controls argue that the restrictions are necessary to reduce a demonstrably high recidivism rate , safeguard potential victims , and assist law enforcement in tracking offenders .

opponents question the restrictions' efficacy and argue that they are disproportionate to the crimes committed .

as challenges to state and federal laws move through the courts , many questions remain .

should an offender be subjected to restrictions for crimes which occurred decades ago ? .

should juveniles be subjected to the same restrictions as adults ? .

these and other policy issues may be informed by judicial determinations .

this report examines background and case law related to registration requirements and residency restrictions .

the related issue of civil commitment was at issue in comstock .

in that case , the supreme court held that a federal statute authorizing the civil commitment of "sexually dangerous persons," 18 u.s.c .

§ 4248 , is within congress's authority .

for more information on united states v. comstock and other challenges to the federal civil commitment statute , see crs report r40958 , united states v. comstock: supreme court review of civil commitment under the adam walsh act , by [author name scrubbed] .

although specific requirements and parameters vary , all 50 states and the district of columbia require persons convicted of sex offenses to register where they live or work .

the requirements are enforced with associated state and federal criminal penalties .

the obligation to register typically continues after a person has served a sentence , in some cases remaining in effect long after incarceration .

registration may have dual goals of assisting law enforcement and preventing future crimes .

in many states , the latter goal is facilitated by making lists of registered sex offenders available to the public .

while federal laws govern mandatory registration and community notification , many states and localities have gone further by enacting residency restrictions .

these laws were first implemented in 1995 in the aftermath of the highly publicized murder of nine - year - old florida resident jessica lunsford by a previously convicted sex offender .

the laws vary in scope and duration .

the most common type prohibits sex offenders from residing within a certain distance of specified places where children congregate ( eg , schools , churches , parks , and libraries ) .

distance markers generally range from 1,000 to 2,000 feet from the designated place .

for example , alabama's residency restriction statute prohibits adult sex offenders from living within 2,000 feet of a school or child care facility or within 1,000 feet of the victim's residence .

variations also exist on the applicability of these restrictions .

some jurisdictions impose these restrictions on those designated as sexual offenders regardless of the type of crime , age of victim , or risk of reoffending .

thus , it is possible that an individual convicted of possession of child pornography or public indecency 10 years ago can be restricted in the same manner as an individual with several arguably more serious convictions for molesting young children , with one of the crimes happening relatively recently .

however , in other jurisdictions restrictions are limited to offenders convicted of only the most serious offenses or deemed most likely to reoffend based on some type of risk assessment .

for example , under arkansas law , it is unlawful for sex offenders assessed by the state to be level three ( high risk ) or level four ( sexually violent predator ) to live within 2,000 feet of a school or child care facility .

some statutes are only applicable to sex offenders who are on some type of supervised release , while others apply for a lifetime .

several statutes contain grandfather clauses exempting sex offenders who had established residency before the statute's enactment and / or prior to a designated entity's ( school or child care facility ) moving to within the given distance of their homes .

legislators and others are debating the efficacy of these restrictions as courts are determining the constitutional limits of enacting such laws .

proponents of these restrictions argue the need to safeguard potential victims — especially minors .

they contend that such restrictions reduce an offender's temptation and ability to reoffend by limiting sex offenders' access to children .

however , because most residency restrictions apply to all registered sex offenders , regardless of the victim's age , opponents argue that these restrictions are overly broad and do not serve to protect residents .

instead , opponents argue that these restrictions can cause a myriad of unintended consequences , such as ( 1 ) isolating offenders , potentially forcing them to live in rural areas that may lack sufficient employment opportunities , transportation , housing , and treatment ; ( 2 ) creating homelessness , making it difficult for law enforcement to track offenders ; ( 3 ) causing offenders to go underground and not update registration information ; and ( 4 ) preventing offenders from residing with supportive family members who live in restricted areas .

media accounts have described the hardships suffered by sex offenders and their families .

for example , five florida men were reportedly forced to live under the julia tuttle bridge between miami and miami beach when they could not procure any other restriction - compliant housing .

in enacting residency restrictions , legislators must strike a delicate balance in protecting communities from sex offender recidivism without violating the rights of offenders .

as these laws comprise both civil and criminal characteristics , the critical threshold issue is whether the laws are designed or operate as civil remedies or criminal penalties .

criminal laws , even those labeled as civil remedies , must provide constitutional protections to criminal defendants , while civil or non - punitive regulations do not require the same adherence to substantive and procedural safeguards .

defendants have challenged residency restrictions under a host of constitutional grounds , such as an infringement of substantive and procedural due process rights under the fourteenth amendment , an infringement of the right against self - incrimination under the fifth amendment , and an infringement of the eighth amendment's prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment .

while courts have generally rejected these constitutional challenges , defendants have had mixed results when arguing that residency restrictions violate the ex post facto clause .

state courts have generally found narrowly tailored statutes constitutional , while striking down statutes that either lacked a grandfather clause or were overly broad .

on the federal level , defendants have been unsuccessful with their challenges .

although defendants invoke different constitutional provisions to challenge restrictions , some overarching themes may be drawn regarding post - incarceration controls .

one theme involves timing: as new and existing controls continue to apply retroactively to individuals whose conviction for a sex offense predated the control , legal questions will persist regarding the constitutional limits .

more broadly , a continuing dilemma in ex post facto and other challenges arises because post - conviction controls generally comprise both civil and criminal elements .

fundamental to the outcome of their characterization are twin propositions: criminal laws , even those labeled as civil remedies , must afford constitutional protections to criminal defendants ; while civil non - punitive regulations do not require the same adherence to substantive and procedural safeguards .

as restrictions have increased in both number and severity , questions arise .

for example , is it possible that a statute's effect is so punitive as to negate a legislature's apparent non - punitive intent ? .

under what circumstances may these restrictions be applied ? .

