new federal tax credits were authorized in the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) , to help certain individuals pay for health insurance coverage , beginning in 2014 .

the tax credits apply toward premiums for private health plans offered through "exchanges" ( also referred to as health insurance marketplaces ) .

aca also establishes subsidies to reduce cost - sharing expenses .

this report describes the eligibility criteria applicable to the premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies , and the calculation method for the credit and subsidy amounts .

it also highlights selected issues addressed in the final regulation on premium credits .

aca requires health insurance exchanges to be established in every state by january 1 , 2014 , either by the state itself or by the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) .

these exchanges are not insurance companies ; rather , they are "marketplaces" that offer private health plans to qualified individuals and small businesses .

generally , exchange plans provide a comprehensive set of health services and meet all aca market reforms , as applicable .

in addition , most exchange plans comply with a requirement that measures how much a given plan will pay for a group of individuals ( who vary in terms of medical use and expenses ) ; that measure is referred to as actuarial value ( av ) .

most exchanges plans meet a specific av , with each av designated by a precious metal: bronze ( actuarial value of 60% ) , silver ( 70% ) , gold ( 80% ) , and platinum ( 90% ) .

for avs , the higher the percentage , the lower the cost - sharing , on average .

given that aca specifically requires exchanges to offer insurance options to individuals and small businesses , exchanges are structured to assist these two different types of "customers. .

consequently , there is an exchange to serve individuals and families , and another to serve small businesses ( "shop exchanges" ) , within each state .

however , aca gives states the option to merge both exchanges and operate it under one structure .

certain enrollees in the individual exchanges are eligible for premium assistance in the form of federal tax credits .

such credits are not provided through the shop exchanges .

the premium credit is an advanceable , refundable tax credit , meaning taxfilers need not wait until the end of the tax year in order to benefit from the credit , and may claim the full credit amount even if they have little or no federal income tax liability .

receiving the credits as advanced payments means that monthly insurance premiums will be automatically reduced by the credit amount .

therefore , the direct cost of insurance to an individual / family generally will be lower than the "advertised" cost for a given exchange plan .

the treasury department promulgated final regulation on the premium credits on may 23 , 2012 .

the final regulation confirmed certain eligibility and other requirements , as specified in statute ; such requirements are discussed in applicable sections of this report .

in addition , the internal revenue service ( irs ) has issued guidance and other documentation ( such as q&as ) relevant to premium credits .

aca specifies that premium credits will be available to "applicable taxpayers" in a "coverage month" beginning in 2014 .

an applicable taxpayer is an individual who is part of a tax - filing unit ; is enrolled in a plan through an individual exchange ; and has household income at or above 100% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) , but not more than 400% fpl .

a coverage month refers to a month in which the applicable taxpayer paid for coverage offered through an exchange , not including any month in which the taxpayer was eligible for "minimum essential coverage" with exceptions .

these eligibility criteria are discussed in greater detail below .

the amount of the premium tax credit varies from person to person ; the credit is based on the household income of the taxfiler ( and dependents ) , the premium for the exchange plan in which the taxfiler ( and dependents ) is ( are ) enrolled , and other factors .

in certain instances , the credit amount may cover the entire premium and the taxfiler pays nothing toward the premium .

in other instances , the taxfiler may pay part ( or all ) of the premium .

the calculation of the credit amount is based on a comparison of two amounts that result from two different scenarios .

the first scenario ( and amount ) is straightforward: the premium for the exchange plan in which the person / family enrolls .

the second scenario is more complicated , involving a formula that considers the premium for a standard plan in the local area in which the person / family resides , and an amount that the person / family may be required to contribute toward the premium .

based on a comparison of the amounts resulting from each scenario , the premium credit will be the lesser amount .

the following text box , "calculation of the premium credit amount," discusses these two scenarios in more detail .

under scenario b , the amount that a taxfiler who receives a premium credit is required to contribute toward the premium ( for the reference plan ) is capped as a percent of household income ; that is , the maximum premium contribution is the product of the taxfiler's household income and the "applicable percentage," as specified in aca .

in general , the applicable percentage is less for those with lower incomes compared with those with higher incomes ; where income is measured relative to the federal poverty level .

under scenario b , the amount that taxfilers with income between 100% fpl and 133% fpl may be required to contribute toward the reference plan's premium is capped at 2% of household income .

for taxfilers with income 300% - 400% fpl , their premium contribution is capped at 9.5% of income .

aca further specifies the applicable percentages that taxfilers , whose incomes are between those two income bands , may be required to pay toward the cost of exchange coverage under scenario b ( see figure 1 ) .

the line graph shows the "applicable percentage" used to calculate the taxfiler's required premium contribution at each income level , as measured relative to the federal poverty level .

the aca statute specifies the applicable percentage at certain incomes ( income at 100% fpl , 133% fpl , 150% fpl , etc. ) .

at each of those incomes , the line changes slope .

specifically , at and above 133% fpl up to 300% fpl , the applicable percentage increases incrementally as income increases .

for example , a person with income at 150% fpl may be required to pay a maximum of 4% of household income toward exchange coverage .

a 1% increase in income ( i.e. , person has income at 151% fpl ) results in a maximum premium contribution equal to 4.05% of income .

in contrast to this gradual change in the maximum premium contribution for incomes between 133% and 300% fpl , there is a "cliff" for a person / family with income below 133% fpl .

instead of the incremental change discussed above , the contribution amount jumps when you compare income just below 133% fpl with income at 133% fpl .

this cliff reflects statutory and regulatory requirements and is discussed in greater detail below .

calculation of the premium credit amount ( under scenario b ) is the arithmetic difference after subtracting the taxfiler's required premium contribution from the premium for the second - lowest cost silver plan ( "reference plan" ) available to the taxfiler .

it is theoretically possible that a person's required premium contribution could be equal to or exceed the reference plan's premium , leaving that taxfiler with a premium credit of zero .

moreover , while the credit amount under this scenario is based on the reference plan , the individual / family may enroll in any metal - tier plan and still be eligible for credits .

however , when a premium credit recipient enrolls in a plan that is more expensive than the reference plan , that person must pay the additional amount .

in addition to the premium credits , aca establishes subsidies that are applicable to cost - sharing expenses .

an individual who qualifies for the premium credit and is enrolled in a silver plan ( actuarial value of 70% ) through an exchange is also eligible for cost - sharing assistance .

the assistance is provided in two forms , and both forms are based on income ( see descriptions below ) .

individuals who receive cost - sharing subsidies may receive both types , as long as they meet the applicable eligibility requirements .

aca requires each metal tier plan to limit the total amount an enrollee will be required to pay out of pocket for use of covered services in a year ( referred to as an annual cost - sharing limit in this report ) , and establishes separate limits for self - only coverage and family coverage .

for 2014 , the annual cost - sharing limit for self - only coverage is $6,350 ; the corresponding limit for family coverage is $12,700 .

given that tiered plans will already be required to comply with those annual cost - sharing limits , one form of cost - sharing assistance reduces such limits ( see table 6 ) .

the cost - sharing assistance reduces the annual limit faced by eligible individuals with income between 100% and 250% fpl ; greater reductions are provided to those with lower incomes .

in general , this cost - sharing assistance targets individuals and families who use a great deal of health care in a year and , therefore , have high cost - sharing expenses .

enrollees who use very little health care do not generate enough cost - sharing expenses to reach the annual limit .

the second form of cost - sharing assistance also applies to individuals with income between 100% and 250% fpl .

for eligible individuals , the cost - sharing requirements ( in the plans they have enrolled ) have been reduced to ensure that the plan covers a certain percentage of allowed health care expenses , on average .

the practical effect of this cost - sharing assistance is to increase the actuarial value ( av ) of the exchange plan in which the person is enrolled ( see table 7 ) , so enrollees face lower cost - sharing requirements than they would have without this assistance .

given that this form of cost - sharing assistance directly affects cost - sharing requirements ( eg , lower deductible ) , both enrollees who use minimal health care and those who use a great deal of services may potentially benefit from this assistance .

in order to be eligible for cost - sharing subsidies , an individual must be enrolled in a silver plan , so that coverage already has an av of 70% .

for an individual who receives the subsidy referred to in table 7 , the health plan imposes a set of different cost - sharing requirements , so the "silver" plan will meet the new applicable av .

aca does not specify how a plan reduces cost - sharing requirements in order to increase the av from 70% to one of the higher avs .

through regulations , hhs requires each insurance company that offers a plan that is subject to these cost - sharing reductions to develop variations of its silver plan ; these plan variations must comply with the higher levels of actuarial value ( 73% , 87% , and 94% ) .

when an individual is determined by an exchange to be eligible for a cost - sharing subsidy , the person is enrolled in the plan variation that corresponds with that person's income ( as indicated in table 7 ) .

this approach ensures that the individual automatically benefits from this cost - sharing assistance , as soon as exchange coverage becomes effective .

the hhs secretary will provide full reimbursements to exchange plans that provide cost - sharing subsidies .

cbo estimates that that federal outlays for the cost - sharing subsidies will total $175 billion , from fy2015 through fy2024 .

