increasing concerns about global warming , energy independence , and public health have contributed to a rise in public interest in so - called "green" products and services , and the development of a "green" economy .

a number of federal programs and activities are relevant to that interest .

in addition to well - known programs aimed at the public such as energy star ( see text box below ) , the federal government is itself a major consumer of goods and services , spending more than $500 billion per year on procurement ( table 1 ) , with annual spending increasing significantly in recent years .

substantial proportions of those expenditures are on goods and services with significant environmental impacts .

for example , in both fy2008 and fy2009 , more than half of the funds spent on manufactured goods was for transportation equipment , and more than 15% was for information technology and other electronics and electrical products .

construction of buildings and other structures comprised 11% of spending in fy2008 and 7% in fy2009 .

those levels of expenditure imply that greater use of green procurement practices could significantly reduce the environmental impacts of federal activities .

furthermore , federal policies and practices relating to green procurement may have significant impact on the adoption of such practices by state and local governments and the private sector .

they might also serve to stimulate growth and innovation in green sectors of the national economy , potentially influencing the availability of green products and services in the marketplace and the development of associated industries .

several relevant federal procurement requirements and programs have been established , beginning with a requirement enacted in the 1970s for federal agencies to purchase products with recycled content .

that requirement and some additional initiatives focus largely or entirely on federal procurement , whereas others , such as energy star , a joint program of the environmental protection agency and the department of energy , were specifically designed to have a broader market focus .

these two kinds of federal efforts , which may be called agency - focused and market - focused , respectively , are distinct but not completely independent .

for example , energy star originated as a market - focused program aimed largely at consumers , but it is now included in federal regulations relating to acquisition of energy - consuming appliances and even buildings .

most of the federal initiatives focus on specific inputs or effects that a product might have , such as energy use , recycled content , or toxicity .

this approach can allow for fairly straightforward implementation of a given initiative , but it may also be criticized as not paying sufficient attention to interactions or trade - offs among various factors .

in addition , evaluating the effectiveness of initiatives in implementing federal green policy can be challenging .

several factors contribute to this situation .

a fundamental problem is that there is no general agreement on what green procurement is or how best to implement it .

also , several barriers exist to broader adoption , both within the federal government and in the broader economy .

those include inadequate information , lack of common standards , concerns about costs , and both market and technical uncertainties .

debate about the desirability or feasibility of meeting green policy goals such as reducing greenhouse - gas emissions may also create uncertainties .

however , this report does not specifically address controversies about the desirability of green policy goals , either those congress has established in various statutes , or those specifically addressed in executive orders issued by presidents clinton , george w. bush , and obama .

those controversies are complex , often long - standing , and beyond the scope of this report , but some of the major ones are discussed in other crs documents .

this report also does not address issues specific to the complex area of federal procurement , which is also discussed in other crs documents .

rather , the report focuses on procurement from a green policy perspective .

it discusses the problem of what green procurement means , selected aspects of applicability to and implementation by federal agencies ( both initiatives aimed largely at federal agencies and those with a broader focus ) , and issues that congress may decide to address with respect to federal green procurement programs .

those issues include what green procurement means in the federal context ; how programs and requirements should be established , assessed , and harmonized ; and what gaps exist at present with respect to focus , implementation , and evaluation .

green procurement may appear to be a somewhat fuzzy concept , given the variety of ways in which it and related terms are used .

there are many different practices and criteria that are called "green," and several alternative terms that are used at least somewhat interchangeably in public discourse .

in fact , the term green came into widespread use only in the last several years .

other terms used in various documents both historically and currently include "environmentally preferable," "sustainable," "affirmative," and "socially responsible" procurement .

those and other terms may have specific meanings in some contexts but they may also be used somewhat interchangeably in other contexts .

in addition , green procurement may be used in some cases to refer to purchasing of products and services with specific attributes such as energy or water efficiency , or use of biobased or recycled materials or nontoxic chemicals , without necessarily taking other factors into account .

such variations in usage and meaning can create significant difficulties in understanding what green procurement is and in the development and implementation of policy goals .

therefore , this section of the report develops a general conceptual framework for consideration of policy issues associated with green procurement .

it draws from both public - and private - sector initiatives and analyses .

it discusses examples from federal programs , including those that have a focus beyond procurement by federal agencies , as well as examples involving states and the private sector .

green - procurement activities by federal agencies are discussed specifically later , in the section on " federal green purchasing initiatives . .

as stated in the introduction to this report , federal initiatives relating to green purchasing of products and services can usefully be organized into two categories based on their primary focus: agency - focused initiatives intended to facilitate the procurement of green products and services by federal agencies , and market - focused programs aimed at the availability of green products and services in the broader economy .

those categories are not mutually exclusive .

programs that are primarily market - focused , such as energy star and biopreferred , may also affect federal acquisitions .

information on green initiatives developed specifically for federal procurement , such as epp ( see text box below ) , may be available to the public through an agency website or other source .

agency - focused initiatives may also influence the broader market in at least two other ways .

first , nonfederal organizations may adopt some version of a federal initiative , as has happened with epp .

second , the size of federal procurement operations — about $500 billion per year — means that federal green procurement programs have a significant potential to affect the availability of green products and services in the marketplace , as well as other aspects of the green economy .

given the size and potential impact of the agency - focused initiatives , most of this section addresses those activities rather than market - focused programs .

the discussion above raises several policy issues that congress may consider in examining federal efforts in green procurement and determining whether any legislative initiatives might be appropriate .

questions raised include the following: what , if any , are the most useful and appropriate policy goals for green procurement ? .

are the means by which different green - procurement preferences , programs , and other initiatives have been established the most appropriate for meeting policy goals ? .

how effectively are agency implementation and performance of green procurement being assessed ? .

how successful are current programs and initiatives at meeting policy goals ? .

are policies on the acquisition of green services sufficient ? .

are the preferences and the methods of implementing them sufficiently harmonized and integrated ? .

are there significant gaps in the various federal preferences for types of green products and services ? .

are there implementation methods not currently used by the federal government that should be considered ? .

is training of procurement officials sufficient ? .

the issues are explored and further characterized below .

green procurement requirements and other initiatives can be used to help meet several policy goals .

perhaps the most obvious and direct is the reduction of the environmental footprint of federal activities with respect to a set of green factors such as those described in this report .

related to that is cost savings through reduction of inputs such as energy , water , and materials .

another goal could be to use procurement leverage or market - focused initiatives to actively facilitate the development of green industries and other aspects of the green economy .

also , federal programs could help provide better ways to meet such goals , for example through facilitating the maturation of life cycle assessment methods and the development of standards .

some broad goals are contained in executive orders and related policy documents .

congress might find useful an integrated assessment of such goals and options for achieving them .

also , some observers may question more broadly whether green procurement is an appropriate focus for federal policy .

a discussion of the complex and often long - standing controversies about the desirability of green policy goals in general is beyond the scope of this report , but an assessment of green procurement policy might include an evaluation of the appropriateness of the goals congress has already established in various statutes , as well as those specifically addressed in executive orders issued by presidents clinton , george w. bush , and obama , in addition to new policy proposals .

also , given the lack of a commonly accepted characterization of what green procurement involves , especially in the context of other concepts and approaches such as sustainable procurement , an examination of green procurement and other relevant concepts , including whether they should be defined in legislation , might also be considered as part of an examination of policy goals .

in addition , an assessment might include examination of how green procurement policy goals interact with other goals of federal procurement policy .

the particular method used by the federal government to establish a green - procurement policy or requirement can have implications both for the degree to which it will be implemented and the ease with which it may be modified or revoked .

in general , statutory requirements such as those for recycled content and alternative fuels are likely to be more fully implemented than a conditional preference such as epp established by executive order but not by an enacted statute .

among the various methods available , policy document s provide the most flexibility but the least potential stability , as the executive branch can modify or revoke them at any time without necessarily considering congressional input or public comments .

statutes , in contrast , provide significant stability because congress must enact legislation to revoke or modify them .

however , the comparative difficulty of changing statutes may also make it more difficult for government to adjust policies established by them when external conditions change .

that may be especially the case if the statute establishes a fixed design standard rather than a flexible performance requirement .

for example , a statutory requirement to use a specific kind of alternative fuel might impede adoption of emerging alternatives that may be substantially better for meeting energy - policy goals .

however , a specific design standard is often simpler to implement than a performance standard .

executive orders and regulations based on them may be instituted , revised , or revoked without congressional action , but congress has the opportunity to review executive orders and regulations before they take effect , and the public generally has the opportunity during the rulemaking process to comment on proposed regulations or proposed modifications to existing regulations .

those two instruments therefore arguably fall somewhere between policy documents and enacted statutes in terms of their flexibility and stability , but unless they are specifically based on enacted statutes , they also give primary authority to the executive branch for any resulting green procurement requirements , policies , and programs .

given the broad range of green - purchasing preferences ( see the section on " preferences for green products and services " ) and the variation in the strength of their applicability , stability , and flexibility , congress may opt to examine whether any modifications would be desirable .

in some cases , congress has chosen to create statutory authority for an existing preference , as when it provided a statutory basis in the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-171 ) for preferences for biobased products that already existed under executive orders and regulations .

the methods currently used to track agencies' performance in green procurement , including those contained in environmental scorecards and reports to congress , focus largely on processes , not outcomes .

they tend to examine whether agencies have programs and policies in place rather than quantitative measures of the results of those programs and policies .

also , to the extent that reporting requirements are fragmented , it may be difficult for congress to assess the degree to which agencies are successfully engaging in integrated green - procurement activities that adequately address interactions among the various green factors across the life cycles of products and services .

agency environmental management systems ( see ems text box above ) could provide a mechanism for integrated performance tracking and assessment , but only if agencies collect appropriate life cycle data on relevant acquisitions , including procurement amounts , useful life , and end - of - life management .

omb has directed agencies to consider life cycle costs in procurement planning , but the degree to which the information they collect for that purpose would need to be supplemented to be useful for ems analyses is not clear .

while performance assessment is important for determining how well existing programs are being implemented , it does not provide a method for examining how well a program or a set of programs is meeting intended policy goals .

some entities have performed studies about outcomes from programs relating to federal green purchasing preferences , but there does not appear to have been any broader , independent examination of the success of those programs and initiatives in meeting broader policy goals such as those discussed above .

such an examination might be useful to congress in determining whether programs should be modified , expanded , or replaced .

roughly half of all federal procurement spending is for services .

however , many of the green purchasing preferences apply only to products .

for example , while recovered - content products are preferred in contracts for goods valued at over $10,000 , they are preferred in contracts for services only for solid waste management .

such restricted applicability may limit the ability of the federal government to use its purchasing power to leverage the availability and cost - effectiveness of green products and services in the marketplace , while broader use of such leveraging may help stimulate the development of green industries , to the extent that is a policy goal .

however , the cost and effectiveness of such efforts is not clear .

some recent proposals are seen as having had the potential to extend the product preferences to additional service contracts , although none have yet been so extended .

the george w. bush administration proposed substituting green products for equivalent non - green products in the "performance" of service contracts .

that proposal could have required contractors to use green products when doing work for the government even when that work did not involve the supply or delivery of products to federal agencies or facilities .

however , the proposal was never finalized .

president obama's executive order on "federal leadership in environmental , energy , and economic performance" ( e.o .

13514 ) contains provisions that could potentially have a similar effect .

however , it is unclear whether they will be interpreted to such effect in either regulations or other policy implementation , and congress does not appear to have provided any general guidance to agencies on the applicability of green purchasing preferences and programs to various services .

the federal approach to green procurement is arguably largely piecemeal and fragmented .

the emphasis has largely been on single - attribute preferences , with the exception of epp , which was designed in a way that could permit it to serve as a framework for an integrated , life cycle approach to federal green procurement .

however , it has been implemented as just one among the various preferences , and a comparatively weak one .

it has no specific basis in enacted statute and no requirement for formal determination of exemptions .

additionally , there appears to be significant ambiguity about which type of green product or service agencies should procure in situations where multiple types could meet their needs .

for example , the far requires agencies to acquire recovered - content products instead of biobased ones when both types would meet agency needs .

however , no similar guidance exists for the other types of preferred products and services discussed in this report .

that leaves agencies without guidance in determining whether , for example , they should procure energy star or femp - designated products , or recovered - content or environmentally preferable products .

such issues could potentially be addressed through an interagency mechanism such as the interagency sustainability steering committee established under e.o .

13423 and its working group on acquisition and materials management .

an examination of the role of these bodies may be useful in determining how best to effect improved integration and harmonization of the various initiatives .

while epp is arguably broad enough in concept to include all the factors involved in green procurement , its current limitations in comparison with single - attribute preferences have led to some gaps in practice in the coverage of the green factors and life cycle approach discussed in this report .

three gaps that are particularly notable are the focus of the energy - efficiency preference on use ( or operational ) energy rather than life cycle energy , the lack of an explicit preference with respect to water use and footprints , and the absence of specific green requirements for end - of - life management for government property such as information technology .

also , epp is among the weakest of the preferences , since it does not require any specific percentages or amounts of environmentally preferable acquisitions and is not accompanied by any requirement for contractor certification .

at present , there is also no single , generally accepted , multiattribute life - cycle - based certification or labeling system that procurement officials can use for all green products and services , as , for example , epeat provides for information technology .

there is not even a single , well - coordinated list of green products for federal agencies to use , but rather several lists maintained by different agencies .

in the absence of such resources and stronger requirements , significant gaps in preferences are liable to persist and the federal green procurement process is likely to remain relatively complex and opaque .

however , given the complexities of the procurement process , the potential for success and possible disadvantages of bridging those gaps are not clear and might be difficult to ascertain .

some foreign , state , and local governments have mechanisms for implementing green procurement that the federal government does not use .

to the degree that congress finds the current level of green procurement by federal agencies inadequate , or agencies have difficulties implementing green procurement , congress could promote additional or different implementing mechanisms .

doing so could including granting agencies additional legal authorities .

given concerns that have been expressed about the capabilities of the acquisition workforce , congress could explore whether the current workforce can adequately implement existing or proposed requirements and policies pertaining to green procurement .

certain requirements , most notably those involving environmentally preferable products , may be difficult for the existing workforce to implement because agencies must consider multiple attributes of products when determining which product to purchase .

this is a more complex determination than ascertaining whether a product possesses a single attribute , such as energy efficiency , and agencies might need information about vendors' production methods to make such determinations .

proposed requirements focused on products' sustainability or life cycle costs could be difficult to implement for similar reasons .

