this report provides background information and potential oversight issues for congress on the columbia - class program , a program to design and build a class of 12 new ballistic missile submarines ( ssbns ) to replace the navy's current force of 14 aging ohio - class ssbns .

the navy has identified the columbia - class program as the navy's top priority program .

the navy wants to procure the first columbia - class boat in fy2021 .

the navy's proposed fy2020 budget requests $1,698.9 million in advance procurement ( ap ) funding and $533.1 million in research and development funding for the program .

the program poses a number of funding and oversight issues for congress .

decisions that congress makes on the columbia - class program could substantially affect u.s. military capabilities and funding requirements , and the u.s. shipbuilding industrial base .

for an overview of the strategic and budgetary context in which the columbia - class program and other navy shipbuilding programs may be considered , see crs report rl32665 , navy force structure and shipbuilding plans: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke .

this report focuses on the columbia - class program as a navy shipbuilding program .

another crs report — crs report rl33640 , u.s. strategic nuclear forces: background , developments , and issues , by amy f. woolf — discusses the columbia class as an element of future u.s. strategic nuclear forces in the context of strategic nuclear arms control agreements .

 table 3 below summarizes congressional action on the navy's fy2020 funding request for the columbia - class program .

appendix a .

summary of past u.s. ssbn designs this appendix provides background information on the four ssbn classes that the united states has operated since 1959 .

the four classes are summarized in table a - 1 .

as shown in the table , the size of u.s. ssbns has grown over time , reflecting in part a growth in the size and number of slbms carried on each boat .

the ohio class carries an slbm ( the d - 5 ) that is much larger than the slbms carried by earlier u.s. ssbns , and it carries 24 slbms , compared to the 16 on earlier u.s. ssbns .

in part for these reasons , the ohio - class design , with a submerged displacement of 18,750 tons , is more than twice the size of earlier u.s. ssbns .

appendix b. u.s. - uk cooperation on slbms and the new uk ssbn this appendix provides background information on u.s. - uk cooperation on slbms and the uk's next - generation ssbn , previously called the successor - class ssbn and now called the dreadnought - class ssbn .

the uk's four vanguard - class ssbns , which entered service in 1993-1999 , each carry 16 trident ii d - 5 slbms .

previous classes of uk ssbns similarly carried earlier - generation u.s. slbms .

the uk's use of u.s. - made slbms on its ssbns is one element of a long - standing close cooperation between the two countries on nuclear - related issues that is carried out under the 1958 agreement for cooperation on the uses of atomic energy for mutual defense purposes ( also known as the mutual defense agreement ) .

within the framework established by the 1958 agreement , cooperation on slbms in particular is carried out under the 1963 polaris sales agreement and a 1982 exchange of letters between the two governments .

the navy testified in march 2010 that "the united states and the united kingdom have maintained a shared commitment to nuclear deterrence through the polaris sales agreement since april 1963 .

the u.s. will continue to maintain its strong strategic relationship with the uk for our respective follow - on platforms , based upon the polaris sales agreement. .

the first vanguard - class ssbn was originally projected to reach the end of its service life in 2024 , but an october 2010 uk defense and security review report states that the lives of the vanguard class ships will now be extended by a few years , so that the four boats will remain in service into the late 2020s and early 2030s .

the uk plans to replace the four vanguard - class boats with three or four next - generation dreadnought - class boats are to be equipped with 12 missile launch tubes , but current uk plans call for each boat to carry eight d - 5 slbms , with the other four tubes not being used for slbms .

the report states that "'main gate' — the decision to start building the submarines — is required around 2016. .

the first new boat is to be delivered by 2028 , or about four years later than previously planned .

the united states is assisting the uk with certain aspects of the dreadnought ssbn program .

in addition to the modular common missile compartment ( cmc ) , the united states is assisting the uk with the new pwr - 3 reactor plant to be used by the dreadnought ssbn .

a december 2011 press report states that "there has been strong [uk] collaboration with the us [on the dreadnought program] , particularly with regard to the cmc , the pwr , and other propulsion technology," and that the design concept selected for the dreadnought class employs "a new propulsion plant based on a us design , but using next - generation uk reactor technology ( pwr - 3 ) and modern secondary propulsion systems. .

the u.s. navy states that naval reactors , a joint department of energy / department of navy organization responsible for all aspects of naval nuclear propulsion , has an ongoing technical exchange with the uk ministry of defence under the us / uk 1958 mutual defence agreement .

the us / uk 1958 mutual defence agreement is a government to government atomic energy act agreement that allows the exchange of naval nuclear propulsion technology between the us and uk .

under this agreement , naval reactors is providing the uk ministry of defence with us naval nuclear propulsion technology to facilitate development of the naval nuclear propulsion plant for the uk's next generation successor ballistic missile submarine .

the technology exchange is managed and led by the us and uk governments , with participation from naval reactors prime contractors , private nuclear capable shipbuilders , and several suppliers .

a uk based office comprised of about 40 us personnel provide full - time engineering support for the exchange , with additional support from key us suppliers and other us based program personnel as needed .

the relationship between the us and uk under the 1958 mutual defence agreement is an ongoing relationship and the level of support varies depending on the nature of the support being provided .

naval reactors work supporting the successor submarine is reimbursed by the uk ministry of defence .

u.s. assistance to the uk on naval nuclear propulsion technology first occurred many years ago: to help jumpstart the uk's nuclear - powered submarine program , the united states transferred to the uk a complete nuclear propulsion plant ( plus technical data , spares , and training ) of the kind installed on the u.s. navy's six skipjack ( ssn - 585 ) class nuclear - powered attack submarines ( ssns ) , which entered service between 1959 and 1961 .

the plant was installed on the uk navy's first nuclear - powered ship , the attack submarine dreadnought , which entered service in 1963 .

the december 2011 press report states that "the uk is also looking at other areas of cooperation between dreadnought and the ohio replacement programme .

for example , a collaboration agreement has been signed off regarding the platform integration of sonar arrays with the respective combat systems. .

a june 24 , 2016 , press report states the following: the [u.s. navy] admiral responsible for the nuclear weapons component of ballistic missile submarines today praised the "truly unique" relationship with the british naval officers who have similar responsibilities , and said that historic cooperation would not be affected by thursday's vote to have the united kingdom leave the european union .

vice adm. terry benedict , director of the navy's strategic systems programs , said that based on a telephone exchange thursday morning with his royal navy counterpart , "i have no concern. .

the so - called brexit vote — for british exit — "was a decision based on its relationship with europe , not with us .

i see yesterday's vote having no effect. .

appendix c. columbia - class program origin and milestones this appendix provides background information on the columbia - class program's origin and milestones .

program origin and early milestones although the eventual need to replace the ohio - class ssbns has been known for many years , the columbia - class program can be traced more specifically to an exchange of letters in december 2006 between president george w. bush and uk prime minister tony blair concerning the uk's desire to participate in a program to extend the service life of the trident ii d - 5 slbm into the 2040s , and to have its next - generation ssbns carry d - 5s .

following this exchange of letters , and with an awareness of the projected retirement dates of the ohio - class ssbns and the time that would likely be needed to develop and field a replacement for them , dod in 2007 began studies on a next - generation sea - based strategic deterrent ( sbsd ) .

the studies used the term sea - based strategic deterrent ( sbsd ) to signal the possibility that the new system would not necessarily be a submarine .

an initial capabilities document ( icd ) for a new sbsd was developed in early 2008 and approved by dod's joint requirements oversight committee ( jroc ) on june 20 , 2008 .

in july 2008 , dod issued a concept decision providing guidance for an analysis of alternatives ( aoa ) for the program ; an acquisition decision memorandum from john young , dod's acquisition executive , stated the new system would , barring some discovery , be a submarine .

the navy established an columbia - class program office at about this same time .

the aoa reportedly began in the summer or fall of 2008 .

the aoa was completed , with final brief to the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) , on may 20 , 2009 .

the final aoa report was completed in september 2009 .

an aoa sufficiency review letter was signed by osd's director , cost assessment & program evaluation ( cape ) on december 8 , 2009 .

the aoa concluded that a new - design ssbn was the best option for replacing the ohio - class ssbns .

 ( for a june 26 , 2013 , navy blog post discussing options that were examined for replacing the ohio - class ssbns , see appendix d . ) .

the program's milestone a review meeting was held on december 9 , 2010 .

on february 3 , 2011 , the navy provided the following statement to crs concerning the outcome of the december 9 meeting: the ohio replacement program achieved milestone a and has been approved to enter the technology development phase of the dept .

of defense life cycle management system as of jan. 10 , 2011 .

this milestone comes following the endorsement of the defense acquisition board ( dab ) , chaired by dr. carter ( usd for acquisition , technology , and logistics ) who has signed the program's milestone a acquisition decision memorandum ( adm ) .

the dab endorsed replacing the current 14 ohio - class ballistic missile submarines ( ssbns ) as they reach the end of their service life with 12 ohio replacement submarines , each comprising 16 , 87-inch diameter missile tubes utilizing trident ii d5 life extended missiles ( initial loadout ) .

the decision came after the program was presented to the defense acquisition board ( dab ) on dec. 9 , 2010 .

the adm validates the program's technology development strategy and allows entry into the technology development phase during which warfighting requirements will be refined to meet operational and affordability goals .

design , prototyping , and technology development efforts will continue to ensure sufficient technological maturity for lead ship procurement in 2019 .

january 2017 milestone b approval on january 4 , 2017 , dod gave milestone b approval to the columbia - class program .

milestone b approval , which permits a program to enter the engineering and manufacturing development ( emd ) phase , is generally considered a major milestone for a defense acquisition program , permitting the program to transition , in effect , from a research and development effort into a procurement program of record .

a january 6 , 2017 , navy notification to congress on the milestone b approval for the columbia - class program states the following: on 4 november 2016 , under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics frank kendall chaired the milestone b defense acquisition board , and on 4 january , 2017 signed the acquisition decision memorandum approving columbia class program's milestone b and designating the program as an acquisition category id major defense acquisition program .

milestone b also establishes the acquisition program baseline against which the program's performance will be assessed .

additionally , this decision formally authorizes entry into the engineering and manufacturing development phase of an acquisition program , permitting the transition from preliminary design to detail design , using shipbuilding and conversion , navy ( scn ) funds .

cost estimates for this program have been rebaselined from cy2010 dollars to cy2017 dollars in accordance with dodi 5000.02 , rev p , dated 7 january 2015 .

the ms b navy cost estimate for average follow ship end cost ( hulls 2-12 ) in 2010$ using specific shipbuilding indices is $5.0 billion , a $600 million reduction from the ms a estimate , which nearly achieves the affordability target of $4.9 billion set at ms a .

to continue cost control , the navy will focus on: • stable operational and technical requirements • high design maturity at construction start • detailed plans to ensure manufacturing readiness including robust prototyping efforts and synergies with other nuclear shipbuilding programs • aggressive cost reduction actions affordability caps have been assigned that are consistent with current cost estimates and reasonable margins for cost growth .

relative to milestone a , these estimates have been updated to adjust base year from 2010 to 2017 , a standard practice to match base year with the year of milestone b approval .

the ms a unit cost affordability target ( $4.9 billion in cy2010$ using navy indices ) used a unique metric , "average follow - on ship end cost," which accounted for hulls 2-12 .

from milestone b forward , the affordability cap for the unit cost will be measured by using the average procurement unit cost ( apuc ) , which includes all 12 hulls .

the affordability cap of $8.0 billion in cy2017$ is based upon the approved apuc estimate of $7.3 billion plus 10%... .

the navy and industry are currently negotiating the detail design and construction ( dd&c ) contract , which is expected to award in early 2017 .

with negotiations continuing on the dd&c contract , the navy has ensured the columbia program design effort will continue without interruption .

the navy issued a contract modification to allow execution of scn for detail design on the existing r&d contract .

with this modification in place , detail design efforts that had initially planned to transition to the dd&c contract , will continue on the current r&d contract to ensure continued design progress .

with the milestone b approval and the appropriation of $773m in fy17 scn under the second continuing resolution , funding is now available to execute detail design .

in accordance with 10 u.s.c .

§2218a and the fy17 national defense authorization act , the navy deposited the fy17 scn into the national sea - based deterrence fund ( nsbdf ) .

the first installment of funding will be executed on the existing r&d contract , which allows transition into detail design and continued design progress until the award of the dd&c contract .

appendix d. design of columbia - class boats this appendix provides additional background information on the design for the columbia - class boats .

some key design features the columbia - class design will reflect the following: the columbia class is being designed for a 42-year expected service life .

unlike the ohio - class design , which requires a midlife nuclear refueling , the columbia class is to be equipped with a life - of - the - ship nuclear fuel core ( a nuclear fuel core that is sufficient to power the ship for its entire expected service life ) .

although the columbia class will not need a midlife nuclear refueling , it will still need a midlife nonrefueling overhaul ( i.e. , an overhaul that does not include a nuclear refueling ) to operate over its full 42-year life .

the columbia class is to be equipped with an electric - drive propulsion train , as opposed to the mechanical - drive propulsion train used on other navy submarines .

the electric - drive system is expected to be quieter ( i.e. , stealthier ) than a mechanical - drive system .

the columbia class is to have slbm launch tubes that are the same size as those on the ohio class ( i.e. , tubes with a diameter of 87 inches and a length sufficient to accommodate a d - 5 slbm ) .

the columbia class will have a beam ( i.e. , diameter ) of 43 feet , compared to 42 feet on the ohio - class design , and a length of 560 feet , the same as that of the ohio - class design .

instead of 24 slbm launch tubes , as on the ohio - class design , the columbia class is to have 16 slbm launch tubes .

as noted earlier , although the columbia - class design has fewer slbm tubes than the ohio - class design , it is larger than the ohio - class design in terms of submerged displacement .

the columbia - class design has a reported submerged displacement of 20,815 tons ( as of august 2014 ) , compared to 18,750 tons for the ohio - class design .

the columbia - class design , like the ohio - class design before it , will be the largest submarine ever built by the united states .

the navy states that "owing to the unique demands of strategic relevance , [columbia - class boats] must be fitted with the most up - to - date capabilities and stealth to ensure they are survivable throughout their full 40-year life span. .

june 2013 navy blog post regarding ohio replacement options a june 26 , 2013 , blog post by rear admiral richard breckenridge , the navy's director for undersea warfare ( n97 ) , discussing options that were examined for replacing the ohio - class ssbns , stated the following: over the last five years , the navy – working with u.s. strategic command , the joint staff and the office of the secretary of defense – has formally examined various options to replace the ohio ballistic missile submarines as they retire beginning in 2027 .

this analysis included a variety of replacement platform options , including designs based on the highly successful virginia - class attack submarine program and the current ohio - class ballistic missile submarine .

in the end , the navy elected to pursue a new design that leverages the lessons from the ohio , the virginia advances in shipbuilding and improvements in cost - efficiency .

recently , a variety of writers have speculated that the required survivable deterrence could be achieved more cost effectively with the virginia - based option or by restarting the ohio - class ssbn production line .

both of these ideas make sense at face value – which is why they were included among the alternatives assessed – but the devil is in the details .

when we examined the particulars , each of these options came up short in both military effectiveness and cost efficiency .

virginia - based ssbn design with a trident ii d5 missile .

an ssbn design based on a virginia - class attack submarine with a large - diameter missile compartment was rejected due to a wide range of shortfalls .

it would: • not meet survivability ( stealth ) requirements due to poor hull streamlining and lack of a drive train able to quietly propel a much larger ship • not meet at - sea availability requirements due to longer refit times ( since equipment is packed more tightly within the hull , it requires more time to replace , repair and retest ) • not meet availability requirements due to a longer mid - life overhaul ( refueling needed ) • require a larger number of submarines to meet the same operational requirement • reduce the deterrent value needed to protect the country ( fewer missiles , warheads at - sea ) • be more expensive than other alternatives due to extensive redesign of virginia systems to work with the large missile compartment ( for example , a taller sail , larger control surfaces and more robust support systems ) we would be spending more money ( on more ships ) to deliver less deterrence ( reduced at - sea warhead presence ) with less survivability ( platforms that are less stealthy ) .

virginia - based ssbn design with a smaller missile .

some have encouraged the development of a new , smaller missile to go with a virginia - based ssbn .

this would carry forward many of the shortfalls of a virginia - based ssbn we just discussed , and add to it a long list of new issues .

developing a new nuclear missile from scratch with an industrial base that last produced a new design more than 20 years ago would be challenging , costly and require extensive testing .

we deliberately decided to extend the life of the current missile to decouple and de - risk the complex ( and costly ) missile development program from the new replacement submarine program .

additionally , a smaller missile means a shorter employment range requiring longer ssbn patrol transits .

this would compromise survivability , require more submarines at sea and ultimately weaken our deterrence effectiveness .

with significant cost , technical and schedule risks , there is little about this option that is attractive .

ohio - based ssbn design .

some have argued that we should re - open the ohio production line and resume building the ohio design ssbns .

this simply cannot be done because there is no ohio production line .

it has long since been re - tooled and modernized to build state - of - the - art virginia - class ssns using computerized designs and modular , automated construction techniques .

is it desirable to redesign the ohio so that a ship with its legacy performance could be built using the new production facilities ? .

no , since an ohio - based ssbn would: • not provide the required quieting due to ohio design constraints and use of a propeller instead of a propulsor ( which is the standard for virtually all new submarines ) • require 14 instead of 12 ssbns by reverting to ohio class operational availability standards ( incidentally creating other issues with the new start treaty limits ) • suffer from reduced reliability and costs associated with the obsolescence of legacy ohio system components once again , the end result would necessitate procuring more submarines ( 14 ) to provide the required at - sea presence and each of them would be less stealthy and less survivable against foreseeable 21 st century threats .

the right answer: a new design ssbn that improves on ohio: what has emerged from the navy's exhaustive analysis is an ohio replacement submarine that starts with the foundation of the proven performance of the ohio ssbn , its trident ii d5 strategic weapons system and its operating cycle .

to this it adds: • enhanced stealth as necessary to pace emerging threats expected over its service life • systems commonality with virginia ( pumps , valves , sonars , etc. ) .

wherever possible , enabling cost savings in design , procurement , maintenance and logistics • modular construction and use of cots equipment consistent with those used in today's submarines to reduce the cost of fabrication , maintenance and modernization .

total ownership cost reduction ( for example , investing in a life - of - the - ship reactor core enables providing the same at - sea presence with fewer platforms ) .

although the ohio replacement is a "new design," it is in effect an ssbn that takes the best lessons from 50 years of undersea deterrence , from the ohio , from the virginia , from advances in shipbuilding efficiency and maintenance , and from the stern realities of needing to provide survivable nuclear deterrence .

the result is a low - risk , cost - effective platform capable of smoothly transitioning from the ohio and delivering effective 21 st century undersea strategic deterrence .

16 vs. 20 slbm tubes overview the navy's decision to design columbia - class boats with 16 slbm tubes rather than 20 was one of several decisions the navy made to reduce the estimated average procurement cost of boats 2 through 12 in the program toward a navy target cost of $4.9 billion in fy2010 dollars .

some observers were concerned that designing the columbia class with 16 tubes rather than 20 would create a risk that u.s. strategic nuclear forces might not have enough capability in the 2030s and beyond to fully perform their deterrent role .

these observers noted that to comply with the new start treaty limiting strategic nuclear weapons , dod plans to operate in coming years a force of 14 trident ssbns , each with 20 operable slbm tubes ( 4 of the 24 tubes on each boat are to be rendered inoperable ) , for a total of 280 tubes , whereas the navy in the columbia - class program is planning a force of 12 ssbns each with 16 tubes , for a total of 192 tubes , or about 31% less than 280 .

these observers also cited the uncertainties associated with projecting needs for strategic deterrent forces out to the year 2080 , when the final columbia - class boat is scheduled to leave service .

these observers asked whether the plan to design the columbia class with 16 tubes rather than 20 was fully supported within all parts of dod , including u.s. strategic command ( stratcom ) .

in response , navy and other dod officials stated that the decision to design the columbia class with 16 tubes rather than 20 was carefully considered within dod , and that they believe a boat with 16 tubes will give u.s. strategic nuclear forces enough capability to fully perform their deterrent role in the 2030s and beyond .

testimony in 2011 at a march 1 , 2011 , hearing before the house armed services committee , admiral gary roughead , then - chief of naval operations , stated the following: i'm very comfortable with where we're going with ssbn - x .

the decision and the recommendation that i made with regard to the number of tubes — launch tubes are consistent with the new start treaty .

they're consistent with the missions that i see that ship having to perform .

and even though it may be characterized as a cost cutting measure , i believe it sizes the ship for the missions it will perform .

at a march 2 , 2011 , hearing before the strategic forces subcommittee of the house armed services committee , the following exchange occurred: representative turner: general kehler , thank you so much for your continued thoughts and of course your leadership .

one item that we had a discussion on was the triad , of looking to — of the navy and the tube reductions of 20 to 16 , as contained in other hearings on the hill today .

i would like your thoughts on the reduction of the tubes and what you see driving that , how you see it affecting our strategic posture and any other thoughts you have on that ? .

air force general c. robert kehler , commander , u.s. strategic command thank you , mr. chairman .

well , first of all , sir , let me say that the — in my mind anyway , the discussion of trident and ohio - class replacement is really a discussion in the context of the need to modernize the entire triad .

and so , first of all , i think that it's important for us to recognize that that is one piece , an important piece , but a piece of the decision process that we need to go through .

second , the issue of the number of tubes is not a simple black - and - white answer .

so let me just comment here for a minute .

first of all , the issue in my mind is the overall number of tubes we wind up with at the end , not so much as the number of tubes per submarine .

second , the issue is , of course , we have flexibility and options with how many warheads per missile per tube , so that's another consideration that enters into this mixture .

another consideration that is important to me is the overall number of boats and the operational flexibility that we have with the overall number of boats , given that some number will need to be in maintenance , some number will need to be in training , et cetera .

and so those and many other factors — to include a little bit of foresight here , in looking ahead to 20 years from now in antisubmarine warfare environment that the navy will have to operate in , all of those bear on the ultimate sideways shape configuration of a follow - on to the ohio .

at this point , mr. chairman , i am not overly troubled by going to 16 tubes .

as i look at this , given that we have that kind of flexibility that i just laid out ; given that this is an element of the triad and given that we have some decision space here as we go forward to decide on the ultimate number of submarines , nothing troubles me operationally here to the extent that i would oppose a submarine with 16 tubes .

i understand the reasons for wanting to have 20 .

i understand the arguments that were made ahead of me .

but as i sit here today , given the totality of the discussion , i am — as i said , i am not overly troubled by 16 .

now , i don't know that the gavel has been pounded on the other side of the river yet with a final decision , but at this point , i am not overly troubled by 16 .

at an april 5 , 2011 , hearing before the strategic forces subcommittee of the house armed services committee , the following exchange occurred: representative larsen: general benedict , we have had this discussion , not you and i , i am sorry .

but the subcommittee has had a discussion in the past with regards to the ohio - class replacement program .

the new start , though , when it was negotiated , assumed a reduction from 24 missile tubes per hole to , i think , a maximum a maximum of 20 .

the current configuration [for the columbia class] , as i understand it , would move from 24 to 16 .

can you discuss , for the subcommittee here , the navy's rationale for that ? .

for moving from 24 to 16 as opposed to the max of 20 ? .

navy rear admiral terry benedict , director , strategic systems programs ( ssp ) : sir , as part — excuse me , as part of the work - up for the milestone a [review for the columbia class program] with dr. carter in osd , ssp supported the extensive analysis at both the osd level as well as stratcom's analysis .

throughout that process , we provided , from the sws [strategic weapon system] capability , our perspective .

ultimately that was rolled up into both stratcom and osd and senior navy leadership and in previous testimony , the secretary of the navy , the cno , and general chilton have all expressed their confidence that the mission of the future , given their perspectives , is they see the environment today can be met with 16 .

and so , as the acquisition and the sws provider , we are prepared to support that decision by leadership , sir .

representative larsen: yes .

and your analysis supports — did your analysis that fed into this , did you look at specific numbers then ? .

reard admiral benedict: sir , we looked at the ability of the system , again , ssp does not look at specific targets with... representative larsen: right .

yes , yes , yes .

rear admiral benedict: our input was the capability of the missile , the number of re - entry bodies and the throw weight that we can provide against those targets and based on that analysis , the leadership decision was 16 , sir .

at an april 6 , 2011 , hearing before the strategic forces subcommittee of the senate armed services committee , the following exchange occurred: senator sessions: admiral benedict , according to recent press reports , the navy rejected the recommendations of strategic command to design the next generation of ballistic missile submarines with 20 missile tubes instead of opting for only 16 per boat .

what is the basis for the navy's decision of 16 ? .

and i'm sure cost is a factor .

in what ways will that decision impact the overall nuclear force structure associated with the command ? .

navy rear admiral terry benedict , director , strategic systems programs ( ssp ) : yes , sir .

ssp supported the navy analysis , stratcom's analysis , as well as the osd analysis , as we proceeded forward and towards the milestone a decision [on the columbia class program] that dr. carter conducted .

based on our input , which was the technical input as the — as the director of ssp , other factors were considered , as you stated .

cost was one of them .

but as the secretary , as the cno , and i think as general kehler submitted in their testimony , that given the threats that we see today , given the mission that we see today , given the upload capability of the d - 5 , and given the environment as they saw today , all three of those leaders were comfortable with the decision to proceed forward with 16 tubes , sir .

senator sessions: and is that represent your judgment ? .

to what extent were you involved — were you involved in that ? .

rear admiral benedict: sir , we were involved from technical aspects in terms of the capability of the missile itself , what we can throw , our range , our capability .

and based on what we understand the capability of the d - 5 today , which will be the baseline missile for the ohio replacement program , as the director of ssp i'm comfortable with that decision .

section 242 report section 242 of the fy2012 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

1540 / p.l .

112-81 of december 31 , 2011 ) required dod to submit a report on the columbia - class program that includes , among other things , an assessment of various combinations of boat quantities and numbers of slbm launch tubes per boat .

the text of the section is as follows: sec .

242 .

report and cost assessment of options for ohio - class replacement ballistic missile submarine .

 ( a ) report required - not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of the navy and the commander of the united states strategic command shall jointly submit to the congressional defense committees a report on each of the options described in subsection ( b ) to replace the ohio - class ballistic submarine program .

the report shall include the following: ( 1 ) an assessment of the procurement cost and total life - cycle costs associated with each option .

 ( 2 ) an assessment of the ability for each option to meet — ( a ) the at - sea requirements of the commander that are in place as of the date of the enactment of this act ; and ( b ) any expected changes in such requirements .

 ( 3 ) an assessment of the ability for each option to meet — ( a ) the nuclear employment and planning guidance in place as of the date of the enactment of this act ; and ( b ) any expected changes in such guidance .

 ( 4 ) a description of the postulated threat and strategic environment used to inform the selection of a final option and how each option provides flexibility for responding to changes in the threat and strategic environment .

 ( b ) options considered - the options described in this subsection to replace the ohio - class ballistic submarine program are as follows: ( 1 ) a fleet of 12 submarines with 16 missile tubes each .

 ( 2 ) a fleet of 10 submarines with 20 missile tubes each .

 ( 3 ) a fleet of 10 submarines with 16 missile tubes each .

 ( 4 ) a fleet of eight submarines with 20 missile tubes each .

 ( 5 ) any other options the secretary and the commander consider appropriate .

 ( c ) form - the report required under subsection ( a ) shall be submitted in unclassified form , but may include a classified annex .

subsection ( c ) above states the report "shall be submitted in unclassified form , but may include a classified annex. .

the report as submitted was primarily the classified annex , with a one - page unclassified summary , the text of which is as follows ( underlining as in the original ) : the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2012 ( fy12 ) directed the secretary of the navy and the commander of u.s. strategic command ( usstratcom ) to jointly submit a report to the congressional defense committees comparing four different options for the ohio replacement ( or ) fleet ballistic missile submarine ( ssbn ) program .

our assessment considered the current operational requirements and guidance .

the four ssbn options analyzed were: 1.12 ssbns with 16 missile tubes each 2.10 ssbns with 20 missile tubes each 3.10 ssbns with 16 missile tubes each 4.8 ssbns with 20 missile tubes each the ssbn force continues to be an integral part of our nuclear triad and contributes to deterrence through an assured second strike capability that is survivable , reliable , and credible .

the number of ssbns and their combined missile tube capacity are important factors in our flexibility to respond to changes in the threat and uncertainty in the strategic environment .

we assessed each option against the ability to meet nuclear employment and planning guidance , ability to satisfy at - sea requirements , flexibility to respond to future changes in the postulated threat and strategic environment , and cost .

in general , options with more ssbns can be adjusted downward in response to a diminished threat ; however , options with less ssbns are more difficult to adjust upward in response to a growing threat .

clearly , a smaller ssbn force would be less expensive than a larger force , but for the reduced force options we assessed , they fail to meet current at - sea and nuclear employment requirements , increase risk in force survivability , and limit flexibility in response to an uncertain strategic future .

our assessment is the program of record , 12 ssbns with 16 missile tubes each , provides the best balance of performance , flexibility , and cost meeting commander's requirements while supporting the nation's strategic deterrence mission goals and objectives .

the classified annex contains detailed analysis that is not releasable to the public .

appendix e. national sea - based deterrence fund ( nsbdf ) this appendix provides additional background information on the national sea - based deterrence fund ( nsbdf ) .

created by p.l .

113-291 section 1022 of the carl levin and howard p. "buck" mckeon national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 ( h.r .

3979 / p.l .

113-291 of december 19 , 2014 ) created the national sea - based deterrence fund ( nsbdf ) , a fund in the dod budget , codified at 10 u.s.c .

2218a , that is separate from the navy's regular shipbuilding account ( which is formally known as the shipbuilding and conversion , navy , or scn , appropriation account ) .

amended by p.l .

114-92 , p.l .

114-328 , and p.l .

115-91 section 1022 of the fy2016 national defense authorization act ( s. 1356 / p.l .

114-92 of november 25 , 2015 ) , section 1023 of the fy2017 national defense authorization act ( s. 2943 / p.l .

114-328 of december 23 , 2016 ) , and section 1022 of the fy2018 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

2810 / p.l .

115-91 of december 12 , 2017 ) amended 10 u.s.c .

2218a to provide additional acquisition authorities for the nsbdf .

text as amended the text of 10 u.s.c .

2218a , as amended , is as follows: §2218a .

national sea - based deterrence fund ( a ) establishment. - there is established in the treasury of the united states a fund to be known as the "national sea - based deterrence fund" .

 ( b ) administration of fund. - the secretary of defense shall administer the fund consistent with the provisions of this section .

 ( c ) fund purposes. - ( 1 ) funds in the fund shall be available for obligation and expenditure only for construction ( including design of vessels ) , purchase , alteration , and conversion of national sea - based deterrence vessels .

 ( 2 ) funds in the fund may not be used for a purpose or program unless the purpose or program is authorized by law .

 ( d ) deposits. - there shall be deposited in the fund all funds appropriated to the department of defense for construction ( including design of vessels ) , purchase , alteration , and conversion of national sea - based deterrence vessels .

 ( e ) expiration of funds after 5 years. - no part of an appropriation that is deposited in the fund pursuant to subsection ( d ) shall remain available for obligation more than five years after the end of fiscal year for which appropriated except to the extent specifically provided by law .

 ( f ) authority to enter into economic order quantity contracts. - ( 1 ) the secretary of the navy may use funds deposited in the fund to enter into contracts known as "economic order quantity contracts" with private shipyards and other commercial or government entities to achieve economic efficiencies based on production economies for major components or subsystems .

the authority under this subsection extends to the procurement of parts , components , and systems ( including weapon systems ) common with and required for other nuclear powered vessels under joint economic order quantity contracts .

 ( 2 ) a contract entered into under paragraph ( 1 ) shall provide that any obligation of the united states to make a payment under the contract is subject to the availability of appropriations for that purpose , and that total liability to the government for termination of any contract entered into shall be limited to the total amount of funding obligated at time of termination .

 ( g ) authority to begin manufacturing and fabrication efforts prior to ship authorization. - ( 1 ) the secretary of the navy may use funds deposited into the fund to enter into contracts for advance construction of national sea - based deterrence vessels to support achieving cost savings through workload management , manufacturing efficiencies , or workforce stability , or to phase fabrication activities within shipyard and manage sub - tier manufacturer capacity .

 ( 2 ) a contract entered into under paragraph ( 1 ) shall provide that any obligation of the united states to make a payment under the contract is subject to the availability of appropriations for that purpose , and that total liability to the government for termination of any contract entered into shall be limited to the total amount of funding obligated at time of termination .

 ( h ) authority to use incremental funding to enter into contracts for certain items. - ( 1 ) the secretary of the navy may use funds deposited into the fund to enter into incrementally funded contracts for advance procurement of high value , long lead time items for nuclear powered vessels to better support construction schedules and achieve cost savings through schedule reductions and properly phased installment payments .

 ( 2 ) a contract entered into under paragraph ( 1 ) shall provide that any obligation of the united states to make a payment under the contract is subject to the availability of appropriations for that purpose , and that total liability to the government for termination of any contract entered into shall be limited to the total amount of funding obligated at time of termination .

 ( i ) authority for multiyear procurement of critical components to support continuous production. - ( 1 ) to implement the continuous production of critical components , the secretary of the navy may use funds deposited in the fund , in conjunction with funds appropriated for the procurement of other nuclear - powered vessels , to enter into one or more multiyear contracts ( including economic ordering quantity contracts ) , for the procurement of critical contractor - furnished and government - furnished components for critical components of national sea - based deterrence vessels .

the authority under this subsection extends to the procurement of equivalent critical components common with and required for other nuclear - powered vessels .

 ( 2 ) in each annual budget request submitted to congress , the secretary shall clearly identify funds requested for critical components and the individual ships and programs for which such funds are requested .

 ( 3 ) any contract entered into pursuant to paragraph ( 1 ) shall provide that any obligation of the united states to make a payment under the contract is subject to the availability of appropriations for that purpose and that the total liability to the government for the termination of the contract shall be limited to the total amount of funding obligated for the contract as of the date of the termination .

 ( j ) budget requests. - budget requests submitted to congress for the fund shall separately identify the amount requested for programs , projects , and activities for construction ( including design of vessels ) , purchase , alteration , and conversion of national sea - based deterrence vessels .

 ( k ) definitions. - in this section: ( 1 ) the term "fund" means the national sea - based deterrence fund established by subsection ( a ) .

 ( 2 ) the term "national sea - based deterrence vessel" means any submersible vessel constructed or purchased after fiscal year 2016 that is owned , operated , or controlled by the department of defense and that carries operational intercontinental ballistic missiles .

 ( 3 ) the term "critical component" means any of the following: ( a ) a common missile compartment component .

 ( b ) a spherical air flask .

 ( c ) an air induction diesel exhaust valve .

 ( d ) an auxiliary seawater valve .

 ( e ) a hovering valve .

 ( f ) a missile compensation valve .

 ( g ) a main seawater valve .

 ( h ) a launch tube .

 ( i ) a trash disposal unit .

 ( j ) a logistics escape trunk .

 ( k ) a torpedo tube .

 ( l ) a weapons shipping cradle weldment .

 ( m ) a control surface .

 ( n ) a launcher component .

 ( o ) a propulsor .

precedents for funding navy acquisition programs outside navy appropriation accounts prior to the establishment of the nsbdf , some observers had suggested funding the procurement of columbia - class boats outside the navy's shipbuilding budget , so as to preserve navy shipbuilding funds for other navy shipbuilding programs .

there was some precedent for such an arrangement construction of certain dod sealift ships and navy auxiliary ships was funded in past years in the national defense sealift fund ( ndsf ) , a part of dod's budget that is outside the shipbuilding and conversion , navy ( scn ) appropriation account , and also outside the procurement title of the dod appropriations act .

most spending for ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) programs ( including procurement - like activities ) is funded through the defense - wide research and development and procurement accounts rather than through the research and development and procurement accounts of the individual military services .

a rationale for funding dod sealift ships in the ndsf had been that dod sealift ships perform a transportation mission that primarily benefits services other than the navy , and therefore should not be forced to compete for funding in a navy budget account that funds the procurement of ships central to the navy's own missions .

a rationale for funding bmd programs together in the defense - wide research and development account is that this makes potential trade - offs in spending among various bmd programs more visible and thereby helps to optimize the use of bmd funding .

potential implications of nsbdf on funding available for other programs the nsbdf has at least two potential implications for the impact that the columbia - class program may have on funding available in coming years for other dod acquisition programs a principal apparent intent in creating the nsbdf is to help preserve funding in coming years for other navy programs , and particularly navy shipbuilding programs other than the columbia - class program , by placing funding for the columbia - class program in a location within the dod budget that is separate from the navy's shipbuilding account and the navy's budget in general .

referring to the fund as a national fund and locating it outside the navy's budget appears intended to encourage a view ( consistent with an argument made by supporters of the columbia - class program that the program is intended to meet a national military need rather than a navy - specific need ) that funding for the columbia - class program should be resourced from dod's budget as a whole , rather than from the navy's budget in particular .

the acquisition authorities in subsections ( f ) , ( g ) , ( h ) , and ( i ) of 10 u.s.c .

2218a , which were added by p.l .

114-92 and p.l .

114-328 , could marginally reduce the procurement costs of not only columbia - class boats , but also other nuclear - powered ships , such as virginia - class attack submarines and gerald r. ford ( cvn - 78 ) class aircraft carriers , by increasing economies of scale in the production of ship components and better optimizing ship construction schedules .

the joint explanatory statement for the fy2016 national defense authorization act ( s. 1356 / p.l .

114-92 of november 25 , 2015 ) directed dod to submit a report on the "acquisition strategy to build ohio - class replacement submarines that will leverage the enhanced procurement authorities provided in the [nsbdf] .. .

. .

among other things , the report was to identify "any additional authorities the secretary [of defense] may need to make management of the ohio - class replacement more efficient...." the navy submitted the report on april 18 , 2016 .

the report states in part that the high cost for this unique , next generation strategic deterrent requires extraordinary measures to ensure its affordability .

further , procuring the oho replacement ( or ) , the next generation ssbn , within the current shipbuilding plan presents an extreme challenge to the navy's shipbuilding budget .

to minimize this challenge and reduce or schedule risk , the navy proposes to leverage those authorities provided by the national sea - based deterrence fund ( nsbdf ) in conjunction with the employment of best acquisition practices on this critical program.... ... the navy is continuing to identify opportunities to further acquisition efficiency , reduce schedule risk , and improve program affordability .

most notably in this regard , the navy is currently assessing [the concept of] continuous production [for producing components of columbia - class boats more efficiently than currently scheduled] and will keep congress informed as we quantify the benefits of this and other initiatives that promise substantial savings.... ... the navy's initial assessment is that the authorities and further initiatives described [in this report] will be essential to achieving the reductions to acquisition cost and schedule risk that are so critical to success on the or program... .

section 1022 of the fy2016 ndaa authorized the use of funds in the nsbdf to enter into contracts for eoq [economic order quantity purchases of materials and equipment] and ac [advance construction activities in shipyards] , and to incrementally fund contracts for ap [advance procurement] of specific components .

these authorities are essential to successfully executing the or acquisition strategy .

the navy is able to take advantage of these authorities largely due to how its submarine shipbuilding plan is phased.... economic order quantity contracts provide substantial cost savings to the navy from procuring materials and equipment in bulk quantities .

in addition to the cost savings typically associated with eoq authority , the navy has identified an opportunity to implement eoq procurements to achieve or schedule efficiencies and commonality contract actions with vcs [virginia - class submarine] block v [boats] and cvn [nuclear - powered aircraft carriers].... advance construction is the authority to begin [shipyard] construction [work] in fiscal years of ap [advance procurement] budget requests prior to the full funding / authorization year of a hull .

early manufacturing activities help retire construction risk for first - of - a - kind efforts , ease transition from design to production , and provide efficiencies in shipyard construction workload .

advance construction would allow the shipbuilders to begin critical path construction activities earlier , thus reducing risk to the or delivery schedule... .

the fy2016 ndaa allows the navy and shipbuilders to enter into incrementally funded procurements for long lead components that employ both ap and full funding ( ff ) scn increments .

this funding approach will provide significant schedule improvements and cost savings by maximizing the utilization of limited funding... .

maximum economic advantage can be obtained through continuous production .

procuring components and systems necessary for continuous production lines [as opposed to production lines that experience periods during which they are without work] would provide opportunities for savings through manufacturing efficiencies , increased [production - line] learning and the retention of critical production skills .

in addition to lowering costs , continuous production would reduce schedule risk for both the u.s. and uk ssbn construction programs and minimize year - to - year funding spikes .

to execute continuous production , the navy requires authority to enter into contracts to procure contractor furnished and government furnished components and systems for or ssbns .

or missile tube and missile tube module component procurement through continuous production lines have been identified as the most efficient and affordable procurement strategy.... missile tube continuous production could achieve an average reduction of 25 percent in missile tube procurement costs across the [columbia] class .

these savings are compared to [the] single shipset procurement costs [that are] included in the pb17 por [the program of record reflected in the president's ( proposed ) budget for fy2017]... .

the navy estimates that procuring missile tube modules in continuous production lines would result in a cumulative one year schedule reduction in missile tube module manufacturing for the or class .

this schedule reduction , on a potential critical path assembly , would reduce ship delivery risk and increase schedule margin for follow ship deliveries .

in addition to improving schedule , missile tube module continuous production ( including strategic weapon system ( sws ) government furnished equipment ( gfe ) ) would produce savings as high as 20 percent compared to single shipset procurement costs included in the pb17 por .

executing continuous production of missile tubes or missile tube modules requires re - phasing of funding from outside the pb17 future year's defense program ( fydp ) [to years that are within the fydp] but results in significant overall program reductions .

the navy is evaluating additional continuous production opportunities for nuclear and nonnuclear components with common vendors required for virginia class submarines and ford class aircraft carriers .

some examples include spherical air flasks , hull valves , pressure hull hemi heads , bow domes , castings , and torpedo tubes .

the prerequisite to continuous production in each of these cases would be an affirmation of design stability consistent with completion of first article testing , or its equivalent... .

the navy's position on the cost benefits of these authorities is not fully developed .

however , the congressional budget office stated in its analysis of the navy's fy2016 shipbuilding plan , " ... the navy could potentially save several hundred million dollars per submarine by purchasing components and materials for several submarines at the same time.".. .

the navy's initial cost analysis aligns with cbo's projections , and the cost reductions from employing these acquisition authorities will be further evaluated to support the navy's updated or milestone b cost estimate in august 2016... .

the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics ( usd at&l ) approved the or program acquisition strategy on january 4 , 2016 .

this strategy emphasizes using alternative acquisition tools and cross - platform contracting to reduce schedule risk and lower costs in support of the navy's shipbuilding programs.... to reduce costs and help alleviate fiscal pressures , the navy will work with congress to implement granted authorities and explore the additional initiatives identified in this report... .

the cost reductions from employing the granted and proposed acquisition authorities will be further evaluated to support the navy's updated or milestone b cost estimate in august 2016... .

these authorities are needed with the national sea - based deterrence fund , rdten [research , development , test , and evaluation , navy] , and scn appropriations accounts .

together , these acquisition tools will allow the navy , and the shipbuilders , to implement the procurement strategy which will reduce total or acquisition costs and shorten construction schedules for a program with no margin for delay .

