reports by congressional commissions , the mention of bioterrorism in president obama's 2010 state of the union address , and the issuance of executive orders have increased congressional attention to the threat of bioterrorism .

federal efforts to combat the threat of bioterrorism predate the anthrax attacks of 2001 but have significantly increased since then .

the u.s. government has developed these efforts as part of and in parallel with other defenses against conventional terrorism .

continued attempts by terrorist groups to launch attacks targeted at u.s. citizens , including those in transit to u.s. soil , have increased concerns that federal counterterrorism activities , and the investments that underlie them , insufficiently address the threat .

experts differ in their assessments of the threat posed by bioterrorism .

some claim the threat is dire and imminent .

the congressionally mandated commission on the prevention of wmd proliferation and terrorism concluded that unless the world community acts decisively and with great urgency , it is more likely than not that a weapon of mass destruction will be used in a terrorist attack somewhere in the world by the end of 2013 .

the commission further believes that terrorists are more likely to be able to obtain and use a biological weapon than a nuclear weapon .

in contrast , other experts assert that the bioterrorism threat is less severe or pressing than that posed by more conventional terrorism or other issues facing the united states .

the scientists working group on biological and chemical weapons concluded that public health in the united states faces many challenges ; bioterrorism is just one .

policies need to be crafted to respond to the full range of infectious disease threats and critical public health challenges rather than be disproportionately weighted in favor of defense against an exaggerated threat of bioterrorism .

stakeholders often measure federal efforts against the perceived magnitude of the threat .

thus , those who believe that bioterrorism poses a relatively low threat tend to conclude that the government has done too much .

in contrast , those who perceive a greater threat conclude that the federal government needs to do more , whether under existing programs or new ones .

many experts come to mixed conclusions: they regard some programs as effective but identify others as insufficient .

the federal government's biodefense efforts span many agencies and vary widely in their resources , scope , and approach .

for example , the departments of state and defense have cooperated with foreign governments and nongovernmental organizations to engage in nonproliferation , counterproliferation , and foreign disease outbreak detection efforts .

the departments of state and commerce have strengthened export controls of materials that could be used for bioterrorism .

the department of health and human services ( hhs ) has made investments in public health preparedness ; response planning ; foreign disease outbreak detection ; and research , development , and procurement of medical countermeasures against biological terrorism agents ( see " medical countermeasures " below ) .

the intelligence community has engaged in intelligence gathering and sharing regarding bioterrorism .

the department of justice performs background checks on people who want to possess certain dangerous pathogens .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has engaged in preparedness , response , and recovery - related activities , developed increased capabilities in environmental biosurveillance ( see " biosurveillance " below ) , and invested in expanding domestic bioforensics capabilities .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has explored post - event infrastructure decontamination .

many agencies , jointly or separately , have invested in expanded biodefense infrastructure , including public and private high - containment laboratories for research , diagnostic , and forensics purposes .

lastly , the executive office of the president and other executive branch coordinating groups have engaged in risk assessment and strategic planning exercises to coordinate and optimize federal investment against bioterrorism and response capabilities .

conflicting views of the bioterrorism threat and the breadth of the federal biodefense effort , which crosses congressional committee jurisdictions , complicate congressional oversight of the overall biodefense enterprise .

providing oversight and direction for individual biodefense agencies or programs is easier than addressing the entirety of the biodefense enterprise at once , but such an approach may focus too narrowly to improve the overall effort .

an alternative approach identifies key areas or activities that shape federal agency efforts .

the bush administration identified four such "pillars" as organizing principles for the federal biodefense efforts: threat awareness ; prevention and protection ; surveillance and detection ; and response and recovery .

each of these pillars may have several agencies performing critical parts of the activity .

congressional oversight and direction of biodefense efforts has followed a similar but not identical path .

congress has provided oversight and direction on the basis of both individual agency biodefense activity and on those cross - agency themes and policies deemed most important by congressional policymakers .

because of the diversity of federal biodefense efforts , this report cannot address all aspects and associated programs related to this issue .

instead , this report focuses on four areas under congressional consideration deemed critical to the success of the biodefense enterprise: strategic planning ; risk assessment ; surveillance ; and the development , procurement , and distribution of medical countermeasures .

this report also focuses on the effectiveness and sufficiency of programs implementing these aspects of the federal biodefense efforts , outside analysts' suggestions for improving the government's efforts , and current issues under congressional consideration .

this report does not attempt to address all biodefense issues of potential congressional interest .

although outside the scope of this report , state and local governments , private industry , and our international partners play key roles in defending against the threat of bioterrorism .

although the federal government had previously undertaken efforts to address the bioterrorism threat , the events of september 11 , 2001 , and the subsequent anthrax mailings led to an increased focus on terrorism in general and especially on biological weapons of mass destruction ( wmds ) .

the bush administration established a homeland security apparatus within the white house .

congress and the bush administration created the dhs as a focal point in the federal preparedness , response , and recovery to terrorism and imbued it with a variety of new authorities .

in addition , the bush administration developed a series of national strategies and other guidance documents for homeland security generally and biodefense in specific .

beyond these cross - governmental strategy documents , many agencies developed more focused strategic plans for their individual operations against bioterrorism .

the obama administration has continued this focus on bioterrorism by issuing additional guidance and directives .

congress has acted to require federal strategic planning activities through provisions of the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) , the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act ( p.l .

109-417 ) , and other legislation .

in addition to establishing dhs , congress has created offices and agencies within other cabinet departments and assigned them specific planning activities .

finally , congress established an office within the executive office of the president charged with preventing wmd proliferation and terrorism .

policymakers , analysts , and other experts have criticized federal efforts at strategic planning .

some experts have criticized white house led cross - agency planning as lacking metrics and measures , failing to encompass the full range of threats , and insufficiently meeting stated goals .

policymakers have critiqued efforts by federal agencies to develop multi - agency plans as lacking metrics .

even when considering efforts within individual agencies , experts have levied criticisms of research plans , stating that the correspondence between strategic goals , operational outcomes , and program investments has not been made clear .

agency implementation , translating strategic goals into effective programs and policies , will remain a key component of successful federal biodefense activities .

ideally , a full understanding of the risk posed by bioterrorism would underpin the government's biodefense efforts .

by understanding the bioterrorism risk , the federal government could determine the appropriate level of federal response and investment against this risk .

the government accountability office ( gao ) has called for increased risk assessment activities in biodefense for many years .

unfortunately , the nature of the bioterrorism threat , with its high consequences and low frequency , makes determining the bioterrorism risk difficult .

additionally , the presence of an intelligent adversary who can adapt to the presence of successful countermeasures complicates the use of standard risk assessment techniques .

despite these challenges , risk assessment activities can help agencies use risk - informed decision - making processes to plan , prioritize , and invest wisely .

in contrast , investment based on uninformed hypotheses or on an ad hoc basis may allow improperly identified or assessed risks to go unmitigated or result in overinvestment against low - risk events .

the bush administration identified bioterrorism risk assessment as a key component of its biodefense strategy .

as a consequence , dhs engages in a bioterrorism risk assessment process on a two - year cycle .

other agencies also engage in risk assessment activities , but they vary from dhs's efforts in approach , assumptions , emphasis , and purpose .

risk assessment processes depend heavily on the information used as input , the quantitative and qualitative factors used to interpret that information , and the robustness of the assessment process .

these factors complicate comparisons between bioterrorism risk assessments performed for different purposes or among assessments of other threats .

the dhs has begun this comparison on a limited scale , but its use of these risk assessments for planning purposes has been strongly criticized by outside experts .

these experts assert that the dhs risk assessments do not adequately address the decision - making process of an intelligent adversary .

regardless of the complexity of the risk assessment methodology , the inherent uncertainties associated with assessing risk in a counterterrorism context likely necessitate retaining some level of flexibility in managing risk .

unlike most other terrorist attacks , a biological attack could infect victims without their knowledge .

days or weeks might pass before victims develop symptoms .

health practitioners treating infected , symptomatic individuals might be the first to identify that a bioterrorism attack had occurred .

the bush administration prioritized the development and deployment of biosurveillance technologies in an attempt to identify a bioterrorism attack as soon after an attack as possible .

the sooner officials identify an attack , the sooner treatment of the exposed individuals could begin .

earlier treatment generally increases the likelihood of individual survival and recovery .

the bush administration implemented a number of different detection approaches , including environmental detection , syndromic surveillance , and information sharing .

through these efforts , the federal government aims to identify bioterrorism events at various scales , ranging from large , aerially disseminated releases to smaller releases infecting only a few individuals .

the federal government , in collaboration with state and local jurisdictions , enhanced the existing network of public health laboratories to ensure that diagnostic laboratories could correctly handle and analyze clinical samples related to potential bioterrorism events .

similarly , the federal government has continued to invest in some global health activities partly to help identify when an emerging disease might pose a threat to the united states .

government and outside experts have both criticized and supported these efforts .

widespread deployment of environmental biosurveillance technologies by the federal government began after the anthrax mailings , and federal efforts to further develop these technologies have also increased .

questions remain regarding the effectiveness of their detection ability , especially in comparison to the innate detection ability of the medical system through astute physicians .

a repeated criticism of biosurveillance activities is that the detection system may lack sufficient sensitivity and dependability to allow for a federal response following detection of a bioterrorism event .

technical difficulties persist in making a detection system sufficiently sensitive to detect very low levels of pathogens while maintaining a very low number of false alarms .

frequent false alarms pose a high cost in terms of resource consumption and responder opportunity costs .

additionally , frequent false alarms may lead responders and the public to assume that all alarms are likely false , and thus they may not take alarms seriously .

other widely discussed issues include the extent to which the federal government should protect the population of the united states with such systems , through environmental sensing or other methods , and how the federal government should deploy the limited number of available systems .

effective medical countermeasures could significantly decrease the impact of a bioterrorist attack .

several federal agencies , described below , have devoted many resources to the development , procurement , and distribution of medical countermeasures that could help respond to a bioterrorist attack .

since 2001 , the federal government has often reexamined programs in these areas .

outside observers , congress , and the executive branch have scrutinized , suggested improvements to , and further refined these policies .

while no mass - casualty bioterrorism event has yet occurred in the united states , some experts and policymakers assert that terrorist organizations are attempting to develop such a capability .

the federal government has been preparing for a bioterrorism event for many years .

multiple programs in many agencies attempt to prepare for and respond to a bioterrorism event .

whether these programs are sufficient , redundant , excessive , or need improvement has been a topic of much debate .

congress , through oversight activities as well as authorizing and appropriations legislation , continues to influence the federal response to the bioterrorism threat .

congressional policymakers may be faced with many difficult choices about the priority of maintaining , shrinking , or expanding existing programs versus creating new programs to address identified deficiencies .

augmenting such programs may incur additional costs in a time of fiscal challenges while maintaining or shrinking such programs may be deemed as incurring unacceptable risks , given the potential for significant casualties and economic effects from a large - scale bioterror attack .

