as part of the conflict with the taliban and al qaeda , the united states has captured and detained numerous persons believed to have been part of or associated with enemy forces .

over the years , federal courts have considered a multitude of petitions by or on behalf of suspected belligerents challenging aspects of u.s. detention policy .

the supreme court has issued definitive rulings concerning several legal issues raised in the conflict with al qaeda and the taliban , including executive authority under the 2001 authorization for use of military force ( "aumf," p.l .

107-40 ) to detain properly designated enemy belligerents captured on the afghan battlefield ; the application of at least some provisions of the 1949 geneva conventions to the conflict with al qaeda ; and the ability of detainees held in the united states or at the u.s .

naval station in guantanamo bay , cuba , to challenge the legality of their detention in habeas corpus proceedings .

in december 2011 , congress passed the national defense authorization act for fy2012 ( "2012 ndaa," p.l .

112-81 ) , which contains a provision largely intended to codify the present understanding of the detention authority conferred by the aumf , as interpreted and applied by the executive and the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) .

the full implications of the 2012 ndaa upon judicial activity concerning wartime detention remains to be seen .

in any event , the act does not address many of the legal issues involving wartime detention which , while occasioning significant political debate , have not been squarely resolved by the supreme court .

these issues include the full scope of the executive's detention authority , including the circumstances in which u.s. citizens may be detained as enemy belligerents ; the degree to which noncitizens held at guantanamo and other locations outside the united states are entitled to protections under the constitution ; the authority of federal habeas courts to compel the release into the united states of detainees determined to be unlawfully held if the executive cannot effectuate their release to another country ; and the ability of detainees to receive advance notice and challenge their proposed transfer to a foreign country .

additionally , the supreme court may be called upon to determine the nature of procedural rules to be applied in habeas cases and the proper standard of evidence to be applied .

to the extent that these rules are found to differ from the federal rules of civil procedure and other court rules , it may be necessary to determine whether the same procedural rules apply to both u.s. citizens and foreign nationals who may be detained under the aumf authority .

this report briefly summarizes major judicial opinions concerning suspected enemy belligerents detained in the conflict with al qaeda and the taliban .

it discusses all supreme court decisions concerning enemy combatants .

it also addresses notable appeals court opinions addressing issues of ongoing relevance to u.s. detention policy .

the report also discusses a few notable decisions by federal district courts , including criminal cases involving persons who were either involved in the 9 / 11 attacks or were captured abroad by u.s. forces or allies during operations against al qaeda and the taliban .

it also addresses some federal appellate reviews of matters involving military commissions .

many of the rulings discussed in this report are discussed in greater detail in other crs products , including crs report rl33180 , enemy combatant detainees: habeas corpus challenges in federal court , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl34536 , boumediene v. bush: guantanamo detainees' right to habeas corpus , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rs21884 , the supreme court 2003 term: summary and analysis of opinions related to detainees in the war on terrorism , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r42337 , detention of u.s .

persons as enemy belligerents , by [author name scrubbed] .

since 2004 , the supreme court has made several rulings concerning enemy combatants .

these have addressed , inter alia , the executive's authority to detain enemy belligerents under the 2001 aumf ; the legality of military commissions established by presidential order to try suspected belligerents for violations of the law of war ; and detainees' access to federal courts .

most judicial activity concerning u.s. detention policy in the conflict with al qaeda has occurred within the d.c .

circuit .

following the supreme court's ruling in boumediene that the constitutional writ of habeas corpus extends to detainees held at guantanamo , over 200 habeas petitions were filed by detainees in the u.s. district court for the district of columbia .

courts considering habeas claims have sometimes reached differing conclusions regarding the scope of the executive's detention authority ; the admissibility of hearsay evidence and involuntary statements made by detainees ; the appropriate methodology for assessing the sufficiency and reliability of evidence proffered by the government to justify the legality of a habeas petitioner's detention ; and the remedy available for those persons whom a habeas court determines to have been unlawfully detained .

decisions by the d.c .

circuit have generally been favorable to the legal positions advanced by the government .

since 2009 , the appellate court has issued rulings concluding , among other things , that the executive may lawfully detain persons who are "part of" al qaeda , the taliban , and affiliated groups , and possibly also persons who provide a sufficient degree of support to such entities in their hostilities against the united states and its allies ( al - bihani v. obama ) ; a functional approach is appropriate when assessing whether a person is "part of" al qaeda , meaning that judges should consider the significance of a person's activities in relation to the organization , rather than requiring formal proof of membership , such as evidence the petitioner received orders from the organization's hierarchy ( awad v. obama , bensayah v. obama , salahi v. obama ) ; the government may satisfy its evidentiary burden in support of a person's detention when its factual claims are supported by a preponderance of evidence ( al - bihani v. obama , al odah v. united states ) , but a lower standard might be constitutionally permissible ( al - adahi v. obama , almerfedi v. obama ) ; it is proper for a habeas court to assess the cumulative weight and effect of proffered evidence according to a "conditional probability analysis" when determining whether the government has demonstrated factual grounds for detaining a habeas petitioner ( al - adahi v. obama , salahi v. obama ) ; consideration of hearsay evidence in habeas cases is not determined by the federal rules of evidence ( al odah v. united states , al - madhwani v. obama ) ; official government records , including government intelligence reports , are entitled to a presumption of regularity in guantanamo habeas litigation ( latif v. obama ) ; the writ of habeas affords guantanamo detainees with a limited right to challenge their proposed transfer to the custody of a foreign government ( kiyemba ii ) as well as matters related to their conditions of confinement ( aamer v. obama , hatim v. obama ) ; habeas courts lack authority , absent an authorizing statute , to compel the executive to release non - citizen detainees into the united states , even if such persons have been determined by the court to be unlawfully detained ( kiyemba i and iii ) ; it is unlikely that noncitizens who have been transferred to foreign custody may seek judicial review of their designation as enemy combatants by the u.s. government ( gul v. obama ) ; and the constitutional writ of habeas does not presently extend to noncitizen detainees held at u.s. - operated facilities in afghanistan ( maqaleh v. gates ) .

in some of these cases , affected detainees have requested supreme court review .

several of these requests have been denied .

it remains to be seen whether the supreme court will ultimately agree to review any of the d.c .

circuit's decisions , or whether the appellate court's rulings will remain controlling for the foreseeable future .

the following section discusses major rulings made by the d.c .

circuit regarding persons designated as enemy combatants that involve matters of continuing relevance to u.s. detention policy .

it does not discuss those rulings that were subsequently overruled by the supreme court on the merits .

although most judicial activity concerning u.s. detention policy has occurred in the d.c .

circuit , a few notable cases have been decided in the fourth circuit court of appeals .

each case concerned the military detention of a u.s. person within the united states — one a u.s. citizen and the other an alien lawfully admitted into the country on a student visa — following the executive's determination that the person was an unlawful enemy combatant .

in each case , the individual was ultimately transferred to civilian custody , and thereafter tried and convicted for terrorism - related activity .

nonetheless , it is possible that the circuit court's analysis of the scope of executive detention authority may inform subsequent judicial rulings on the matter .

although numerous cases have been brought in federal civilian court involving persons who allegedly engaged in terrorist activity , relatively few involve persons who were captured abroad by u.s. forces during operations against either al qaeda or the taliban , and only one case has been tried in civilian court involving a person involved in the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks .

this section discusses notable rulings made in criminal cases involving zacharias moussaoui , who was tried and convicted for his role in the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , but was never officially designated as an "enemy combatant" ; john walker lindh , thus far the only person captured abroad and tried and convicted in federal civilian court for belligerent activities occurring on the afghan battlefield ; and ahmed khalfan ghailani , a suspect in the 1998 african embassy bombings who was incarcerated at guantanamo and charged at a military commission , but was later transferred to the southern district of new york for trial on terrorism charges .

ghailani is the only guantanamo prisoner to have been transferred for civilian trial in the united states .

this section also covers appeals of military commission convictions and a collateral case in which the petitioner sought to enjoin his trial by military commission .

although the political branches of government have been primarily responsible for shaping u.s. wartime detention policy in the conflict with al qaeda and the taliban , the judiciary has also played a significant role in clarifying elements of the rights and privileges owed to detainees under the constitution and existing federal statutes and treaties .

these rulings may have long - term consequences for u.s. detention policy , both in the conflict with al qaeda and the taliban and in future armed conflicts .

judicial decisions concerning the meaning and effect of existing statutes and treaties may compel the executive branch to modify its current practices to conform with judicial opinion .

for example , judicial opinions concerning the scope of detention authority conferred by the aumf may inform executive decisions as to whether grounds exist to detain an individual suspected of involvement with al qaeda or the taliban .

judicial decisions concerning statutes applicable to criminal prosecutions in article iii courts or military tribunals may influence executive determinations as to the appropriate forum in which to try detainees for criminal offenses .

judicial rulings may also invite response from the legislative branch , including consideration of legislative proposals to modify existing authorities governing u.s. detention policy .

the 2012 ndaa , for example , contains provisions which arguably codify aspects of existing jurisprudence regarding u.s. authority to detain persons in the conflict with al qaeda .

judicial activity with respect to the present armed conflict may also influence legislative activity in future hostilities .

for example , congress may look to judicial rulings interpreting the meaning and scope of the 2001 aumf for guidance when drafting legislation authorizing the executive to use military force in some future conflict .

while the supreme court has issued definitive rulings concerning certain issues related to wartime detainees , many other issues related to the capture , treatment , and trial of suspected enemy belligerents are either the subject of ongoing litigation or are likely to be addressed by the judiciary .

accordingly , the courts appear likely to play a significant role in shaping u.s. policies relating to enemy belligerents in the foreseeable future .

