the diminishment of arctic sea ice has led to increased human activities in the arctic , and has heightened interest in , and concerns about , the region's future .

issues such as arctic territorial disputes ; commercial shipping through the arctic ; arctic oil , gas , and mineral exploration ; endangered arctic species ; and increased military operations in the arctic could cause the region in coming years to become an arena of international cooperation or competition .

the united states , by virtue of alaska , is an arctic country and has substantial political , economic , energy , environmental , and other interests in the region .

decisions that congress makes on arctic - related issues could significantly affect these interests .

this report provides an overview of arctic - related issues for congress , and refers readers to more in - depth crs reports on specific arctic - related issues .

congressional readers with questions about an issue discussed in this report should contact the author or authors of the section discussing that issue .

the authors are identified by footnote at the start of each section .

this report does not track legislation on specific arctic - related issues .

for tracking of legislative activity , see the crs reports relating to specific arctic - related issues that are listed at the end of this report , just prior to appendix a .

crs report rl34266 , climate change: science highlights , by jane a. leggett crs report rs21890 , the u.n. law of the sea convention and the united states: developments since october 2003 , by marjorie ann browne crs report rl33872 , arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr ) : an overview , by m. lynne corn , michael ratner , and laura b. comay crs report rl32838 , arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr ) : votes and legislative actions since the 95th congress , by m. lynne corn and beth cook crs report rl34547 , possible federal revenue from oil development of anwr and nearby areas , by salvatore lazzari crs report rl33705 , oil spills: background and governance , by jonathan l. ramseur crs report rl33941 , polar bears: listing under the endangered species act , by eugene h. buck , m. lynne corn , and kristina alexander crs report rl34391 , coast guard polar security cutter ( polar icebreaker ) program: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke crs report rl34342 , homeland security: roles and missions for united states northern command , by william knight appendix a. arctic research and policy act ( arpa ) of 1984 ( title i of p.l .

98-373 ) the text of the arctic research and policy act ( arpa ) of 1984 ( title i of p.l .

98-373 of july 31 , 1984 ) is as follows: title i – arctic research and policy short title sec .

101 .

this title may be cited as the "arctic research and policy act of 1984" .

findings and purposes sec .

102 .

 ( a ) the congress finds and declares that - ( 1 ) the arctic , onshore and offshore , contains vital energy resources that can reduce the nation's dependence on foreign oil and improve the national balance of payments ; ( 2 ) as the nation's only common border with the soviet union , the arctic is critical to national defense ; ( 3 ) the renewable resources of the arctic , specifically fish and other seafood , represent one of the nation's greatest commercial assets ; ( 4 ) arctic conditions directly affect global weather patterns and must be understood in order to promote better agricultural management throughout the united states ; ( 5 ) industrial pollution not originating in the arctic region collects in the polar air mass , has the potential to disrupt global weather patterns , and must be controlled through international cooperation and consultation ; ( 6 ) the arctic is a natural laboratory for research into human health and adaptation , physical and psychological , to climates of extreme cold and isolation and may provide information crucial for future defense needs ; ( 7 ) atmospheric conditions peculiar to the arctic make the arctic a unique testing ground for research into high latitude communications , which is likely to be crucial for future defense needs ; ( 8 ) arctic marine technology is critical to cost - effective recovery and transportation of energy resources and to the national defense ; ( 9 ) the united states has important security , economic , and environmental interests in developing and maintaining a fleet of icebreaking vessels capable of operating effectively in the heavy ice regions of the arctic ; ( 10 ) most arctic - rim countries , particularly the soviet union , possess arctic technologies far more advanced than those currently available in the united states ; ( 11 ) federal arctic research is fragmented and uncoordinated at the present time , leading to the neglect of certain areas of research and to unnecessary duplication of effort in other areas of research ; ( 12 ) improved logistical coordination and support for arctic research and better dissemination of research data and information is necessary to increase the efficiency and utility of national arctic research efforts ; ( 13 ) a comprehensive national policy and program plan to organize and fund currently neglected scientific research with respect to the arctic is necessary to fulfill national objectives in arctic research ; ( 14 ) the federal government , in cooperation with state and local governments , should focus its efforts on the collection and characterization of basic data related to biological , materials , geophysical , social , and behavioral phenomena in the arctic ; ( 15 ) research into the long - range health , environmental , and social effects of development in the arctic is necessary to mitigate the adverse consequences of that development to the land and its residents ; ( 16 ) arctic research expands knowledge of the arctic , which can enhance the lives of arctic residents , increase opportunities for international cooperation among arctic - rim countries , and facilitate the formulation of national policy for the arctic ; and ( 17 ) the alaskan arctic provides an essential habitat for marine mammals , migratory waterfowl , and other forms of wildlife which are important to the nation and which are essential to arctic residents .

 ( b ) the purposes of this title are - ( 1 ) to establish national policy , priorities , and goals and to provide a federal program plan for basic and applied scientific research with respect to the arctic , including natural resources and materials , physical , biological and health sciences , and social and behavioral sciences ; ( 2 ) to establish an arctic research commission to promote arctic research and to recommend arctic research policy ; ( 3 ) to designate the national science foundation as the lead agency responsible for implementing arctic research policy ; and ( 4 ) to establish an interagency arctic research policy committee to develop a national arctic research policy and a five year plan to implement that policy .

arctic research commission sec .

103 .

 ( a ) the president shall establish an arctic research commission ( hereafter referred to as the "commission" ) .

 ( b ) ( 1 ) the commission shall be composed of five members appointed by the president , with the director of the national science foundation serving as a nonvoting , ex officio member .

the members appointed by the president shall include - ( a ) three members appointed from among individuals from academic or other research institutions with expertise in areas of research relating to the arctic , including the physical , biological , health , environmental , social , and behavioral sciences ; ( b ) one member appointed from among indigenous residents of the arctic who are representative of the needs and interests of arctic residents and who live in areas directly affected by arctic resource development ; and ( c ) one member appointed from among individuals familiar with the arctic and representative of the needs and interests of private industry undertaking resource development in the arctic .

 ( 2 ) the president shall designate one of the appointed members of the commission to be chairperson of the commission .

 ( c ) ( 1 ) except as provided in paragraph ( 2 ) of this subsection , the term of office of each member of the commission appointed under subsection ( b ) ( 1 ) shall be four years .

 ( 2 ) of the members of the commission originally appointed under subsection ( b ) ( 1 ) - ( a ) one shall be appointed for a term of two years ; ( b ) two shall be appointed for a term of three years ; and ( c ) two shall be appointed for a term of four years .

 ( 3 ) any vacancy occurring in the membership of the commission shall be filled , after notice of the vacancy is published in the federal register , in the manner provided by the preceding provisions of this section , for the remainder of the unexpired term .

 ( 4 ) a member may serve after the expiration of the member's term of office until the president appoints a successor .

 ( 5 ) a member may serve consecutive terms beyond the member's original appointment .

 ( d ) ( 1 ) members of the commission may be allowed travel expenses , including per diem in lieu of subsistence , as authorized by section 5703 of title 5 , united states code .

a member of the commission not presently employed for compensation shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the rate for gs - 16 of the general schedule under section 5332 of title 5 , united states code , for each day the member is engaged in the actual performance of his duties as a member of the commission , not to exceed 90 days of service each year .

except for the purposes of chapter 81 of title 5 ( relating to compensation for work injuries ) and chapter 171 of title 28 ( relating to tort claims ) , a member of the commission shall not be considered an employee of the united states for any purpose .

 ( 2 ) the commission shall meet at the call of its chairman or a majority of its members .

 ( 3 ) each federal agency referred to in section 107 ( b ) may designate a representative to participate as an observer with the commission .

these representatives shall report to and advise the commission on the activities relating to arctic research of their agencies .

 ( 4 ) the commission shall conduct at least one public meeting in the state of alaska annually .

duties of commission sec .

104 .

 ( a ) the commission shall - ( 1 ) develop and recommend an integrated national arctic research policy ; ( 2 ) in cooperation with the interagency arctic research policy committee established under section 107 , assist in establishing a national arctic research program plan to implement the arctic research policy ; ( 3 ) facilitate cooperation between the federal government and state and local governments with respect to arctic research ; ( 4 ) review federal research programs in the arctic and suggest improvements in coordination among programs ; ( 5 ) recommend methods to improve logistical planning and support for arctic research as may be appropriate and in accordance with the findings and purposes of this title ; ( 6 ) suggest methods for improving efficient sharing and dissemination of data and information on the arctic among interested public and private institutions ; ( 7 ) offer other recommendations and advice to the interagency committee established under section 107 as it may find appropriate ; and ( 8 ) cooperate with the governor of the state of alaska and with agencies and organizations of that state which the governor may designate with respect to the formulation of arctic research policy .

 ( b ) not later than january 31 of each year , the commission shall - ( 1 ) publish a statement of goals and objectives with respect to arctic research to guide the interagency committee established under section 107 in the performance of its duties ; and ( 2 ) submit to the president and to the congress a report describing the activities and accomplishments of the commission during the immediately preceding fiscal year .

cooperation with the commission sec .

105 .

 ( a ) ( 1 ) the commission may acquire from the head of any federal agency unclassified data , reports , and other nonproprietary information with respect to arctic research in the possession of the agency which the commission considers useful in the discharge of its duties .

 ( 2 ) each agency shall cooperate with the commission and furnish all data , reports , and other information requested by the commission to the extent permitted by law ; except that no agency need furnish any information which it is permitted to withhold under section 552 of title 5 , united states code .

 ( b ) with the consent of the appropriate agency head , the commission may utilize the facilities and services of any federal agency to the extent that the facilities and services are needed for the establishment and development of an arctic research policy , upon reimbursement to be agreed upon by the commission and the agency head and taking every feasible step to avoid duplication of effort .

 ( c ) all federal agencies shall consult with the commission before undertaking major federal actions relating to arctic research .

administration of the commission sec .

106 .

the commission may - ( 1 ) in accordance with the civil service laws and subchapter iii of chapter 53 of title 5 , united states code , appoint and fix the compensation of an executive director and necessary additional staff personnel , but not to exceed a total of seven compensated personnel ; ( 2 ) procure temporary and intermittent services as authorized by section 3109 of title 5 , united states code ; ( 3 ) enter into contracts and procure supplies , services , and personal property ; and ( 4 ) enter into agreements with the general services administration for the procurement of necessary financial and administrative services , for which payment shall be made by reimbursement from funds of the commission in amounts to be agreed upon by the commission and the administrator of the general services administration .

lead agency and interagency arctic research policy committee sec .

107 .

 ( a ) the national science foundation is designated as the lead agency responsible for implementing arctic research policy , and the director of the national science foundation shall insure that the requirements of section 108 are fulfilled .

 ( b ) ( 1 ) the president shall establish an interagency arctic research policy committee ( hereinafter referred to as the "interagency committee" ) .

 ( 2 ) the interagency committee shall be composed of representatives of the following federal agencies or offices: ( a ) the national science foundation ; ( b ) the department of commerce ; ( c ) the department of defense ; ( d ) the department of energy ; ( e ) the department of the interior ; ( f ) the department of state ; ( g ) the department of transportation ; ( h ) the department of health and human services ; ( i ) the national aeronautics and space administration ; ( j ) the environmental protection agency ; and ( k ) any other agency or office deemed appropriate .

 ( 3 ) the representative of the national science foundation shall serve as the chairperson of the interagency committee .

duties of the interagency committee sec .

108 .

 ( a ) the interagency committee shall - ( 1 ) survey arctic research conducted by federal , state , and local agencies , universities , and other public and private institutions to help determine priorities for future arctic research , including natural resources and materials , physical and biological sciences , and social and behavioral sciences ; ( 2 ) work with the commission to develop and establish an integrated national arctic research policy that will guide federal agencies in developing and implementing their research programs in the arctic ; ( 3 ) consult with the commission on - ( a ) the development of the national arctic research policy and the 5-year plan implementing the policy ; ( b ) arctic research programs of federal agencies ; ( c ) recommendations of the commission on future arctic research ; and ( d ) guidelines for federal agencies for awarding and administering arctic research grants ; ( 4 ) develop a 5-year plan to implement the national policy , as provided for in section 109 ; ( 5 ) provide the necessary coordination , data , and assistance for the preparation of a single integrated , coherent , and multiagency budget request for arctic research as provided for in section 110 ; ( 6 ) facilitate cooperation between the federal government and state and local governments in arctic research , and recommend the undertaking of neglected areas of research in accordance with the findings and purposes of this title ; ( 7 ) coordinate and promote cooperative arctic scientific research programs with other nations , subject to the foreign policy guidance of the secretary of state ; ( 8 ) cooperate with the governor of the state of alaska in fulfilling its responsibilities under this title ; ( 9 ) promote federal interagency coordination of all arctic research activities , including - ( a ) logistical planning and coordination ; and ( b ) the sharing of data and information associated with arctic research , subject to section 552 of title 5 , united states code ; and ( 10 ) provide public notice of its meetings and an opportunity for the public to participate in the development and implementation of national arctic research policy .

 ( b ) not later than january 31 , 1986 , and biennially thereafter , the interagency committee shall submit to the congress through the president , a brief , concise report containing - ( 1 ) a statement of the activities and accomplishments of the interagency committee since its last report ; and ( 2 ) a description of the activities of the commission , detailing with particularity the recommendations of the commission with respect to federal activities in arctic research .

5-year arctic research plan sec .

109 .

 ( a ) the interagency committee , in consultation with the commission , the governor of the state of alaska , the residents of the arctic , the private sector , and public interest groups , shall prepare a comprehensive 5-year program plan ( hereinafter referred to as the "plan" ) for the overall federal effort in arctic research .

the plan shall be prepared and submitted to the president for transmittal to the congress within one year after the enactment of this act and shall be revised biennially thereafter .

 ( b ) the plan shall contain but need not be limited to the following elements: ( 1 ) an assessment of national needs and problems regarding the arctic and the research necessary to address those needs or problems ; ( 2 ) a statement of the goals and objectives of the interagency committee for national arctic research ; ( 3 ) a detailed listing of all existing federal programs relating to arctic research , including the existing goals , funding levels for each of the 5 following fiscal years , and the funds currently being expended to conduct the programs ; ( 4 ) recommendations for necessary program changes and other proposals to meet the requirements of the policy and goals as set forth by the commission and in the plan as currently in effect ; and ( 5 ) a description of the actions taken by the interagency committee to coordinate the budget review process in order to ensure interagency coordination and cooperation in ( a ) carrying out federal arctic research programs , and ( b ) eliminating unnecessary duplication of effort among these programs .

coordination and review of budget requests sec .

110 .

 ( a ) the office of science and technology policy shall - ( 1 ) review all agency and department budget requests related to the arctic transmitted pursuant to section 108 ( a ) ( 5 ) , in accordance with the national arctic research policy and the 5-year program under section 108 ( a ) ( 2 ) and section 109 , respectively ; and ( 2 ) consult closely with the interagency committee and the commission to guide the office of science and technology policy's efforts .

 ( b ) ( 1 ) the office of management and budget shall consider all federal agency requests for research related to the arctic as one integrated , coherent , and multiagency request which shall be reviewed by the office of management and budget prior to submission of the president's annual budget request for its adherence to the plan .

the commission shall , after submission of the president's annual budget request , review the request and report to congress on adherence to the plan .

 ( 2 ) the office of management and budget shall seek to facilitate planning for the design , procurement , maintenance , deployment , and operations of icebreakers needed to provide a platform for arctic research by allocating all funds necessary to support icebreaking operations , except for recurring incremental costs associated with specific projects , to the coast guard .

authorization of appropriations ; new spending authority sec .

111 .

 ( a ) there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for carrying out this title .

 ( b ) any new spending authority ( within the meaning of section 401 of the congressional budget act of 1974 ) which is provided under this title shall be effective for any fiscal year only to such extent or in such amounts as may be provided in appropriation acts .

definition sec .

112 .

as used in this title , the term "arctic" means all united states and foreign territory north of the arctic circle and all united states territory north and west of the boundary formed by the porcupine , yukon , and kuskokwim rivers ; all contiguous seas , including the arctic ocean and the beaufort , bering , and chukchi seas ; and the aleutian chain .

appendix b. p.l .

101-609 of 1990 , amending arctic research and policy act ( arpa ) of 1984 the arctic research and policy act ( arpa ) of 1984 ( see appendix a ) was amended by p.l .

101-609 of november 16 , 1990 .

the text of p.l .

101-609 is as follows: section 1 .

except as specifically provided in this act , whenever in this act an amendment or repeal is expressed as an amendment to , or repeal of a provision , the reference shall be deemed to be made to the arctic research and policy act of 1984 .

sec .

2 .

section 103 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( 15 u.s.c .

4102 ( b ) ( 1 ) ) is amended — ( 1 ) in the text above clause ( a ) , by striking out `five' and inserting in lieu thereof `seven' ; ( 2 ) in clause ( a ) , by striking out `three' and inserting in lieu thereof `four' ; and ( 3 ) in clause ( c ) , by striking out `one member' and inserting in lieu thereof `two members' .

sec .

3 .

section 103 ( d ) ( 1 ) ( 15 u.s.c .

4102 ( d ) ( 1 ) ) is amended by striking out `gs - 16' and inserting in lieu thereof `gs - 18' .

sec .

4 .

 ( a ) section 104 ( a ) ( 15 u.s.c .

4102 ( a ) ) is amended — ( 1 ) in paragraph ( 4 ) , by striking out `suggest' and inserting in lieu thereof `recommend' ; ( 2 ) in paragraph ( 6 ) , by striking out `suggest' and inserting in lieu thereof `recommend' ; ( 3 ) in paragraph ( 7 ) , by striking out `and' at the end thereof ; ( 4 ) in paragraph ( 8 ) , by striking out the period and inserting in lieu thereof a semicolon ; and ( 5 ) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs: ' ( 9 ) recommend to the interagency committee the means for developing international scientific cooperation in the arctic ; and ' ( 10 ) not later than january 31 , 1991 , and every 2 years thereafter , publish a statement of goals and objectives with respect to arctic research to guide the interagency committee established under section 107 in the performance of its duties.' .

 ( b ) section 104 ( b ) is amended to read as follows: ' ( b ) not later than january 31 of each year , the commission shall submit to the president and to the congress a report describing the activities and accomplishments of the commission during the immediately preceding fiscal year.' .

sec .

5 .

section 106 ( 15 u.s.c .

4105 ) is amended — ( 1 ) in paragraph ( 3 ) , by striking out 'and' at the end thereof ; ( 2 ) in paragraph ( 4 ) , by striking out the period at the end thereof and inserting in lieu thereof ; and' ; and ( 3 ) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ' ( 5 ) appoint , and accept without compensation the services of , scientists and engineering specialists to be advisors to the commission .

each advisor may be allowed travel expenses , including per diem in lieu of subsistence , as authorized by section 5703 of title 5 , united states code .

except for the purposes of chapter 81 of title 5 ( relating to compensation for work injuries ) and chapter 171 of title 28 ( relating to tort claims ) of the united states code , an advisor appointed under this paragraph shall not be considered an employee of the united states for any purpose. .

sec .

6 .

subsection ( b ) ( 2 ) of section 108 ( 15 u.s.c .

4107 ( b ) ( 2 ) ) is amended to read as follows: ' ( 2 ) a statement detailing with particularity the recommendations of the commission with respect to federal interagency activities in arctic research and the disposition and responses to those recommendations. .

appendix c. january 2009 arctic policy directive ( nspd 66 / hspd 25 ) on january 12 , 2009 , the george w. bush administration released a presidential directive establishing a new u.s. policy for the arctic region .

the directive , dated january 9 , 2009 , was issued as national security presidential directive 66 / homeland security presidential directive 25 ( nspd 66 / hspd 25 ) .

the text of nspd 66 / hspd 25 is as follows: subject: arctic region policy i .

purpose a .

this directive establishes the policy of the united states with respect to the arctic region and directs related implementation actions .

this directive supersedes presidential decision directive / nsc - 26 ( pdd - 26 ; issued 1994 ) with respect to arctic policy but not antarctic policy ; pdd - 26 remains in effect for antarctic policy only .

b .

this directive shall be implemented in a manner consistent with the constitution and laws of the united states , with the obligations of the united states under the treaties and other international agreements to which the united states is a party , and with customary international law as recognized by the united states , including with respect to the law of the sea .

ii .

background a .

the united states is an arctic nation , with varied and compelling interests in that region .

this directive takes into account several developments , including , among others: 1 .

altered national policies on homeland security and defense ; 2 .

the effects of climate change and increasing human activity in the arctic region ; 3 .

the establishment and ongoing work of the arctic council ; and 4 .

a growing awareness that the arctic region is both fragile and rich in resources .

iii .

policy a .

it is the policy of the united states to: 1 .

meet national security and homeland security needs relevant to the arctic region ; 2 .

protect the arctic environment and conserve its biological resources ; 3 .

ensure that natural resource management and economic development in the region are environmentally sustainable ; 4 .

strengthen institutions for cooperation among the eight arctic nations ( the united states , canada , denmark , finland , iceland , norway , the russian federation , and sweden ) ; 5 .

involve the arctic's indigenous communities in decisions that affect them ; and 6 .

enhance scientific monitoring and research into local , regional , and global environmental issues .

b .

national security and homeland security interests in the arctic 1 .

the united states has broad and fundamental national security interests in the arctic region and is prepared to operate either independently or in conjunction with other states to safeguard these interests .

these interests include such matters as missile defense and early warning ; deployment of sea and air systems for strategic sealift , strategic deterrence , maritime presence , and maritime security operations ; and ensuring freedom of navigation and overflight .

2 .

the united states also has fundamental homeland security interests in preventing terrorist attacks and mitigating those criminal or hostile acts that could increase the united states vulnerability to terrorism in the arctic region .

3 .

the arctic region is primarily a maritime domain ; as such , existing policies and authorities relating to maritime areas continue to apply , including those relating to law enforcement .

[1] human activity in the arctic region is increasing and is projected to increase further in coming years .

this requires the united states to assert a more active and influential national presence to protect its arctic interests and to project sea power throughout the region .

4 .

the united states exercises authority in accordance with lawful claims of united states sovereignty , sovereign rights , and jurisdiction in the arctic region , including sovereignty within the territorial sea , sovereign rights and jurisdiction within the united states exclusive economic zone and on the continental shelf , and appropriate control in the united states contiguous zone .

5 .

freedom of the seas is a top national priority .

the northwest passage is a strait used for international navigation , and the northern sea route includes straits used for international navigation ; the regime of transit passage applies to passage through those straits .

preserving the rights and duties relating to navigation and overflight in the arctic region supports our ability to exercise these rights throughout the world , including through strategic straits .

6 .

implementation: in carrying out this policy as it relates to national security and homeland security interests in the arctic , the secretaries of state , defense , and homeland security , in coordination with heads of other relevant executive departments and agencies , shall: a .

develop greater capabilities and capacity , as necessary , to protect united states air , land , and sea borders in the arctic region ; b .

increase arctic maritime domain awareness in order to protect maritime commerce , critical infrastructure , and key resources ; c. preserve the global mobility of united states military and civilian vessels and aircraft throughout the arctic region ; d. project a sovereign united states maritime presence in the arctic in support of essential united states interests ; and e. encourage the peaceful resolution of disputes in the arctic region .

c. international governance 1 .

the united states participates in a variety of fora , international organizations , and bilateral contacts that promote united states interests in the arctic .

these include the arctic council , the international maritime organization ( imo ) , wildlife conservation and management agreements , and many other mechanisms .

as the arctic changes and human activity in the region increases , the united states and other governments should consider , as appropriate , new international arrangements or enhancements to existing arrangements .

2 .

the arctic council has produced positive results for the united states by working within its limited mandate of environmental protection and sustainable development .

its subsidiary bodies , with help from many united states agencies , have developed and undertaken projects on a wide range of topics .

the council also provides a beneficial venue for interaction with indigenous groups .

it is the position of the united states that the arctic council should remain a high - level forum devoted to issues within its current mandate and not be transformed into a formal international organization , particularly one with assessed contributions .

the united states is nevertheless open to updating the structure of the council , including consolidation of , or making operational changes to , its subsidiary bodies , to the extent such changes can clearly improve the council's work and are consistent with the general mandate of the council .

3 .

the geopolitical circumstances of the arctic region differ sufficiently from those of the antarctic region such that an "arctic treaty" of broad scope — along the lines of the antarctic treaty — is not appropriate or necessary .

4 .

the senate should act favorably on u.s. accession to the u.n. convention on the law of the sea promptly , to protect and advance u.s. interests , including with respect to the arctic .

joining will serve the national security interests of the united states , including the maritime mobility of our armed forces worldwide .

it will secure u.s. sovereign rights over extensive marine areas , including the valuable natural resources they contain .

accession will promote u.s. interests in the environmental health of the oceans .

and it will give the united states a seat at the table when the rights that are vital to our interests are debated and interpreted .

5 .

implementation: in carrying out this policy as it relates to international governance , the secretary of state , in coordination with heads of other relevant executive departments and agencies , shall: a .

continue to cooperate with other countries on arctic issues through the united nations ( u.n. ) and its specialized agencies , as well as through treaties such as the u.n .

framework convention on climate change , the convention on international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora , the convention on long range transboundary air pollution and its protocols , and the montreal protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer ; b .

consider , as appropriate , new or enhanced international arrangements for the arctic to address issues likely to arise from expected increases in human activity in that region , including shipping , local development and subsistence , exploitation of living marine resources , development of energy and other resources , and tourism ; c. review arctic council policy recommendations developed within the ambit of the council's scientific reviews and ensure the policy recommendations are subject to review by arctic governments ; and d. continue to seek advice and consent of the united states senate to accede to the 1982 law of the sea convention .

d. extended continental shelf and boundary issues 1 .

defining with certainty the area of the arctic seabed and subsoil in which the united states may exercise its sovereign rights over natural resources such as oil , natural gas , methane hydrates , minerals , and living marine species is critical to our national interests in energy security , resource management , and environmental protection .

the most effective way to achieve international recognition and legal certainty for our extended continental shelf is through the procedure available to states parties to the u.n. convention on the law of the sea .

2 .

the united states and canada have an unresolved boundary in the beaufort sea .

united states policy recognizes a boundary in this area based on equidistance .

the united states recognizes that the boundary area may contain oil , natural gas , and other resources .

3 .

the united states and russia are abiding by the terms of a maritime boundary treaty concluded in 1990 , pending its entry into force .

the united states is prepared to enter the agreement into force once ratified by the russian federation .

4 .

implementation: in carrying out this policy as it relates to extended continental shelf and boundary issues , the secretary of state , in coordination with heads of other relevant executive departments and agencies , shall: a .

take all actions necessary to establish the outer limit of the continental shelf appertaining to the united states , in the arctic and in other regions , to the fullest extent permitted under international law ; b .

consider the conservation and management of natural resources during the process of delimiting the extended continental shelf ; and c. continue to urge the russian federation to ratify the 1990 united states - russia maritime boundary agreement .

e. promoting international scientific cooperation 1 .

scientific research is vital for the promotion of united states interests in the arctic region .

successful conduct of u.s. research in the arctic region requires access throughout the arctic ocean and to terrestrial sites , as well as viable international mechanisms for sharing access to research platforms and timely exchange of samples , data , and analyses .

better coordination with the russian federation , facilitating access to its domain , is particularly important .

2 .

the united states promotes the sharing of arctic research platforms with other countries in support of collaborative research that advances fundamental understanding of the arctic region in general and potential arctic change in particular .

this could include collaboration with bodies such as the nordic council and the european polar consortium , as well as with individual nations .

3 .

accurate prediction of future environmental and climate change on a regional basis , and the delivery of near real - time information to end - users , requires obtaining , analyzing , and disseminating accurate data from the entire arctic region , including both paleoclimatic data and observational data .

the united states has made significant investments in the infrastructure needed to collect environmental data in the arctic region , including the establishment of portions of an arctic circumpolar observing network through a partnership among united states agencies , academic collaborators , and arctic residents .

the united states promotes active involvement of all arctic nations in these efforts in order to advance scientific understanding that could provide the basis for assessing future impacts and proposed response strategies .

4 .

united states platforms capable of supporting forefront research in the arctic ocean , including portions expected to be ice - covered for the foreseeable future , as well as seasonally ice - free regions , should work with those of other nations through the establishment of an arctic circumpolar observing network .

all arctic nations are members of the group on earth observations partnership , which provides a framework for organizing an international approach to environmental observations in the region .

in addition , the united states recognizes that academic and research institutions are vital partners in promoting and conducting arctic research .

5 .

implementation: in carrying out this policy as it relates to promoting scientific international cooperation , the secretaries of state , the interior , and commerce and the director of the national science foundation , in coordination with heads of other relevant executive departments and agencies , shall: a .

continue to play a leadership role in research throughout the arctic region ; b .

actively promote full and appropriate access by scientists to arctic research sites through bilateral and multilateral measures and by other means ; c. lead the effort to establish an effective arctic circumpolar observing network with broad partnership from other relevant nations ; d. promote regular meetings of arctic science ministers or research council heads to share information concerning scientific research opportunities and to improve coordination of international arctic research programs ; e. work with the interagency arctic research policy committee ( iarpc ) to promote research that is strategically linked to u.s. policies articulated in this directive , with input from the arctic research commission ; and f. strengthen partnerships with academic and research institutions and build upon the relationships these institutions have with their counterparts in other nations .

f. maritime transportation in the arctic region 1 .

the united states priorities for maritime transportation in the arctic region are: a .

to facilitate safe , secure , and reliable navigation ; b .

to protect maritime commerce ; and c. to protect the environment .

2 .

safe , secure , and environmentally sound maritime commerce in the arctic region depends on infrastructure to support shipping activity , search and rescue capabilities , short - and long - range aids to navigation , high - risk area vessel - traffic management , iceberg warnings and other sea ice information , effective shipping standards , and measures to protect the marine environment .

in addition , effective search and rescue in the arctic will require local , state , federal , tribal , commercial , volunteer , scientific , and multinational cooperation .

3 .

working through the international maritime organization ( imo ) , the united states promotes strengthening existing measures and , as necessary , developing new measures to improve the safety and security of maritime transportation , as well as to protect the marine environment in the arctic region .

these measures may include ship routing and reporting systems , such as traffic separation and vessel traffic management schemes in arctic chokepoints ; updating and strengthening of the guidelines for ships operating in arctic ice - covered waters ; underwater noise standards for commercial shipping ; a review of shipping insurance issues ; oil and other hazardous material pollution response agreements ; and environmental standards .

4 .

implementation: in carrying out this policy as it relates to maritime transportation in the arctic region , the secretaries of state , defense , transportation , commerce , and homeland security , in coordination with heads of other relevant executive departments and agencies , shall: a .

develop additional measures , in cooperation with other nations , to address issues that are likely to arise from expected increases in shipping into , out of , and through the arctic region ; b .

commensurate with the level of human activity in the region , establish a risk - based capability to address hazards in the arctic environment .

such efforts shall advance work on pollution prevention and response standards ; determine basing and logistics support requirements , including necessary airlift and icebreaking capabilities ; and improve plans and cooperative agreements for search and rescue ; c. develop arctic waterways management regimes in accordance with accepted international standards , including vessel traffic - monitoring and routing ; safe navigation standards ; accurate and standardized charts ; and accurate and timely environmental and navigational information ; and d. evaluate the feasibility of using access through the arctic for strategic sealift and humanitarian aid and disaster relief .

g. economic issues , including energy 1 .

sustainable development in the arctic region poses particular challenges .

stakeholder input will inform key decisions as the united states seeks to promote economic and energy security .

climate change and other factors are significantly affecting the lives of arctic inhabitants , particularly indigenous communities .

the united states affirms the importance to arctic communities of adapting to climate change , given their particular vulnerabilities .

2 .

energy development in the arctic region will play an important role in meeting growing global energy demand as the area is thought to contain a substantial portion of the world's undiscovered energy resources .

the united states seeks to ensure that energy development throughout the arctic occurs in an environmentally sound manner , taking into account the interests of indigenous and local communities , as well as open and transparent market principles .

the united states seeks to balance access to , and development of , energy and other natural resources with the protection of the arctic environment by ensuring that continental shelf resources are managed in a responsible manner and by continuing to work closely with other arctic nations .

3 .

the united states recognizes the value and effectiveness of existing fora , such as the arctic council , the international regulators forum , and the international standards organization .

4 .

implementation: in carrying out this policy as it relates to economic issues , including energy , the secretaries of state , the interior , commerce , and energy , in coordination with heads of other relevant executive departments and agencies , shall: a .

seek to increase efforts , including those in the arctic council , to study changing climate conditions , with a view to preserving and enhancing economic opportunity in the arctic region .

such efforts shall include inventories and assessments of villages , indigenous communities , subsistence opportunities , public facilities , infrastructure , oil and gas development projects , alternative energy development opportunities , forestry , cultural and other sites , living marine resources , and other elements of the arctic's socioeconomic composition ; b .

work with other arctic nations to ensure that hydrocarbon and other development in the arctic region is carried out in accordance with accepted best practices and internationally recognized standards and the 2006 group of eight ( g - 8 ) global energy security principles ; c. consult with other arctic nations to discuss issues related to exploration , production , environmental and socioeconomic impacts , including drilling conduct , facility sharing , the sharing of environmental data , impact assessments , compatible monitoring programs , and reservoir management in areas with potentially shared resources ; d. protect united states interests with respect to hydrocarbon reservoirs that may overlap boundaries to mitigate adverse environmental and economic consequences related to their development ; e. identify opportunities for international cooperation on methane hydrate issues , north slope hydrology , and other matters ; f. explore whether there is a need for additional fora for informing decisions on hydrocarbon leasing , exploration , development , production , and transportation , as well as shared support activities , including infrastructure projects ; and g. continue to emphasize cooperative mechanisms with nations operating in the region to address shared concerns , recognizing that most known arctic oil and gas resources are located outside of united states jurisdiction .

h. environmental protection and conservation of natural resources 1 .

the arctic environment is unique and changing .

increased human activity is expected to bring additional stressors to the arctic environment , with potentially serious consequences for arctic communities and ecosystems .

2 .

despite a growing body of research , the arctic environment remains poorly understood .

sea ice and glaciers are in retreat .

permafrost is thawing and coasts are eroding .

pollutants from within and outside the arctic are contaminating the region .

basic data are lacking in many fields .

high levels of uncertainty remain concerning the effects of climate change and increased human activity in the arctic .

given the need for decisions to be based on sound scientific and socioeconomic information , arctic environmental research , monitoring , and vulnerability assessments are top priorities .

for example , an understanding of the probable consequences of global climate variability and change on arctic ecosystems is essential to guide the effective long - term management of arctic natural resources and to address socioeconomic impacts of changing patterns in the use of natural resources .

3 .

taking into account the limitations in existing data , united states efforts to protect the arctic environment and to conserve its natural resources must be risk - based and proceed on the basis of the best available information .

4 .

the united states supports the application in the arctic region of the general principles of international fisheries management outlined in the 1995 agreement for the implementation of the provisions of the united nations convention on the law of the sea of december 10 , 1982 , relating to the conservation and management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks and similar instruments .

the united states endorses the protection of vulnerable marine ecosystems in the arctic from destructive fishing practices and seeks to ensure an adequate enforcement presence to safeguard arctic living marine resources .

5 .

with temperature increases in the arctic region , contaminants currently locked in the ice and soils will be released into the air , water , and land .

this trend , along with increased human activity within and below the arctic , will result in increased introduction of contaminants into the arctic , including both persistent pollutants ( eg , persistent organic pollutants and mercury ) and airborne pollutants ( eg , soot ) .

6 .

implementation: in carrying out this policy as it relates to environmental protection and conservation of natural resources , the secretaries of state , the interior , commerce , and homeland security and the administrator of the environmental protection agency , in coordination with heads of other relevant executive departments and agencies , shall: a .

in cooperation with other nations , respond effectively to increased pollutants and other environmental challenges ; b .

continue to identify ways to conserve , protect , and sustainably manage arctic species and ensure adequate enforcement presence to safeguard living marine resources , taking account of the changing ranges or distribution of some species in the arctic .

for species whose range includes areas both within and beyond united states jurisdiction , the united states shall continue to collaborate with other governments to ensure effective conservation and management ; c. seek to develop ways to address changing and expanding commercial fisheries in the arctic , including through consideration of international agreements or organizations to govern future arctic fisheries ; d. pursue marine ecosystem - based management in the arctic ; and e. intensify efforts to develop scientific information on the adverse effects of pollutants on human health and the environment and work with other nations to reduce the introduction of key pollutants into the arctic .

iv .

resources and assets a .

implementing a number of the policy elements directed above will require appropriate resources and assets .

these elements shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and authorities of agencies , or heads of agencies , vested by law , and subject to the availability of appropriations .

the heads of executive departments and agencies with responsibilities relating to the arctic region shall work to identify future budget , administrative , personnel , or legislative proposal requirements to implement the elements of this directive .

 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — [1] these policies and authorities include freedom of navigation ( pdd / nsc - 32 ) , the u.s. policy on protecting the ocean environment ( pdd / nsc - 36 ) , maritime security policy ( nspd - 41 / hspd - 13 ) , and the national strategy for maritime security ( nsms ) .

appendix d. may 2013 national strategy for arctic region on may 10 , 2013 , the obama administration released a document entitled national strategy for the arctic region .

the executive summary of the document is reprinted earlier in this report ( see " may 2013 national strategy for arctic region " in " background " ) .

this appendix reprints the main text of the document .

the main text states the following: introduction we seek an arctic region that is stable and free of conflict , where nations act responsibly in a spirit of trust and cooperation , and where economic and energy resources are developed in a sustainable manner that also respects the fragile environment and the interests and cultures of indigenous peoples .

as the united states addresses these opportunities and challenges , we will be guided by our central interests in the arctic region , which include providing for the security of the united states ; protecting the free flow of resources and commerce ; protecting the environment ; addressing the needs of indigenous communities ; and enabling scientific research .

in protecting these interests , we draw from our long - standing policy and approach to the global maritime spaces in the 20 th century , including freedom of navigation and overflight and other internationally lawful uses of the sea and airspace related to these freedoms ; security on the oceans ; maintaining strong relationships with allies and partners ; and peaceful resolution of disputes without coercion .

to achieve this vision , the united states is establishing an overarching national approach to advance national security interests , pursue responsible stewardship of this precious and unique region , and serve as a basis for cooperation with other arctic states and the international community as a whole to advance common interests .

even as we work domestically and internationally to minimize the effects of climate change , the effects are already apparent in the arctic .

ocean resources are more readily accessible as sea ice diminishes , but thawing ground is threatening communities as well as hindering land - based activities , including access to resources .

diminishing land and sea ice is altering ecosystems and the services they provide .

as an arctic nation , the united states must be proactive and disciplined in addressing changing regional conditions and in developing adaptive strategies to protect its interests .

an undisciplined approach to exploring new opportunities in this frontier could result in significant harm to the region , to our national security interests , and to the global good .

when implementing this strategy , the united states will proceed in a thoughtful , responsible manner that leverages expertise , resources , and cooperation from the state of alaska , alaska natives , and stakeholders across the entire nation and throughout the international community .

we will encourage and use science - informed decisionmaking to aid this effort .

we will endeavor to do no harm to the sensitive environment or to alaska native communities and other indigenous populations that rely on arctic resources .

just as a common spirit and shared vision of peaceful partnership led to the development of an international space station , we believe much can be achieved in the arctic region through collaborative international efforts , coordinated investments , and public - private partnerships .

structure of the strategy through this national strategy for the arctic region , we seek to guide , prioritize , and synchronize efforts to protect u.s. national and homeland security interests , promote responsible stewardship , and foster international cooperation .

this strategy articulates three priority lines of effort .

it also identifies guiding principles as a foundation for arctic region activities .

through a deliberate emphasis on the priority lines of effort and objectives , it aims to achieve a national unity of effort that is consistent with our domestic and international legal rights , obligations , and commitments and that is well coordinated with our arctic neighbors and the international community .

these lines of effort identify common themes where specific emphasis and activities will be focused to ensure that strategic priorities are met .

the three lines of effort , as well as the guiding principles are meant to be acted upon as a coherent whole .

changing conditions while the arctic region has experienced warming and cooling cycles over millennia , the current warming trend is unlike anything previously recorded .

the reduction in sea ice has been dramatic , abrupt , and unrelenting .

the dense , multi - year ice is giving way to thin layers of seasonal ice , making more of the region navigable year - round .

scientific estimates of technically recoverable conventional oil and gas resources north of the arctic circle total approximately 13 percent of the world's undiscovered oil and 30 percent of the world's undiscovered gas deposits , as well as vast quantities of mineral resources , including rare earth elements , iron ore , and nickel .

these estimates have inspired fresh ideas for commercial initiatives and infrastructure development in the region .

as portions of the arctic ocean become more navigable , there is increasing interest in the viability of the northern sea route and other potential routes , including the northwest passage , as well as in development of arctic resources .

for all of the opportunities emerging with the increasing accessibility and economic and strategic interests in the arctic , the opening and rapid development of the arctic region presents very real challenges .

on the environmental front , reduced sea ice is having an immediate impact on indigenous populations as well as on fish and wildlife .

moreover , there may be potentially profound environmental consequences of continued ocean warming and arctic ice melt .

these consequences include altering the climate of lower latitudes , risking the stability of greenland's ice sheet , and accelerating the thawing of the arctic permafrost in which large quantities of methane – a potent driver of climate change – as well as pollutants such as mercury are stored .

uncoordinated development – and the consequent increase in pollution such as emissions of black carbon or other substances from fossil fuel combustion – could have unintended consequences on climate trends , fragile ecosystems , and arctic communities .

it is imperative that the united states proactively establish national priorities and objectives for the arctic region .

lines of effort to meet the challenges and opportunities in the arctic region , and in furtherance of established arctic region policy , we will pursue the following lines of effort and supporting objectives in a mutually reinforcing manner that incorporates the broad range of u.s. current activities and interests in the arctic region .

1 .

advance united states security interests our highest priority is to protect the american people , our sovereign territory and rights , natural resources , and interests of the united states .

to this end , the united states will identify , develop , and maintain the capacity and capabilities necessary to promote safety , security , and stability in the region through a combination of independent action , bilateral initiatives , and multilateral cooperation .

we acknowledge that the protection of our national security interests in the arctic region must be undertaken with attention to environmental , cultural , and international considerations outlined throughout this strategy .

as many nations across the world aspire to expand their role in the arctic , we encourage arctic and non - arctic states to work collaboratively through appropriate fora to address the emerging challenges and opportunities in the arctic region , while we remain vigilant to protect the security interests of the united states and our allies .

to accomplish this line of effort , the united states government will seek to: • evolve arctic infrastructure and strategic capabilities – working cooperatively with the state of alaska , local , and tribal authorities , as well as public and private sector partners , we will develop , maintain , and exercise the capacity to execute federal responsibilities in our arctic waters , airspace , and coastal regions , including the capacity to respond to natural or man - made disasters .

we will carefully tailor this regional infrastructure , as well as our response capacity , to the evolving human and commercial activity in the arctic region .

• enhance arctic domain awareness – we seek to improve our awareness of activities , conditions , and trends in the arctic region that may affect our safety , security , environmental , or commercial interests .

the united states will endeavor to appropriately enhance sea , air , and space capabilities as arctic conditions change , and to promote maritime - related information sharing with international , public , and private sector partners , to support implementation of activities such as the search - and - rescue agreement signed by arctic states .

• preserve arctic region freedom of the seas – the united states has a national interest in preserving all of the rights , freedoms , and uses of the sea and airspace recognized under international law .

we will enable prosperity and safe transit by developing and maintaining sea , under - sea , and air assets and necessary infrastructure .

in addition , the united states will support the enhancement of national defense , law enforcement , navigation safety , marine environment response , and search - and - rescue capabilities .

existing international law provides a comprehensive set of rules governing the rights , freedoms , and uses of the world's oceans and airspace , including the arctic .

the law recognizes these rights , freedoms , and uses for commercial and military vessels and aircraft .

within this framework , we shall further develop arctic waterways management regimes , including traffic separation schemes , vessel tracking , and ship routing , in collaboration with partners .

we will also encourage other nations to adhere to internationally accepted principles .

this cooperation will facilitate strategic partnerships that promote innovative , low - cost solutions that enhance the arctic marine transportation system and the safe , secure , efficient and free flow of trade .

• provide for future united states energy security – the arctic region's energy resources factor into a core component of our national security strategy: energy security .

the region holds sizable proved and potential oil and natural gas resources that will likely continue to provide valuable supplies to meet u.s. energy needs .

continuing to responsibly develop arctic oil and gas resources aligns with the united states "all of the above" approach to developing new domestic energy sources , including renewables , expanding oil and gas production , and increasing efficiency and conservation efforts to reduce our reliance on imported oil and strengthen our nation's energy security .

within the context of this broader energy security strategy , including our economic , environmental and climate policy objectives , we are committed to working with stakeholders , industry , and other arctic states to explore the energy resource base , develop and implement best practices , and share experiences to enable the environmentally responsible production of oil and natural gas as well as renewable energy .

2 .

pursue responsible arctic region stewardship responsible stewardship requires active conservation of resources , balanced management , and the application of scientific and traditional knowledge of physical and living environments .

as arctic environments change , increased human activity demands precaution , as well as greater knowledge to inform responsible decisions .

together , arctic nations can responsibly meet new demands – including maintaining open sea lanes for global commerce and scientific research , charting and mapping , providing search - and - rescue services , and developing capabilities to prevent , contain , and respond to oil spills and accidents – by increasing knowledge and integrating arctic management .

we must improve our ability to forecast future conditions in the arctic while being mindful of the potential for unexpected developments .

to realize this line of effort , we will pursue the specific objectives outlined below: • protect the arctic environment and conserve arctic natural resources – protecting the unique and changing environment of the arctic is a central goal of u.s. policy .

supporting actions will promote healthy , sustainable , and resilient ecosystems over the long term , supporting a full range of ecosystem services .

this effort will be risk - based and proceed on the basis of best available information .

the united states in the arctic will assess and monitor the status of ecosystems and the risks of climate change and other stressors to prepare for and respond effectively to environmental challenges .

• use integrated arctic management to balance economic development , environmental protection , and cultural values – natural resource management will be based on a comprehensive understanding of environmental and cultural sensitivities in the region , and address expectations for future infrastructure needs and other development - related trends .

this endeavor can promote unity of effort and provide the basis for sensible infrastructure and other resource management decisions in the arctic .

we will emphasize science - informed decisionmaking and integration of economic , environmental , and cultural values .

we will also advance coordination among federal departments and agencies and collaboration with partners engaged in arctic stewardship activities .

• increase understanding of the arctic through scientific research and traditional knowledge – proper stewardship of the arctic requires understanding of how the environment is changing , and such understanding will be based on a holistic earth system approach .

vast areas of the arctic ocean are unexplored , and we lack much of the basic knowledge necessary to understand and address arctic issues .

the changes in the arctic cannot be understood in isolation and must be viewed in a global context .

as we learn more about the region , we have identified several key subcomponents of the arctic that require urgent attention: land ice and its role in changing sea level ; sea - ice and its role in global climate , fostering biodiversity , and supporting arctic peoples ; and , the warming permafrost and its effects on infrastructure and climate .

better earth system - level knowledge will also help us meet operational needs such as weather and ice forecasting .

we can make faster progress through a well - coordinated and transparent national and international exploration and research agenda that reduces the potential for duplication of effort and leads to better leveraging of resources .

• chart the arctic region – we will continue to make progress in charting and mapping the arctic region's ocean and waterways , so long obscured by perennial ice , and mapping its coastal and interior lands according to reliable , modern standards .

given the vast expanse of territory and water to be charted and mapped , we will need to prioritize and synchronize charting efforts to make more effective use of resources and attain faster progress .

in so doing , we will make navigation safer and contribute to the identification of ecologically sensitive areas and reserves of natural resources .

3 .

strengthen international cooperation what happens in one part of the arctic region can have significant implications for the interests of other arctic states and the international community as a whole .

the remote and complex operating conditions in the arctic environment make the region well - suited for collaborative efforts by nations seeking to explore emerging opportunities while emphasizing ecological awareness and preservation .

we will seek to strengthen partnerships through existing multilateral fora and legal frameworks dedicated to common arctic issues .

we will also pursue new arrangements for cooperating on issues of mutual interest or concern and addressing unique and unprecedented challenges , as appropriate .

u.s. efforts to strengthen international cooperation and partnerships will be pursued through four objectives: • pursue arrangements that promote shared arctic state prosperity , protect the arctic environment , and enhance security – we will seek opportunities to pursue efficient and effective joint ventures , based on shared values that leverage each arctic state's strengths .

this collaboration will assist in guiding investments and regional activities , addressing dynamic trends , and promoting sustainable development in the arctic region .

arctic nations have varied commercial , cultural , environmental , safety , and security concerns in the arctic region .

nevertheless , our common interests make these nations ideal partners in the region .

we seek new opportunities to advance our interests by proactive engagement with other arctic nations through bilateral and multilateral efforts using of a wide array of existing multilateral mechanisms that have responsibilities relating to the arctic region .

as appropriate , we will work with other arctic nations to develop new coordination mechanisms to keep the arctic region prosperous , environmentally sustainable , operationally safe , secure , and free of conflict , and will protect u.s. , allied , and regional security and economic interests .

• work through the arctic council to advance u.s .

interests in the arctic region – in recent years , the arctic council has facilitated notable achievements in the promotion of cooperation , coordination , and interaction among arctic states and arctic indigenous peoples .

recent successes of the council include its advancement of public safety and environmental protection issues , as evidenced by the 2011 arctic search - and - rescue agreement and by the 2013 arctic marine oil pollution preparedness and response agreement .

the united states will continue to emphasize the arctic council as a forum for facilitating arctic states' cooperation on myriad issues of mutual interest within its current mandate .

• accede to the law of the sea convention – accession to the convention would protect u.s. rights , freedoms , and uses of the sea and airspace throughout the arctic region , and strengthen our arguments for freedom of navigation and overflight through the northwest passage and the northern sea route .

the united states is the only arctic state that is not party to the convention .

only by joining the convention can we maximize legal certainty and best secure international recognition of our sovereign rights with respect to the u.s. extended continental shelf in the arctic and elsewhere , which may hold vast oil , gas , and other resources .

our extended continental shelf claim in the arctic region could extend more than 600 nautical miles from the north coast of alaska .

in instances where the maritime zones of coastal nations overlap , arctic states have already begun the process of negotiating and concluding maritime boundary agreements , consistent with the law of the sea convention and other relevant international law .

the united states supports peaceful management and resolution of disputes , in a manner free from coercion .

while the united states is not currently a party to the convention , we will continue to support and observe principles of established customary international law reflected in the convention .

• cooperate with other interested parties – a growing number of non - arctic states and numerous non - state actors have expressed increased interest in the arctic region .

the united states and other arctic nations should seek to work with other states and entities to advance common objectives in the arctic region in a manner that protects arctic states' national interests and resources .

one key example relates to the promotion of safe , secure , and reliable arctic shipping , a goal that is best pursued through the international maritime organization in coordination with other arctic states , major shipping states , the shipping industry and other relevant interests .

guiding principles the u.s. approach to the arctic region must reflect our values as a nation and as a member of the global community .

we will approach holistically our interests in promoting safety and security , advancing economic and energy development , protecting the environment , addressing climate change and respecting the needs of indigenous communities and arctic state interests .

to guide our efforts , we have identified the following principles to serve as the foundation for u.s. arctic engagement and activities .

• safeguard peace and stability by working to maintain and preserve the arctic region as an area free of conflict , acting in concert with allies , partners , and other interested parties .

this principle will include united states action , and the actions of other interested countries , in supporting and preserving international legal principles of freedom of navigation and overflight and other uses of the sea related to these freedoms , unimpeded lawful commerce , and the peaceful resolution of disputes .

the united states will rely on existing international law , which provides a comprehensive set of rules governing the rights , freedoms , and uses of the world's oceans and airspace , including the arctic .

• make decisions using the best available information by promptly sharing – nationally and internationally – the most current understanding and forecasts based on up - to - date science and traditional knowledge .

• pursue innovative arrangements to support the investments in scientific research , marine transportation infrastructure requirements , and other support capability and capacity needs in this region .

the harshness of the arctic climate and the complexity associated with developing , maintaining , and operating infrastructure and capabilities in the region necessitate new thinking on public - private and multinational partnerships .

• consult and coordinate with alaska natives consistent with tribal consultation policy established by executive order .

this policy emphasizes trust , respect , and shared responsibility .

it articulates that tribal governments have a unique legal relationship with the united states and requires federal departments and agencies to provide for meaningful and timely input by tribal officials in development of regulatory policies that have tribal implications .

this guiding principle is also consistent with the alaska federation of natives guidelines for research .

conclusion we seek a collaborative and innovative approach to manage a rapidly changing region .

we must advance u.s. national security interests , pursue responsible stewardship , and strengthen international collaboration and cooperation , as we work to meet the challenges of rapid climate - driven environmental change .

the melting of arctic ice has the potential to transform global climate and ecosystems as well as global shipping , energy markets , and other commercial interests .

to address these challenges and opportunities , we will align federal activities in accordance with this strategy ; partner with the state of alaska , local , and tribal entities ; and work with other arctic nations to develop complementary approaches to shared challenges .

we will proactively coordinate regional development .

our economic development and environmental stewardship must go hand - in - hand .

the unique arctic environment will require a commitment by the united states to make judicious , coordinated infrastructure investment decisions , informed by science .

to meet this challenge , we will need bold , innovative thinking that embraces and generates new and creative public - private and multinational cooperative models .

appendix e. obama administration statement regarding u.s. chairmanship of arctic council this appendix presents the text of a statement from the obama administration regarding the two - year period of u.s. chairmanship of the arctic council that began in april 2015 .

the text of the statement is as follows: given the increased strategic importance of the region , the next two years offers the united states an unprecedented opportunity to make significant progress on our arctic policy objectives , which were first laid out in the national strategy for the arctic region released by the white house in may 2013 and followed by an implementation plan in january 2014 .

the u.s. will be chairing the arctic council at a crucial moment when the effects of climate change are bringing a myriad of new environmental , human and economic opportunities and challenges to the arctic .

during the u.s. chairmanship , the state department will focus the arctic work it carries out through the arctic council , various international scientific cooperation mechanisms and , in some cases , domestic initiatives led by u.s. states or other u.s. government agencies .

the three thematic areas of the u.s. chairmanship are: improving economic and living conditions in arctic communities ; arctic ocean safety , security and stewardship ; and addressing the impacts of climate change .

the theme of the u.s. chairmanship of the arctic council is "one arctic: shared opportunities , challenges and responsibilities," which recognizes the peaceful and stable nature of the arctic .

the u.s. chairmanship will conclude in spring 2017 with a ministerial meeting in alaska , at which point the united states will hand the chairmanship to finland .

to guide u.s. engagement on the arctic during this crucial period , u.s. secretary of state john kerry appointed the former commandant of the u.s. coast guard , admiral robert j. papp , jr. , as the first - ever u.s. special representative for the arctic in july 2014 .

the u.s. has developed an ambitious and balanced program for its arctic council chairmanship that focuses on three crucial areas: improving economic and living conditions ; arctic ocean safety , security and stewardship ; and addressing the impacts of climate change .

1 .

improving economic and living conditions in arctic communities remote arctic communities face a number of threats to the health and well - being of their citizens , including food and water security , safe water , sewer and sanitation , affordable and renewable energy , adequate mental health services , and the need to ensure the continued economic viability of their communities .

our work in this area will aim to: — promote the development of renewable energy technology , such as modular micro - grid systems , to spur public - private partnerships and improve energy affordability ; — provide a better understanding of freshwater security in the arctic , including through the creation of a water resources vulnerability index ; — coordinate an arctic - wide telecommunications infrastructure assessment to promote the build - out of commercial infrastructure in the region ; — support mental wellness , including suicide prevention and resilience ; — harness the expertise and resources of the arctic economic council to inform the arctic council's work on economic and living conditions ; — mitigate public health risks and reduce black carbon output in arctic communities ; — promote better community sanitation and public health by facilitation collaboration between industry , researchers and public policy experts to increase access to and reduce the operating costs of in - home running water and sewer in remote communities .

2 .

arctic ocean safety , security and stewardship the acceleration of maritime activity in the arctic increases risk in an already harsh and challenging environment .

u.s. chairmanship priorities include building upon existing preparedness and response programs ; enhancing the ability of arctic states to execute their search and rescue responsibilities ; and emphasizing safe , secure , and environmentally sound shipping as a matter of high priority .

to ensure that future maritime development avoids negative impacts , particularly in areas of ecological and cultural significance , the arctic council is also continuing its work towards a network of marine protected areas and enhanced international cooperation in the arctic ocean .

ocean acidification is one of the most urgent issues facing the world's ocean today and the arctic council is responding by supporting research to improve the capability to monitor and track acidification in the arctic ocean .

our work in this area will aim to: — better prepare those responsible to better address search and rescue challenges in the arctic ; — ensure marine environmental protection , including working toward the establishment of a network of marine protected areas ; — explore the creation of a regional seas program of the arctic ocean ; — create a better understanding of arctic ocean acidification and its effects on arctic organisms and the economies that rely on them ; — encourage all parties take the steps necessary to allow for the proper implementation of the agreement on cooperation on marine oil pollution , preparedness and response in the arctic .

3 .

addressing the impacts of climate change the impacts of climate change affect the arctic and the many people , wildlife , and plants that depend on the region for survival .

the united states recognizes that we need to reduce black carbon ( soot ) and methane emissions , which disproportionally impact the arctic .

the arctic council is addressing the impacts of climate change by facilitating cooperation on action to reduce black carbon and methane emissions .

arctic council activities to enhance access to adaptation and resilience tools , and promote the development of climate change indicators and high - resolution mapping are also priorities of the u.s. chairmanship that will increase scientists' , communities' , policymakers' and the public's understanding of the impacts of climate change .

our work in this area will aim to: — target short - lived climate pollutants through reductions in black carbon and methane emissions ; — support arctic climate adaptation and resilience efforts including the creation of an early warning indicator system ; — create a pan - arctic digital elevation map that will increase our understanding of the impacts of climate change on shorelines and surface areas in the arctic .

