the first amendment of the u.s. constitution provides the freedom to individuals to exercise their religious beliefs without governmental interference , and simultaneously prohibits government actions that benefit followers of one faith over another .

at times , when government actions would otherwise burden individuals' religious exercise , the government makes efforts to accommodate the religious practice .

however , accommodation of religion to prevent violations of the free exercise clause must be carefully considered in order to prevent violation of the establishment clause .

one of the premier examples of the tension between the religion clauses is accommodation of the religious exercise of military personnel , particularly in the limitations on personnel in uniform and the provision of military chaplains .

the tension between the clauses has been illustrated in a number of military scenarios in recent years .

for example , the u.s. army recently allowed the first sikh in more than 25 years to graduate from the officer basic training program without sacrificing the articles of his faith .

the army granted an exemption from the uniform policy , allowing the officer to maintain his unshorn hair and beard and to wear a turban as required by his faith .

some argue that allowing exemptions to the uniform policy diminishes esprit de corps and may weaken military effectiveness .

others assert that the exemptions allow for more individuals to serve in the military at a time when the forces have been stretched thin with the ongoing conflicts .

they assert that it furthers an important public policy goal of ensuring that servicemembers of all faiths are an integral part of american military life and affirms the military's role as an assimilative national institution which has historically served to counter prejudice .

in another example , the don't ask , don't tell repeal act was enacted in december 2010 and created a process to repeal the military's current policy regarding homosexual servicemembers once certain conditions are met .

the repeal has raised several questions about the impact a new policy would have on chaplains whose religious background does not support homosexuality .

some argue that chaplains , as religious leaders , may be protected from providing support to homosexual servicemembers as a matter of conscience , similar to protections for doctors who have religious objections to abortions .

clergy and spiritual leaders traditionally benefit from heightened protection from claims of discrimination or unequal treatment of others , but it is also important to note that the military operates under a unique set of rules in contrast to the civilian society in which doctors and clergy may be afforded heightened conscience protections .

this report provides an overview of the requirements of the first amendment related to military personnel's religious exercise .

it analyzes current constitutional and statutory requirements regarding religious exercise , and provides a framework for how congress and the courts might consider future issues that arise related to servicemembers' religious exercise .

specifically , the report examines the limitations placed on servicemembers in uniform to exercise their religious beliefs .

it also examines the role of military chaplains and the legal challenges associated with public funding for religious personnel .

the report analyzes efforts by congress and the department of defense to address the constitutional concerns that are raised by these issues .

religious exercise is protected by a number of different laws and regulations .

primarily , the protections and limitations on religion are based upon the establishment clause and free exercise clause of the first amendment .

in addition to the first amendment's religion clauses , the religious freedom restoration act ( rfra ) supplements the standard of review of burdens on individuals' religious exercise to provide heightened protection not offered by the constitutional standard .

furthermore , the department of defense ( dod ) has promulgated regulations addressing religious exercise in the military .

the military chaplaincy raises other issues of accommodation of religious practices in the military .

the chaplaincy is a fairly unique institution in the context of religious freedom analysis because it is a government - funded program with the specific purpose of providing religious services to members of the u.s. military .

although courts have not invalidated the chaplaincy as a violation of religious freedoms so far , there have been indications that some specific operations of the chaplaincy may raise constitutional concerns .

in 1985 , the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit decided the only direct constitutional challenge to the military chaplaincy , katcoff v. marsh .

although later cases have challenged how the chaplaincy is administered , katcoff considered whether the mere existence of the military chaplaincy violated the establishment clause .

the second circuit held that the chaplaincy did not violate the establishment clause , but concluded that specific practices of the chaplaincy may not be constitutional .

the second circuit noted that the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of legislative chaplains offering prayers at legislative sessions under the rationale that the practice was a part of american history and had been woven into the fabric of our society .

the court had reasoned that the legislative chaplaincy had an "unbroken history of more than 200 years. .

arguments have been made that the legislative chaplaincy is distinct from the military chaplaincy , meaning that the supreme court's analysis of the legislative chaplaincy does not control the outcome of cases challenging the military chaplaincy .

thus , the second circuit examined the challenge under other constitutional tests .

the court indicated that the military chaplaincy would fail under the lemon test's requirements , but recognized that the establishment clause concerns must be balanced by other constitutional considerations , including the free exercise clause .

the court held that the military chaplaincy was a constitutional means of accommodating servicemembers' religious exercise rights under the free exercise clause .

because members of the military have been removed from their religious communities , the court explained that the government had interfered with their ability to exercise their religious beliefs .

accordingly , the military chaplaincy , although unconstitutional if examined solely under the establishment clause , alleviated the burden imposed by the military on servicemembers' religious exercise .

the court reinforced this balance favoring the accommodation of servicemembers' religious exercise by noting the importance of the interests of the war powers clause of the u.s. constitution , which required the court to give significant deference to congress in military affairs .

the court explained that "when a matter provided for by congress in the exercise of its war power and implemented by the army appears reasonably relevant and necessary to furtherance of our national defense it should be treated as presumptively valid and any doubt as to its constitutionality should be resolved ... in favor of deference to the military's exercise of discretion. .

thus , the court determined that because the chaplaincy serves as an accommodation to alleviate a burden on religion imposed by the government and because the military is entitled to deference in a reasonable policy to ensure that servicemembers are adequately treated to maintain military order , the chaplaincy is a permissive accommodation of religion by the government .

although the legal debate over the constitutionality of the chaplaincy program has appeared settled since katcoff , later cases address whether specific practices of the chaplaincy program in various branches of the military comport with constitutional requirements .

among the issues considered by lower courts are the employment and hiring practices for military chaplains and the role of religious pluralism in chaplains' practices .

one of the most recent and illustrative challenges to the specific practices of the military chaplaincy was larsen v. u.s. navy , a federal district court case decided in 2007 .

in larsen , three non - liturgical protestant ministers challenged the navy's hiring practices for the chaplaincy as violations of the first amendment .

the ministers alleged that the navy's previous and current hiring practices were inadequate to meet constitutional requirements related to religious exercise of servicemembers .

the court rejected the challenge to the earlier hiring policy , which divided the chaplaincy into thirds ( roman catholic , protestant liturgical , and non - liturgical christian and special worship ) , as moot .

the court did consider the constitutionality of the navy's hiring practice that was in place at the time of the lawsuit , however , and ultimately held that it was a constitutionally permissible form of religious accommodation under the first amendment .

the navy hiring policy at issue in larsen was described as faith group - neutral and designed to take "the best qualified candidates , regardless of denomination. .

the policy considers several factors in determining the composition of the chaplaincy: the breadth of locations where navy personnel serve ; the unique circumstances of naval service , which involves personnel isolated on ships sailing all over the world ; the various fucntions and tasks of chaplain officers outside of religious services including assistance to those of other faith groups and even no faith groups ; the need to keep accession , promotion , and retention in line with other naval communities ; the need to prevent shortages of qualified clergy ; the need to maintain capacity to respond to events requiring quick access to chaplains from different faith groups not stationed on site , such as terror attacks ; and the need to consider administrative necessities in managing an all - volunteer corps .

in considering the constitutional claims related to this policy , the district court noted that typically first amendment analysis does not defer to the government's rationale , but also noted that the supreme court has indicated that the military is separate from civilian society and that military actions are to receive higher deference than similar issues arising in a civilian context .

notably , one supreme court opinion recognized that certain actions in the military context may appear to be constitutionally suspect , but a military policy that favors the group's mission over personal practices is "paramount. .

the district court in larsen framed its decision as one which fit in the so - called "joints" of the religion clauses , "in the space between the constitutional command against practices respecting an establishment of religion and the command against practices which prohibit the free exercise thereof. .

the plaintiffs' assertions also recognized the need to accommodate the religious exercise of servicemembers , but based their challenge on the manner in which that accommodation should be offered .

the court disagreed with the plaintiffs' claim that , because the military had a compelling interest in accommodating servicemembers' religious exercise , the military therefore was required to accommodate .

rather , it interpreted the challenge as one that could be resolved constitutionally through permissive accommodation instead of mandatory accommodation .

as such , the court rejected the claim that the chaplaincy must be narrowly tailored to specifically provide for all servicemembers' religious needs .

applying the goldman standard for deference to military decisions , the larsen court held that the navy's policy for hiring was "constitutionally sound" because it served legitimate military ends by advancing the navy's mission of national defense and because it accommodated individual religious exercise to "an appropriate degree. .

in reaching its conclusion , it considered the navy's claim that "it would be impossible in any given military unit or community to provide a chaplain for each faith group represented by its members" and agreed that a "relaxed hiring approach , which ignores faith group identifiers , seems reasonable and justified. .

under one suggested alternative hiring policy , the chaplaincy would be directly related to the religious demographics of the navy .

the larsen court found this alternative to be "flawed because it confuses religious demographics with religious need. .

such a plan would mean that the navy ( or another military branch ) would have to spend a significant portion of resources monitoring the appropriate representation and distribution of chaplains for its servicemembers stationed around the world .

among the problems the court recognized were the difficulty in addressing "the complexities and variations of religious worship among religions generally and between individual parishioners specifically" and the assumption that chaplains of one denomination could not serve the religious needs of servicemembers of other denominations .

in upholding the navy's policy to use chaplains without a strict quota system or proportional representation , the court indicated further adherence to the constitutional principle that religious accommodations are permissible if they broadly facilitate opportunities to alleviate burdens imposed upon individual religious exercise .

other cases have addressed the specific policies of the chaplaincy as well , but very few have resulted in decisions on the merits .

often , these cases have been resolved on procedural grounds ( eg , the plaintiff lacked standing or the defendant was not a state actor ) .

one controversial issue which remains open for judicial interpretation is whether military chaplains can be required to endorse pluralism in their practice .

chaplains are required to hold worship services , but the military does not dictate the content of such services .

this allows chaplains to follow their own religious backgrounds and allows the military to avoid dictating religious policy , both consistent with the first amendment .

however , a tension arises because the chaplaincy requires that religious services take a pluralistic approach to some extent , so that any servicemember may be assisted by an available chaplain , regardless of denomination .

a 2006 federal appellate decision resolved a challenge to this issue on procedural grounds , but the question remains an important issue in the debate over religious freedom in the military .

the question of whether chaplains could be required to use a pluralistic approach has become particularly salient with the legislative repeal of the "don't ask , don't tell" policy .

the don't ask , don't tell repeal act of 2010 provides that the policy repeal will become effective 60 days after the president , secretary of defense , and chairman of the joint chiefs of staff certify that they have considered the recommendations contained in a recent dod report on the effect of the repeal ; that dod has prepared the necessary policies and regulations to implement the new law ; and that the implementation of such policies and regulations "is consistent with the standards of military readiness , military effectiveness , unit cohesion , and recruiting and retention of the armed forces. .

the report noted that: some of the most intense and sharpest divergence of views about don't ask , don't tell exists among the chaplain corps .

a large number of military chaplains ( and their followers ) believe that homosexuality is a sin and an abomination , and that they are required by god to condemn it as such .

however , the reality is that in today's u.s. military , people of sharply different moral values and religious convictions … and those who have no religious convictions at all , already co - exist , work , live , and fight together on a daily basis .

the other reality is that policies regarding service members' individual expression and free exercise of religion already exist , and we believe they are adequate .

service members will not be required to change their personal views and religious beliefs ; they must , however , continue to respect and serve with others who hold different views and beliefs .

the report indicated that the issues confronted by chaplains concerning the repeal of don't ask , don't tell were sufficiently addressed in existing guidance and suggested that the guidance be reinforced during the transition efforts to a new policy .

it noted the balance required to be struck by chaplains: existing regulations state that chaplains "will not be required to perform a religious role … in worship services , command ceremonies , or other events , if doing so would be in variance with the tenets or practices of their faith. .

at the same time , regulations state that "chaplains care for all service members , including those who claim no religious faith , facilitate the religious requirements of personnel of all faiths , provide faith - specific ministries , and advise the command. .

the implementation of the new policy may bring clarity to the manner in which these obligations would be reconciled .

alternatively , new legal challenges may be raised that may provide courts the proper opportunity to weigh in on the issue .

it is dod policy , established in the dod directive 1304.19 , that the chaplaincies of each military department exist for three purposes: ( 1 ) to "advise and assist commanders in the discharge of their responsibilities to provide for the free exercise of religion in the context of military service as guaranteed by the constitution" ; ( 2 ) to "assist commanders in managing religious affairs" ; and ( 3 ) to "serve as the principal advisors to commanders for all issues regarding the impact of religion on military operations. .

further , it is the dod policy that the chaplaincies shall serve a "religiously diverse population" and that religious ministry professionals cooperate in providing "comprehensive religious support to all authorized individuals" within the military commands .

in support of the policy , dod instruction 1304.28 provides guidance for the appointment of chaplains for the military departments .

the instruction requires that the secretaries of the military departments ensure that individuals appointed as chaplains meet the prescribed "minimum professional and educational qualifications. .

prior to being considered for an appointment to serve as a chaplain , a religious ministry professional must provide an endorsement from a qualified religious organization verifying , among many things , that the individual "is willing to function in a pluralistic environment ... and is willing to support directly and indirectly the free exercise of religion by all members of the military services , their family members , and other persons authorized to be served by the military chaplaincies. .

further , applicants for appointment as chaplains must affirm that they will "abide by applicable laws , and all applicable regulations , directives , and instructions of the department of defense , and of the military department that grades the appointment. .

of particular note , in 2007 , the dod implemented a change to the instruction concerning the potential nexus between religion and terrorism .

any individual or religious organization may be removed from or rejected from participating in the chaplain program if "the individual is under indictment or has been convicted of a terrorism related offense , or other offense threatening national or economic security" ; or "the religious organization appears on the annual state department list of foreign terror organizations. .

the instruction provides procedures for the removal of chaplains from the service for loss of ecclesiastical endorsement ; however , the instruction does not state if those procedures , rather than the standard administrative separation procedures , would apply to an individual removed from the chaplaincy due to indictment or conviction of terrorism related offense .

the armed forces chaplains board , established by the dod instruction 5120.08 , serves the purpose of making recommendations on "religious , ethical , and moral matters" for the military services to the secretary of defense .

the board consists of the chief and active deputy chief of chaplains from each of the three military departments: army , navy , and air force .

in addition to making recommendations on the "[p]rocurement , professional standards , requirements , training , and assignment of military chaplains," the board advises the secretary of defense on the "[p]rotection of the free exercise of religion according to amendment i to the constitution of the united states. .

