after members of the house or senate leave office , they are afforded certain courtesies and privileges .

some are derived from law and chamber rules , but others are courtesies that have been extended as a matter of custom .

some of these privileges and courtesies include the following: access to the floor of the chamber in which a former member served .

short - term franking privileges .

former members of congress are authorized to use the frank for 90 days immediately after they leave office , only for official matters relating to the closing of their offices .

access to parking facilities and athletic or wellness facilities , subject to some restrictions .

access to house or senate administrative services and dining facilities .

access to materials through the congressional research service ( crs ) and the library of congress .

former members of the house are entitled to admission to the floor of the house while it is in session .

a former member of the house is not entitled to the privilege of the house floor if he or she ( 1 ) becomes a registered lobbyist or the agent of a foreign principal as defined by the house ; ( 2 ) has any direct personal or pecuniary interest in any legislative measure pending before the house or reported by any committee of the house ; ( 3 ) or is employed for the purpose of influencing , directly or indirectly , the passage , defeat , or amendment of any legislative proposal .

the speaker may promulgate regulations that exempt ceremonial or educational functions from these restrictions .

former members of the house may have access , for a fee , to member exercise facilities , including the members' wellness facility .

any former member who is a registered lobbyist or agent of a foreign principal , or who is employed or retained for the purpose of influencing legislation , is not entitled to this courtesy .

other privileges and courtesies extended to former members of the house include the following: parking in house parking facilities , as space is available ; assistance with retirement and other benefits from the office of members' services ; membership in the wright patman congressional federal credit union ; permanent house of representatives id card from the clerk of the house ; use of the collections in the house legislative resource center and senate library without borrowing privileges ; use of the house document room ; seating in the house restaurant facilities and members' dining room ; and membership in the u.s. association of former members of congress .

former senators are entitled to admission to the floor of the senate while it is in session .

a former senator who becomes a registered lobbyist , agent of a foreign principal , or is employed to influence legislation , is denied floor privileges except for ceremonial functions and events designated by the majority leader and minority leader , pursuant to regulations promulgated by the committee on rules and administration .

former senators may obtain a permit allowing them to park in outdoor lots controlled by the senate .

for a fee , former senators are allowed to use the senate athletic facilities .

any former senator who is a registered lobbyist or agent of a foreign principal , or who is employed or retained for the purpose of influencing legislation , is not entitled to these courtesies .

other privileges and courtesies extended to former senators include the following: services from the senate disbursing office , including check cashing privileges and assistance with retirement and other benefits ; use of the senate credit union ; permanent id from the senate sergeant at arms ; limited use of the senate dining room ; use of the senate library , including borrowing privileges ; documents from the senate document room upon personal request of the former senator ; purchasing privileges in the senate stationery room ; and membership in the u.s. association of former members of congress .

