in 2009 , congressional debate focused primarily on stimulating the economy , health care reform , and climate change .

these issues are not only interrelated , but are also intimately linked with the taxation of businesses .

for example , in february , congress enacted the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

two of the act's business tax provisions provided for a temporary increase of small business expensing and temporary "bonus" depreciation limits , while other provisions allow a delayed recognition of cancelation of debt income and five - year carryback of net operating losses for small businesses .

the act also modified several renewable energy provisions , including the renewable energy production tax credit , the investment tax credit , and tax credit for alternative fueling property .

congressional debate in 2010 has focused on extending selected expired tax provisions and reforming health care .

in particular , the tax extenders act of 2009 , h.r .

4213 , passed the house on december 9 , 2009 , and the senate on march 10 , 2010 .

in addition , the debate on health care reform is ongoing and the president's fiscal year 2011 budget proposal calls for the modification of selected business taxes , the removal or restriction of several oil and gas tax provisions , and reforming international taxation .

as the year progresses , it is anticipated that congressional deliberations will consider the extension of several expiring business tax provisions , energy taxation , tax shelters , and international taxation , while continuing to examine opportunities for economic stimulus .

the united states has what tax analysts sometimes term a "classical" system for taxing corporate income .

that is , it imposes a tax on corporate profits — the corporate income tax — that is separate and generally in addition to the individual income taxes that corporate stockholders pay on their corporate - source capital gains and dividends .

the corporate income tax applies a 35% rate to most corporate taxable income , although reduced rates ranging from 15% to 34% apply to corporations earning smaller amounts of income .

the base of the tax is corporate profits as defined by the tax code — generally gross revenue minus interest , wages , the cost of purchased inputs , and an allowance for depreciation .

since 1980 , federal corporate tax revenue has generally varied between 1% and just over 2% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

congressional budget office ( cbo ) data show that corporate tax receipts registered an "uptick" in fy2005 and fy2007 — rising to 2.3% and 2.7% of gdp , respectively — before reverting to a historically normal 2.1% in 2008 and falling to 1.0% in 2009 .

cbo projects corporate tax revenue as a percentage of gdp to remain at this level through 2010 , reflecting reduced corporate profits due to the economic recession , before trending upward beginning in 2011 .

cbo data show a similar trend regarding corporate tax receipts as a share of total taxes , with an "uptick" in fy2005 and fy2007 from 12.9% to 14.4% of total federal revenues , before reverting to a 12.1% in 2008 and then dramatically falling to 6.6% in 2009 .

cbo , again , projects the percentage of total revenue from corporate tax revenue to remain depressed through 2010 .

not all businesses are subject to the corporate income tax , however .

income earned by partnerships is "passed through" and taxed to the individual partners under the individual income tax without imposition of a separate level of tax at the partnership level .

also , businesses that have no more than 100 stockholders and meet certain other requirements ( "s" corporations ) , as well as certain other "pass through entities," are not subject to the corporate income tax , but are taxed in the same manner as partnerships .

as congress debates business tax policy , several policy questions are commonly raised .

these questions highlight three criteria that tax policy experts find informative for the evaluation of tax policy options .

in general terms the criteria are equity , economic efficiency , and administrability .

the policy questions are as follows .

what would be the impact of the investment incentives on the economy's capital stock ? .

does the reduced tax burden increase the supply of capital and saving , thus increasing long - run growth ? .

or , is the economy's supply of capital relatively fixed , meaning the investment incentives simply interfere with the efficient allocation of investment ? .

were the enacted business tax cuts effective in stimulating the economy in the short run , thus aiding recovery from the 2001 recession ? .

or , do planning lags and other factors make business tax cuts ineffective as a fiscal stimulus , meaning the relation between the business tax cuts and economic recovery was serendipitous ? .

what is the effect of the business tax cuts on the overall fairness of the tax system ? .

do the reductions accrue primarily to relatively high - income stockholders and corporate creditors , or will any reductions on tax progressivity be outweighed by positive employment effects ? .

how will the business tax cuts affect u.s. economic competitiveness ? .

have provisions such as the domestic production deduction helped revitalize domestic manufacturing , or do the deduction and other competitiveness provisions interfere with the efficient and flexible participation of u.s. businesses in the world economy ? .

after the passage of arra , the 111 th congress has continued deliberations focused on stimulating the economy .

one topic of these discussions was on how the tax code — and business provisions — could aid economic conditions .

given the policy goal of increasing aggregate demand , business tax cuts , such as in arra , have traditionally focused on "cash - flow" and investment measures .

cash - flow provisions attempt to stimulate the economy by allowing businesses to increase their cash on hand by realizing existing tax attributes in the current period , as opposed to future years .

these measures allow businesses immediate access to working capital that may be useful to maintaining business operations .

an example of a cash - flow measure in arra was the extension of the net operating loss carryback period from two to five years .

the gulf opportunity zone act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-135 ) enacted a similar provision for qualified losses occurring in the gulf opportunity zone ( or go zone ) .

investment measures attempt to stimulate the economy by inducing investment spending , typically through measures that change the cost of capital .

examples of investment measures in arra were one year extensions — through the end of 2009 — of bonus depreciation and small business expensing .

the economic stimulus act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-185 ) also contained a one - year extension of these provisions , covering 2008 .

the tax code contains a set of relatively narrowly applicable tax benefits ( the "extenders" ) that are temporary in nature — each were enacted for only fixed periods of time , and are scheduled to expire on various dates .

the benefits tend to be tax incentives: provisions designed to encourage certain types of investment or activity thought to be economically or socially desirable .

the question with each extender , then , is whether there is a market failure or socially desirable goal that makes the incentive's intervention in the market desirable .

as targeted tax incentives , the benefits tend to raise a similar policy question: according to traditional economic theory , smoothly functioning markets and undistorted prices generally allocate the economy's scare resources in the most efficient way .

absent market malfunctions — failures that economists believe are more the exception than the rule — economic theory indicates that tax benefits or penalties that interfere with the market reduce economic efficiency and reduce overall economic welfare .

one extender is the research and experimentation ( r&e ) tax credit , which was first enacted in 1981 , and which has been renewed on numerous occasions .

the credit provides businesses a tax benefit that is linked to firms' increases in research outlays in the current year over a statutorily defined base period .

the credit is based on economic theory's notion that free markets do not operate smoothly in the case of research and development — that is , absent government support , firms would not spend as much on research as is economically efficient .

 ( it could also be argued , however , that the amount of support provided by the r&e credit and several other extant research subsidies more than compensate for the theoretical shortfall in research. ) .

the r&e credit's most recent extension was provided by the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) in october 2008 .

the act also increased the rate for the alternative simplified credit ( asic ) from 12% to 14% and repealed the alternative incremental research credit ( airc ) for the 2009 tax year only .

in the 111 th congress , there has been interest in extending the r&e credit and in making the tax credit permanent .

the extenders in general have been a continuing issue for congress — in part because their temporary nature necessitates periodic action if they are not to expire , and in part because of the strong support for many of the benefits .

as noted above , an element of division c of p.l .

110-343 , the tax extenders and alternative minimum tax relief act of 2008 , extended the r&e credit .

in addition , the act retroactively extended several temporary tax provisions for individuals and businesses through december 31 , 2009 .

tax extenders have continued to receive congressional attention in 2010 , through passage of the tax extenders act of 2009 ( h.r .

4213 ) , which is discussed above , by both the house and senate .

at the outset of the second session of the 111 th congress , the focus of energy taxation appears to be two - fold: enactment of a new set of incentives aimed at energy conservation and promotion of alternative energy sources and a revenue - raising , scaling - back of tax cuts that were enacted in recent years for the oil and gas companies .

the first of these two goals were addressed , in part , in arra , which contained a number of provisions to encourage investment in alternative energy and alternative energy production .

these provisions are outlined above .

in addition , the president's fy2011 budget outline contains several provisions aimed at achieving the second goal .

if fully enacted the provisions would eliminate tax preferences for the oil and gas industry estimated to raise $36.5 billion over 10 years .

the repeal of the section 199 domestic production deduction , enacted in the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( ajca ; p.l .

108-357 ) and never fully implemented , accounts for over 40% of this total .

another nearly 44% of the total is achieved through the elimination of two provisions enacted during world war i: the expensing of intangible drilling costs and percentage depletion , discussed above .

corporate "tax shelters" are another area where congress may look for tax - increasing revenues .

they concern policymakers because of their corrosive effect on tax equity and popular perceptions about the tax system's fairness .

in popular usage , the term "tax shelter" denotes the use of tax deductions or credits produced by one activity to reduce taxes on another: the first activity "shelters" the second from tax .

in economic terms , a tax shelter can be defined as a transaction ( for example , an investment or sale ) that reduces taxes without resulting in a reduced return or increased risk for the participant .

but the term is so vague and general in most usages that it is sometimes defined simply as a tax - saving activity that is viewed as undesirable by the observer using the term .

under most definitions , tax shelters can be either illegal ( constitute "tax evasion" ) or legal ( constituting "tax avoidance" ) .

congress has evinced considerable interest in tax shelters in recent years and has enacted some restrictions into law .

the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( ajca ; p.l .

108-357 ) contained a number of provisions designed to restrict tax shelters .

in part , the act's provisions were directed at specific tax shelters — for example , leasing activities and the acquisition of losses for tax purposes ( "built in" losses ) .

in addition , the act included provisions — for example , revised penalties and reporting requirements — designed to restrict sheltering activity in general .

in 2006 , the senate version of the tax increase prevention and reconciliation act ( tipra ; p.l .

109-222 ) contained a number of tax shelter restrictions , but the provisions were not included in the conference report .

the senate's tipra provisions included what the bill termed a "clarification" of the economic substance doctrine that has been followed in a number of court decisions applying to tax shelters .

generally , the economic substance doctrine disallows tax deductions , credits , or similar benefits in the case of transactions not having economic substance .

the senate version of tipra would have integrated aspects of the doctrine into the tax code itself .

a similar measure was contained in the senate version of the ajca , but was not adopted .

the president's fy2011 budget outline includes the codification of the economic substance doctrine as a revenue - raising "offset" for tax cuts elsewhere in the tax code .

this provision is estimated to raise $4.2 billion over 10 years .

there are some indications that congress may look to the tax treatment of u.s. firms' foreign income in searching for additional tax revenue .

in part , the focus on international taxation stems from a concern about tax benefits that are perceived to promote foreign "outsourcing" — the movement of u.s. jobs overseas .

economic theory is skeptical about whether tax policy towards u.s. multinationals can have a long - term impact on domestic employment , although short - term and localized impacts are certainly possible .

taxes can , however , alter the extent to which firms engage in overseas operations rather than domestic investment .

under current law , a tax benefit known as "deferral" poses an incentive for u.s. firms to invest overseas in countries with relatively low tax rates .

deferral provides its benefit by permitting u.s. firms to postpone their u.s. tax on foreign income as long as that income is reinvested abroad in foreign subsidiaries .

the benefit is generally available for active business operations abroad , but the tax code's subpart f provisions restrict deferral in the case of income from passive investment .

if made , proposals to restrict deferral may consist of expansion of the range of income subject to subpart f. in recent years , however , the thrust of legislation has been more in the direction of expanding deferral and cutting taxes for overseas operations .

for example , the ajca cut taxes on overseas operations in several ways , while in 2006 , tipra restricted subpart f in the case of banking and related businesses receiving "active financing" income and in the case of the "look through" treatment overseas operations receive from subsidiary firms .

further , several analysts have argued that attempts to tax overseas operations are either counterproductive or outmoded in the modern integrated world economy .

traditional economic analysis , however , suggests that overseas investment that is taxed at a lower or higher rate than domestic income impairs economic efficiency .

however , a consensus appears to be emerging that the u.s. corporate income tax rate should be reduced .

the major tax cuts enacted in 2001 and 2003 with the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act ( egtrra ; p.l .

107-16 ) and the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act ( jgtrra ; p.l .

108-27 ) , respectively , focused more on individual income taxes than corporate taxes , and included measures such as reductions in statutory tax rates , tax cuts for married couples , and expansion of the child tax credit .

jgtrra , however , contained a number of tax cuts aimed at businesses , as did legislation enacted in nearly each year since 2004 .

the most prominent business tax cuts can be summarized as follows: temporary "bonus" depreciation provisions designed to spur investment spending ; capital gains and dividend reductions , intended ( in part ) to increase capital formation and the flow of savings to the corporate sector ; extension of a set of narrowly - applicable temporary tax benefits ( the "extenders" ) that were addressed by several acts ; and provisions enacted in 2004 designed to boost u.s. manufacturing and competitiveness ( the domestic production deduction and foreign tax credit provisions ) .

enacted legislation the job creation and worker assistance act of 2002 ( jcwa ; p.l .

107-147 ) contained temporary "bonus" depreciation provisions that permitted firms to deduct an additional 30% of the cost of property in its first year of service rather than requiring that portion to be depreciated over a period of years .

the provision generally applied to machines and equipment ( but not structures ) and was limited to property placed in service after september 11 , 2001 , and before january 1 , 2005 .

jcwa also temporarily extended the net operating loss "carryback" period ( the years in the past from whose income a firm can deduct losses ) to five years from two years .

the provision only applied to losses in 2001 and 2002 .

jcwa also temporarily extended a set of expiring tax benefits ( the "extenders" discussed above ) , many of which applied to business taxes .

while a principal thrust of the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act ( jgtrra ; p.l .

108-27 ) was accelerating the effective date of individual income tax cuts enacted in 2001 , the act also contained a number of business provisions .

jgtrra's tax cuts for dividends and capital gains applied to individual income taxes , but nonetheless reduced the tax burden on stockholders' corporate - source income .

under the u.s. classical method of business taxation , corporate source income is taxed twice: once under the corporate income tax and once under the individual income tax — an instance of double - taxation that is thought by economists to inefficiently restrict the flow of capital to the corporate sector .

jgtrra's reductions were an incremental step in the direction of removing the double - taxation — a reform economists term tax "integration. .

the reductions were temporary , and were originally scheduled to expire at the end of 2008 .

in addition to its capital gains and dividend reduction , jgtrra increased bonus depreciation to 50% and extended its coverage to the period between may 5 , 2003 , and january 1 , 2005 .

jgtrra also temporarily ( for 2003 , 2004 , and 2005 ) increased the "expensing" allowance for small - business investment from $25,000 to $100,000 .

the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( ajca ; p.l .

108-357 ) grew out of legislation designed to end a dispute between the european union ( eu ) and the united states over a u.s. tax benefit for exporting ( the extraterritorial or eti provisions ) that had been determined to contravene the world trade organization agreements' prohibition on export subsidies .

the eu objected to the eti benefit and imposed countervailing tariffs authorized by the wto .

ajca repealed eti , but also enacted a set of new wto - legal business tax cuts designed , in part , to offset the impact of eti's repeal on domestic businesses .

however , the scope of ajca substantially transcended eti and its offsets , and the act was , in its final form , an omnibus business tax bill .

aside from eti's repeal , ajca's most prominent provisions were a new domestic production deduction equal to 9% of income from domestic ( but not foreign ) production , and a set of tax cuts for multinational firms , including more generous foreign tax credit rules governing interest expense .

ajca also temporarily extended the $100,000 small business expensing allowance ( through 2007 ) .

the tax increase prevention and reconciliation act of 2006 ( tipra ; p.l .

109-222 ) extended jgtrra's reduced rates for dividends and capital gains for two years , through 2010 .

tipra also extended jgtrra's $100,000 small - business expensing - allowance for two years , through 2009 .

 ( in early 2007 , p.l .

110-28 extended the increased expensing allowance through 2010. ) .

the tax relief and health care act of 2006 ( trhca ; p.l .

109-432 ) was passed in the post - election session of the 109 th congress .

many of the extenders had expired at the end of 2005 , and trhca extended them , generally for two years ( through 2007 ) .

the small business and work opportunity tax act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-28 ) continued congress's long - standing interest in tax policy towards small business .

tax cuts for small business ( increased business expensing and the work - opportunity tax credit ) were included as a means of offsetting the extra cost burden the higher minimum wage .

the economic stimulus act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-185 ) contained two provisions which affect business investment ; a temporary , one year increase in the limitations on the expensing of certain depreciable business assets and temporary "bonus" depreciation , for certain property acquired in 2008 .

both provisions permit firms to deduct a greater percentage of the cost of property in the first year of service rather than gradually depreciating the whole value of the asset over time .

the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-234 ) included tax - provisions which affect businesses were several tax credits for the production of fuels from alternative sources .

the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) extended a number of business tax provisions and created or modified a number of renewable energy and energy efficiency provisions .

