preferential trade agreements ( ptas ) comprise a variety of unilateral , bilateral , or regional arrangements which favor member parties over nonmembers by extending tariff and other nontariff preferences .

the most prevalent pta today is a free trade agreement ( fta ) , such as the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) or the u.s. - australian fta .

ptas are excepted under certain circumstances from the nondiscrimination clause of the multilateral world trading system .

the world trade organization ( wto ) permits countries to enter into ptas under certain conditions , but the criteria are very elastic , and the examination by the wto as to their consistency with wto rules has not been rigorous .

the main dispute is whether ptas serve as a building block or a stumbling block for further multilateral trade liberalization .

if ptas , on balance , create more trade ( by allowing production to shift to the more competitive producers in the agreement ) than they divert ( by shifting trade from lower - cost non - pta members to higher - cost members because of tariff preferences extended to members ) , they are said to be a building block or complement for the world trading system .

on the other hand , if the converse is true , ptas are considered to be a stumbling block for the multilateral trading system .

however , it is very difficult to determine quantitatively whether trade creation or trade diversion dominates in any particular pta .

this is because the effects of the agreements on the patterns of trade and investment can depend on the content of the pta as well as the size and magnitude of the barriers being reduced .

what is not disputed is that ptas have grown and become the centerpiece of world trade diplomacy as countries seek to improve access to foreign markets for their exporters and investors .

with weakening momentum for multilateral trade liberalization , ptas , particularly ftas , have proliferated markedly in recent years .

the annual average number of pta notifications since the world trade organization ( wto ) was established in 1995 has been 20 , compared to less than 3 per year during the 1948-1995 period under the gatt .

many more bilateral and regional agreements are being negotiated — an estimated 60 ptas in asia alone — in all parts of the world .

the share of world trade now covered by ptas is estimated to be around 50% .

in the post - war period , the european union ( eu ) has been central to the proliferation of ptas .

the eu itself , initially established in 1957 as the european economic community , is the world's largest preferential agreement .

of the 199 ptas in force and notified to the wto by december 2008 , or to its predecessor organization , the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) , 35 involved the eu , making the eu's network of ptas the largest in the world .

as a result of its widespread ptas ( including unilateral preference programs ) , the eu trades with only 10 wto members where the most - favored - nation ( mfn ) regime applies in its entirety .

these 10 wto members ( australia , canada , chinese taipei , hong kong , china , japan , republic of korea , new zealand , singapore , and the united states ) accounted for 43.9% of the eu's total merchandise imports in 2009 , up from 40.4% in 2008 .

after imposing a moratorium on negotiating new ptas from 1999-2006 , the eu in 2007 began negotiating a new generation of more ambitious or comprehensive ftas .

these agreements are intended to obtain greater commercial and trade benefits than previous ftas , as well as to be comprehensive in scope and "wto - plus" ( going beyond current wto commitments ) .

if the eu's new ftas follow this template , they are likely to be more similar to the ftas negotiated in recent years by the united states — ftas which are often referred to as state - of - the art or "gold standard" agreements .

as outlined in its 2006 global europe strategy , the eu targeted a number of larger countries and regions for negotiations , including south korea , india , canada , and the association of south east asian nations ( asean ) .

others had already started at a point in time ( mercsur ) or were subsequently added ( canada ) .

whether the eu will be successful with a more ambitious and comprehensive agenda of ftas remains to be seen .

coincidentally , the eu change in fta strategy has come at a time when the u.s. fta policy has moved toward a "holding pattern" or "pause. .

legislation granting the president authority to negotiate ftas expired in july 2007 and has not been renewed by congress .

all four ftas negotiated or under negotiation in 2007 — south korea , panama , columbia , and peru — have been approved by congress so the obama administration's major current trade initiative has been to engage in the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement negotiations .

in the meantime , calls from the u.s. business community sector have increased for a more activist u.s. fta policy , much out of fear of losing export sales and market share to eu competitors who may be gaining more favorable access to larger foreign markets as a result of new ptas .

given the need for the u.s. economy to rely on an increase in exports for faster growth , these concerns have also resonated in congress and the obama administration .

this report explores these intersecting issues in three parts .

the first section discusses the status and primary motivations of the eu's ptas currently in place or under negotiation .

the second compares the content and trade coverage of europe's ptas to u.s. ptas .

a third section assesses the implications of the eu's pta program for the multilateral trading system and u.s. trade policy .

a concluding section evaluates future directions for europe's pta policy .

this report will be updated as events warrant .

europe's pta's can be grouped into four categories according to their primary motives .

first , there are agreements for geographically close neighbors for which the eu is prepared to offer accession or some slightly looser relationship .

a second category of agreements is designed primarily to foster stability around the eu borders .

a third category of ptas has a historical and development focus and comprises agreements with 71 small and mostly poor developing countries in africa , the caribbean , and the pacific ( the acp countries ) .

a fourth category involves more distant countries and regions where the primary eu objective is to neutralize potential discrimination against eu exports and investments resulting from ftas between third countries or to secure commercial benefits via preferential access to foreign markets .

unlike the united states , the eu has not used a standard model for its ptas .

the eu's web of ptas is characterized by different trade liberalization agendas and trading rules .

all agreements appear to be negotiated in a flexible manner to suit the eu and its partners in each specific case .

the eu's ptas are also negotiated under a range of different kinds of agreements .

the most typical is an association agreement ( aa ) , which creates a framework for cooperation on a range of political , security , economic , trade , and human rights issues .

the trade portion of the aa is often a free trade agreement between the eu and a third country .

given that association agreements are treaties , they have to be ratified by all the eu member states .

a short elaboration of the agreements reached or negotiations underway for each category follows .

this summary is intended to provide a snapshot of eu preferential agreements currently in place or under negotiation .

it does not provide a history of the evolution of many of these agreements .

most ptas contain a dozen chapters or more and run hundreds and sometimes thousands of pages of highly technical text .

not surprisingly , only a few studies have attempted to compare and contrast the agreements negotiated and implemented by the united states and european union .

two studies , however , have undertaken such a comparison , albeit based on a different universe of ptas .

this section draws from these two studies , one by researchers associated with the london school of economics ( lse ) and the other by researchers affiliated with the bruegel institute in brussels , to illustrate differences in overall approaches and the extent to which provisions in the respective sets of agreements are either "wto - plus" or "wto - extra. .

the significance of these latter two criteria are explained below .

in addition , eu and u.s. ptas are compared in terms of trade coverage and competition .

europe's pta program has implications for the multilateral trading system and for u.s. trade policy .

these impacts are discussed below .

it is not clear what direction europe's pta policy will head in the future .

under its global europe policy , the eu intended to negotiate commercially relevant and wto - compliant ptas by targeting middle - sized economies with some significant barriers such as korea , india , and eventually canada .

according to some european observers , by pursuing this strategy , the eu hoped to gain better access to foreign markets without having to concede significant reductions in its own agricultural and services barriers .

the underlying premise may have been that smaller countries or regions would be willing to deliver cuts in their own protective barriers on a nonreciprocal basis because the eu offered a much bigger market that would facilitate increases in export volume .

to move forward , these same observers maintain that the eu should examine the idea of targeting bigger economies for bilateral negotiations .

these would be the handful of remaining countries that fall outside the eu's network of ptas , namely the united states , china , japan , and australia .

pta negotiations with these countries , it is argued , could yield significant economic benefits and provide the biggest impact ( for good or ill ) on the world trading system .

bigger trade partners such as the united states and china , however , would likely demand openings in agriculture and services , sectors where there is widespread opposition to liberalization .

from a different perspective , some european economists maintain that the competitiveness of eu firms has more to do with internal eu market conditions ( domestic trade policy ) than with opening export markets through pta negotiations .

rejecting the notion that opening export markets will strengthen the competitiveness of european companies , these observers advocate placing greater emphasis on unilateral liberalization of protected sectors and domestic market reforms .

in addition to reforms of the common agricultural policy , these economists propose completing a single market for services by ending barriers that member states still impose against suppliers from other member states on the grounds of regulatory differences .

they argue that the absence of a more dynamic european - wide services sector raise the prices of services relative to goods , and prevents the eu from trading off its agricultural protectionism for better access for its industrial and services firms .

if europe is not prepared to extend improved market access to exports of services and agriculture , foreign countries are likely to maintain barriers against europe's industrial and services firms .

if public support in the eu is lacking for undertaking significant agricultural reforms and services liberalization to position itself to negotiate an fta with the largest economies , european policymakers could explore a number of alternative approaches to trade liberalization both with the united states and with other big economies such as china .

for the united states the possibilities include intensified regulatory cooperation with the goal of developing common standards , sector specific initiatives to remove barriers to trade , or the elimination of all tariffs on manufactured goods .

for china , where negotiations with the eu currently take place under the rubric of a partnership and cooperation agreements ( pca ) , an improved pca is put forth by some observers as an alternative way ( from a multilateral agreement or a fta ) of dealing with bilateral trade tensions and negotiating better market access for european companies .

in considering alternative trade liberalization approaches , many stakeholders in europe no doubt will emphasize a need to place renewed emphasis and priority on concluding multilateral agreements .

eu trading interests , just as u.s. interests , are worldwide and a strong multilateral trading system that ensures that trade flows smoothly , predictably , and as freely as possible will likely remain a top priority .

