the 112 th congress and the obama administration face a range of trade issues .

many of these issues , such as pending free trade agreements and trade negotiations , trade preferences for developing countries , trade enforcement and compliance , and renewal of trade promotion authority , are legacies of previous administrations and congresses .

new issues may be on the horizon .

trade policy is an important element of economic policy , and as such , its objective is to enhance national economic welfare .

however , what constitutes economic welfare can vary among the interest groups that comprise the stakeholders in u.s. trade policy , such as farmers , manufacturers , service providers , workers , importers , consumers , and environmentalists , and among members of congress who represent them .

the shape and conduct of trade policy are the subject of much debate among policymakers .

u.s. policymakers appear to be at a crossroads on these questions at this time .

the future shape , direction , and content of u.s. trade policy are uncertain .

some observers have suggested that the role of trade policy should be given lower priority relative to foreign policy and domestic economic issues ; others call for an activist policy that faces the challenges head on .

besides these questions , there is the overarching question of what role , if any , should or can trade policy have in promoting u.s. economic and foreign policy interests .

on the one hand , it can be argued that the emergence of global production networks , within which manufacturers have internationalized production processes across borders , is making government - to - government trade agreements and trade policy in general less effective , if not obsolete .

in addition , the rapid increase in capital flows across borders dwarf the impact of flows of goods and services , reducing the effectiveness of trade policy initiatives .

on the other hand , it can be argued that trade policy remains a significant aspect of economic and foreign policy that can hinder or promote national interests and has a high - level of relevance as reflected in the rapid growth of trade ( u.s. trade in goods and services totaled $3.5 trillion in 2009 ) , and the increase in bilateral and regional trade agreements throughout the world .

this report is designed to assist the 112 th congress as it grapples with these complex issues of trade policy in a rapidly changing economic landscape .

how congress and the obama administration respond could have long - term implications for u.s. trade , economic , and foreign policy interests .

the report discusses the issues that the 112 th congress could face and the political and economic context in which these issues are being debated .

it then analyzes the debate that is taking place among policy experts and stakeholders over the future form and role of trade policy and concludes with an examination of some of the options available to congress and the pros and cons of each .

this report will be updated as events warrant .

a number of political factors and economic conditions will influence the shape , direction , and content of u.s. trade policy in the next few years .

the relative significance of each of these factors could change over time .

the 112 th congress faces a number of trade issues .

some of these issues were pending from the 111 th congress , while others are longer - term .

the united states is at a crossroads in terms of trade policy .

the obama administration has weighed in somewhat on trade with its national export initiative ( nei ) to reenergize u.s. export promotion programs to increase the role small - and medium - sized companies in exporting and to contribute to the u.s. economic recovery .

it also imposed high duties on imports of tires from china after the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) determined that the tires threatened to harm u.s. producers .

however , the administration and the 112 th congress face a range of other trade policy issues and challenges that have not yet been addressed .

the future direction of trade policy and how the issues are addressed is unclear at this time and the subject of sharp debate within congress , the administration , and the trade policy community at large .

while a number of issues are related to trade policy , a fundamental question that is the subject of this debate is which trade policy , if any , will promote the highest possible standard of living for u.s. residents .

the debate on trade is influenced by the views of three groups .

one group , who might be called "trade liberalizers," asserts that on a net basis the benefits to the united states of trade liberalization are greater than the costs and , therefore , should be encouraged through the reduction of trade barriers .

a second group , often labeled "fair traders," acknowledges the benefits of trade liberalization but assert that u.s. firms and workers may be forced to compete under conditions they deem unfair .

they support trade agreements but only those with provisions that "level the playing field. .

the third group , which might be called "trade skeptics," argues that u.s. policy as structured and practiced has undermined u.s. economic interests and that trade agreements and wto obligations have gone too far in impinging on u.s. sovereignty .

where policymakers fit on this continuum of views could help to determine how they decide to address the outstanding and emerging trade issues before congress .

in many cases , the trade policy positions of policymakers and other experts cannot be readily categorized as belonging to one group or another , but the categories provide a mechanism to analyze the major concepts in trade policy and their potential implications .

below is an examination of these views and examples of them as presented by prominent experts .

at this time , the 112 th congress and the obama administration are at a crossroads on trade policy .

over the years , the general consensus on trade liberalization has frayed as evidenced by closer congressional votes on major trade legislation and ambiguous views on the value of foreign trade from the american public at large .

that splintering seems to have increased recently .

this trend is likely influenced by the recession and high unemployment levels following the economic downturn .

it likely is associated with a longer - term trend that is linked to the various effects of international economic integration ( "globalization" ) that have made farmers , firms , and workers perceive themselves to be more vulnerable .

the direction that u.s. policymakers take trade policy will have broad implications — whether that direction is toward greater trade liberalization , as envisioned by "trade liberalizers" ; conditional trade liberalization , as viewed by "fair traders" ; or a restrained , if not retrenched , trade policy , as expressed by the "trade skeptics. .

greater trade liberalization , whether unilateral or via trade negotiations and agreements , would promote further u.s. integration with the world economy and with it , according to many mainstream economists , a more efficient allocation of resources and economic growth .

it would also encourage the development and adherence to internationally negotiated rules on trade to promote stability and to prevent the use of protectionist measures .

at the same time , it would expose the already vulnerable firms and workers to increased competition , forcing them to make costly adjustments .

a "fair trade" focused policy direction would address what some view as inequities in trade policy by proceeding with trade agreements that require u.s. trade partners to adhere to core labor standards , environmental protection measures , and other provisions to "level the playing field. .

in so doing , such trade agreements could be acceptable to larger segments of the american public and rebuild a consensus on trade .

however , some trading partners have resisted what they consider to be u.s. efforts to impose its own values on them through trade policy .

many economists argue that the "playing field" will always be uneven as labor will be cheaper in some countries than others , reflecting differing stages of development .

a "skeptical" policy direction would require u.s. policymakers to retrench and reevaluate trade policy as a whole to ascertain whether it has benefitted or harmed u.s. interests , for example , in employment , and would reserve the opportunity to renegotiate those trade agreements if they fail to meet the criteria .

this approach would aim to protect u.s. national sovereignty over matters pertaining to the health and safety of its citizens , among other issues .

opponents of this path have argued that it is very difficult , if not impossible , to determine the impact of individual trade agreements on the level of employment and other economic trends , because so many other factors play a role .

they also argue that revisiting and renegotiating trade agreements could undermine the credibility of the united states as a trading partner .

in addressing trade issues , u.s. policymakers may follow different approaches depending on the issue and on other political and economic factors .

while a range of trade issues lie on the collective congress - executive plate , trade enforcement issues — particularly with china , the ftas , and trade preference review and reform — could very well serve as near - term bellwethers for the future of trade policy .

in the longer term , policymakers will face the outlook of the doha round negotiations and possible renewal of trade promotion authority , among other issues .

they will likely also face fundamental questions , such as the future of the multilateral trade system ; the role of trade policy , if any , in addressing non - trade issues , such as climate change ; and the impact of globalization on the effectiveness of trade policy .

