the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ; p.l .

105-220 ) is the primary federal program that supports workforce development .

wia includes five titles: title i — workforce investment systems — provides job training and related services to unemployed or underemployed individuals ; title ii — adult education and literacy — provides education services to assist adults in improving their literacy and completing secondary education ; title iii — workforce investment - related activities — amends the wagner - peyser act of 1933 to integrate the u.s. employment service ( es ) into the one - stop system established by wia ; title iv — rehabilitation act amendments of 1998 — amends the rehabilitation act of 1973 , which provides vocational rehabilitation services to individuals with disabilities , to integrate vocational rehabilitation into the one - stop system ; and title v — general provisions — specifies components of state unified plans and provisions for state incentive grants .

workforce development programs provide a combination of education and training services to prepare individuals for work and to help them improve their prospects in the labor market .

in the broadest sense , workforce development includes secondary and postsecondary education , on - the - job and employer - provided training , and the publicly funded system of job training and employment services .

most workforce development occurs in the workplace during the course of doing business .

the federal government provides workforce development activities through wia's programs and other programs designed to increase the employment and earnings of workers .

workforce development may include activities such as job search assistance , career counseling , occupational skill training , classroom training , or on - the - job training .

the focus of this report is on title i of wia , which authorizes programs to provide job search , education , and training activities for individuals seeking to gain or improve their employment prospects and which establishes the one - stop delivery system .

the programs and services in title i are covered in detail in this report , while the programs and services in titles ii , iii , and iv are discussed briefly .

title ii of wia provides funding for adult education and literacy activities .

title iii of wia amends the wagner - peyser act of 1933 , which establishes the employment service ( es ) , to make the es an integral part of the one - stop system created by wia .

because the es is a critical part of the one - stop system , it is discussed briefly in this report even though it is authorized by separate legislation ( wagner - peyser act of 1933 ) .

title iv of wia authorizes funding for vocational rehabilitation services for individuals with disabilities .

following a brief history of federal workforce development programs , there is a discussion of the provisions and characteristics of wia title i programs and services .

next , there is a description of the one - stop delivery system and workforce investment boards ( wibs ) .

this section includes an overview of the employment service , whose authorizing legislation ( wagner - peyser act of 1933 ) was amended by title iii of wia .

following that , the report covers the services provided by the state formula grant programs and the national programs authorized under title i of wia .

the section on title i concludes with a discussion of funding and performance accountability .

the report then provides a description of the services , funding , and performance accountability provisions of wia titles ii and iv .

appendix a provides a glossary of selected key terms in wia .

appendix b provides an appropriations history for programs authorized under titles i , ii , and iv of wia and under the wagner - peyser act of 1933 .

reauthorization legislation was considered in the 108 th and 109 th congresses .

in both the 108 th and 109 th congresses , the house and the senate passed different versions of legislation that would have reauthorized wia .

however , in neither instance did the two chambers reconcile the differences between the bills they had passed .

in the 113 th congress , wia was reauthorized by congress and signed into law on july 22 , 2014 , after passing the senate on june 25 , 2014 , by a vote of 95-3 and the house on july 9 , 2014 , by a vote of 415-6 ( the new law is the workforce innovation and opportunity act ; p.l .

113-128 ) .

p.l .

113-128 authorizes appropriations for wioa programs from fy2015 through fy2020 .

title i of wia provides job training and related services to unemployed and underemployed individuals .

title i programs are administered by the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) , primarily through its employment and training administration ( doleta ) .

although wia authorized the appropriations of funds for wia programs through september 30 , 2003 , wia programs have continued to be funded through annual appropriations .

in fy2014 , programs and activities authorized under title i of wia were funded at $4.8 billion , including $2.6 billion for state formula grants for youth , adult , and dislocated worker training and employment activities .

as noted , wia was enacted in 1998 and replaced jtpa as the federal government's primary employment and job training legislation .

title i — workforce investment systems — authorizes job training and related services to unemployed or underemployed individuals .

funds authorized under subtitle b of wia ( "statewide and local workforce investment systems" ) are allocated by formula and are used for workforce development activities .

as stated in wia , the purpose of workforce systems is to "increase the employment , retention , and earnings of participants , and increase occupational skill attainment by participants , and as a result , improve the quality of the workforce , reduce welfare dependency , and enhance the productivity and competitiveness of the nation. .

the three formula grant programs in title i — youth , adults , and dislocated workers — authorize funding for employment and training activities available through the national system of one - stop centers and provided by service providers in local communities .

the majority of funding for wia title i programs is provided through state formula grants .

title ii of wia is the adult education and family literacy act ( aefla ) .

the stated purposes of aefla are to 1. assist adults to become literate and obtain the knowledge and skills necessary for employment and self - sufficiency ; 2. assist adults who are parents to obtain the educational skills necessary to become full partners in the educational development of their children ; and 3. assist adults in the completion of a secondary school education .

title ii programs are primarily administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) through its office of vocational and adult education ( ovae ) .

aefla's authorization of appropriations expired on september 30 , 2003 .

programs authorized under aefla continue to be funded through annual appropriations .

historical funding levels are available in table b - 3 and table b - 4 in appendix b .

title iv of wia amended the rehabilitation act of 1973 and authorized appropriations for its programs .

most programs under the rehabilitation act are related to the employment and independent living of individuals with disabilities and are administered through ed's rehabilitation services administration ( rsa ) .

several related independent agencies are also authorized by the rehabilitation act .

vocational rehabilitation ( vr ) state grants account for the large majority of funds appropriated under the rehabilitation act .

since the enactment of wia , vr state grants have accounted for between 85% and 90% of the funds appropriated under the act each year .

an individual is eligible for vr services from the appropriate state agency if ( 1 ) he or she has a disability that creates an obstacle to employment and ( 2 ) he or she would benefit from vr services .

in cases where a state is not able to serve all eligible individuals , preference is given to individuals with the most severe disabilities .

once an individual has established eligibility , the client develops an individualized plan for employment ( ipe ) in conjunction with a vr counselor .

the ipe includes the individual's desired employment outcome and outlines the services necessary to achieve that outcome .

services can include , but are not limited to , case management , counseling , job training , and supplemental support services .

grants are allotted to the states via formula .

states are required to match their grants so that no more than 78.7% of their vr funds are from federal sources .

if a state is not able to match its entire grant , unmatched funds are made available to other states to match .

vr state grants are mandatory spending and the authorization status of the vr state grants program is different from most other programs that were created or amended by wia .

the rehabilitation act specifies that if authorization for appropriations expires and congress has not acted to reauthorize the program , it will automatically be reauthorized for one year and the annual appropriation will equal the prior year's appropriation plus an increase equal to inflation .

the program has operated under these automatic authorization provisions since the wia authorization expired at the end of fy2003 .

several other formula and competitive grant programs are authorized under the rehabilitation act .

these grants are administered by rsa and support the employment and independent living of individuals with disabilities .

the act also authorizes two independent agencies that advocate for individuals with disabilities .

a full list of these authorizations and their recent funding histories are listed in table b - 7 in appendix b .

appendix a. glossary of selected wia terms areas of substantial unemployment ( asu ) — this concept is used in the title i state grant formulas for youth and adult activities .

as defined in sections 127 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( b ) and 132 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ( v ) ( iii ) , an asu is "any area that is of sufficient size and scope to sustain a program of workforce investment activities carried out under this subtitle and that has an average rate of unemployment of at least 6.5 percent for the most recent 12 months. .

states submit potential asu designations and dol approves asus once each fiscal year .

additional guidance from doleta defines an asu as a "contiguous area with a current population of at least 10,000 and an average unemployment rate of at least 6.5 percent for the 12-month reference period. .

if a state has a statewide unemployment rate of at least 6.5% , the entire state will be designated as an asu for allocation purposes .

economically disadvantaged — this concept is used in one of the factors for the title i state grant formulas for youth and adult activities .

for the state formula grants for youth activities , "disadvantaged youth" is defined ( in section 127 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( c ) ) as an "individual who is age 16 through 21 who received an income , or is a member of a family that received a total family income , that , in relation to family size , does not exceed the higher of the poverty line or 70 percent of the lower living standard income level. .

similarly , a "disadvantaged adult" is defined ( in section 132 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ( v ) ( iv ) ) the same as a disadvantaged youth with the exception that the reference individual is age 22 or older .

in practice , for both the youth and adult activities formulas , doleta has used the poverty calculations from the 1990 census ( for py2001-py2003 ) and the 2000 census ( for py2004-present ) for this factor .

excess unemployment — this concept is used in one of the factors for the title i state grant formulas for youth , adult , and dislocated worker activities .

for the state formula grants for youth and adult activities , excess unemployment is defined ( in sections 127 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( d ) and 132 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ( v ) ( vi ) ) as the higher of "the number that represents the number of unemployed individuals in excess of 4.5 percent of the civilian labor force in the state" or "the number that represents the number of unemployed individuals in excess of 4.5 percent of the civilian labor force in areas of substantial unemployment in such state. .

for the state formula grant for dislocated worker activities , excess unemployment is defined ( in section 132 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( b ) ( iii ) ) as "the number that represents the number of unemployed individuals in excess of 4.5 percent of the civilian labor force in the state. .

for example , in a state with a civilian labor force of 100,000 and an unemployment rate of 8.0% ( which would equal 8,000 unemployed individuals ) , the "excess unemployment" would be 3,500 ( 8.0% - 4.5% = 3.5% ; 3.5% of 100,000 is 3,500 ) .

local workforce investment areas ( lwia ) — this concept is used in identifying geographic areas within states that function as administrative units within the one - stop delivery system .

section 116 of the wia directs the governor of each state to designate — in consultation with the state wib and with the chief elected local officials in the relevant areas — lwias within the state .

wia requires that each lwia have a local wib and a one - stop center .

in designating lwias , the governor is required to take into consideration geographic areas served by educational agencies and institutions , labor market areas , distances that individuals must travel to receive services , and the resources available from local areas to help carry out the wia services .

wia does allow for "automatic designation" of substate areas as lwias under three conditions: a unit of local government with a population of at least 500,000 ; an area served by a rural concentrated employment program grant recipient that was a service delivery area ( sda ) under the job training partnership act ( jtpa ) ; and an area that served as an sda in a state with a population of no more than 1.1 million and a population density of no greater than 900 persons per square mile .

long - term unemployment — this concept is used in one of the factors for the title i state grant formulas for dislocated worker activities .

for the state formula grants for dislocated worker activities , long - term unemployment is defined ( in section 132 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( b ) ( ii ) ( iii ) ) as the number of individuals in a state who have been unemployed ( as measured by the census bureau ) for at least 15 weeks .

relative number / share — this concept is used in the state grant formulas for youth , adult , and dislocated worker activities .

each formula consists of three equally weighted factors .

the factors themselves are based on the concept of the "relative number" or "relative share" of that factor compared to the analogous number in all of the states .

an example from the dislocated worker activities formula — based on the factors of regular unemployment , excess unemployment , and long - term unemployment — will demonstrate this .

in the py2012 state formula allotments , nevada had the following factor values: regular unemployment = 178,314 ; excess unemployment = 118,912 ; and long - term unemployment = 117,600 .

for each of these factors , nevada's "relative share" was calculated by dividing the number of individuals in nevada by the number of individuals in all states .

for example , nevada's relative share of regular unemployment was 1.25% ( 178,314 / 14,259,148 ) ; its share of excess unemployment was 1.63% ( 118,912 / 7,299,720 ) ; and its share of long - term unemployment was 1.41% ( 117,600 / 8,358,500 ) .

multiplying each of these individuals by 1 / 3 and summing the results would give nevada a total share of 1.43% ( ( 1.04%*1 / 3 ) + ( 1.45%*1 / 3 ) + ( 0.98%*1 / 3 ) ) .

finally , multiplying nevada's share , 1.43% , by the total funding for all states ( $1,008,151,464 ) yields $14,404,698 , which nevada received in py2012 .

appendix b .

funding for programs authorized under wi .

