the federal government uses two slightly different but related definitions of poverty .

one , the statistical definition of poverty , is maintained and updated by the census bureau .

it is used to arrive at official estimates of the number and characteristics of the poor population .

census bureau estimates of the number of people with incomes below poverty are also used to distribute federal funds to states under various programs' grant formulas .

a second definition of poverty , closely related to the statistical definition and issued as "federal poverty guidelines" by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is used for administrative purposes , such as determining income eligibility of individuals , families , and households for federal and state programs .

the existing u.s. poverty measure evolved well over 40 years ago , in tandem with the advent of the "great society" and "war on poverty" programs .

it has served as a yardstick by which the economic progress of the most economically disadvantaged members of society has been gauged , and the effects of social programs assessed .

billions of dollars in federal grant funds are also allotted to states and localities based on their relative share of the nation's poor population .

many experts consider the measure of poverty currently being used as the "official measure" as flawed and outmoded .

a congressionally commissioned study conducted by the national academy of sciences ( nas ) national research council ( nrc ) panel provided a wide range of specific recommendations to revamp the statistical measure of poverty used in the united states in its 1995 report , measuring poverty: a new approach .

since then , an extensive amount of research has been undertaken by statistical agencies , academics , and other researchers to devise and test methods , and evaluate the results of implementing the nas panel's recommendations .

legislation introduced in the 110 th and 111 th congress , if adopted , would instruct the census bureau to implement many of the nas panel's recommendations in a new "modern" poverty measure .

more recently , the department of commerce economic and statistics administration , under an omb sponsored initiative , announced that the census bureau , in coordination with the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) , will develop a supplemental poverty measure ( spm ) , using nas panel recommendations and subsequent research as a framework .

the proposed measure will supplement , rather than replace , the current poverty measure , which will continue to be deemed the "official" statistical measure of poverty in the united states .

this report will provide a brief history of precursor events and studies that led to a rediscovery of poverty in the united states and the development and adoption of an "official" statistical measure to measure the phenomenon and to weigh progress toward its eradication .

it will then present the nas panel's major recommendations to address perceived flaws in the "official" measure and to develop a new u.s. measure of poverty .

some of the conceptual , technical , and methodological issues relating to the implementation of a nas - based poverty measure are then discussed .

subsequently , alternative estimates to the current poverty measure using variants of the nas panel's recommendations are presented .

finally , recent house and senate legislative proposals to create a new "modern" poverty measure , and more recent developments initiated by the office of management and budget ( omb ) proposing a new supplemental poverty measure , are reviewed in the context of the current "official" measure and the nas panel recommendations .

many experts and interested observers believe that the current measure of poverty is outmoded and needs to be revised to better measure social conditions and the effects of social and economic policies on the low - income population .

as noted above , in the early 1990s congress commissioned an independent review of the u.s. poverty measure , which culminated in a study issued by the national research council ( nrc ) of the national academy of sciences ( nas ) entitled measuring poverty: a new approach .

the 12-member nas panel on poverty and family assistance made 27 specific recommendations for revising the poverty measure .

 ( one panel member dissented from the majority view and disagreed with specifics of some of the panel's recommendations. ) .

in arriving at its recommendations , the panel was guided by three principles: the measure should be acceptable and understandable to the public ; the measure should be statistically defensible ; and , the measure should be feasible to implement with available or readily obtainable data .

the panel's major recommendations focused on setting , updating , and adjusting poverty thresholds , and defining family resources to be counted against poverty thresholds for determining families' and individuals' poverty status .

since the nas panel issued its recommendations , an extensive amount of research has been undertaken by statistical agencies , academics , and other researchers to devise and test methods , and evaluate results of implementing the panel's recommendations .

a 2004 nrc - sponsored workshop by the nas committee on national statistics ( cnstat ) reviewed much of the research undertaken since the 1995 nas report was issued ; workshop members identified areas in which consensus among experts appears to have emerged , and others where experts believe more work needs to done in order to devise a new poverty measure that conforms to the nas panel recommendations .

 table 5 presents poverty estimates for 2008 under the official poverty definition and selected alternative poverty measures , by age and income concept , using two versions of nas - based poverty thresholds .

the first set of nas - based estimates is based on poverty thresholds that do not take mortgage principal payments into account , while the second set of estimates is based on poverty thresholds that do .

these thresholds are the same as those shown earlier in table 3 and table 4 , respectively .

the estimates shown here illustrate the effects of selected approaches to devising a nas - based poverty measure .

as discussed earlier , there is no clear consensus as to what might constitute a preferred measure , and about the precise methods that should be adopted in its construction .

the table shows the sequential effects of adding specified sources to income , or subtracting specified expenses from income , in estimating individuals' poverty status based on their families' net income relative to specified poverty thresholds .

the first row of the table shows poverty based on the current official income concept ( i.e. , pre - tax money income ) .

the subsequent lines indicate the effects on the number of poor and percent of the population of poor ( poverty rates ) when resources are added , and expenses subtracted , from income .

the change in number of poor relative to the "official" poverty measure ( demarcated in framed bold type ) is also shown .

the effects of subtracting fica payroll and federal income taxes ( before refundable tax credits ) on poverty are shown , followed by the inclusion of federal refundable tax credits ( i.e. , the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) and the partially refundable child tax credit ( ctc ) ) .

next , the effect of one - time federal stimulus payments on poverty is estimated .

subsequently , the estimated net effect of state income taxes and tax credits is shown , followed by the subtraction of estimated work - related expenses ( including child care expenses ) , inclusion of supplemental nutrition assistance benefits ( snap , formerly named food stamps ) , and subtraction of imputed medical out - of - pocket expenses .

the last two rows , which include the addition of housing subsidies , school lunch , and energy assistance , are demarcated from the measures above , as these benefits are not adequately accounted for in the developed poverty thresholds , and thus do not adhere to the nas - panel's principle that any measure of resources or expenses counted against poverty thresholds should be consistent with those included in their development .

figure 3 through figure 6 show the effects of counting income and expenses from sources described above against current "official" poverty thresholds , and against two nas - based alternatives , one with mortgage principal payments excluded , and the other with such payments included , in the calculation of the thresholds .

table 5 shows that in 2008 , an estimated 39.8 million people , or 13.2% of the population for whom poverty status was determined , were poor under the official poverty definition .

estimated poverty based on alternative poverty thresholds , and using the current "official" pre - tax money income measure , results in an estimated 47.1 million people ( 15.6% ) who would be considered poor based on the nas - based fcsu poverty thresholds with mortgage payments excluded in their calculation , and 53.3 million poor ( 17.7% ) with mortgage principal included .

the two alternative poverty thresholds result in substantial increases in measured poverty among persons age 65 and older .

under the official measure , 9.7% of aged persons were poor in 2008 , compared to 13.8% under the fcsu thresholds without mortgage principal factored in , and 16.7% with it included .

note that no adjustment has been made in these estimates for the value of owner - occupied housing , discussed earlier , which would tend to reduce poverty rates somewhat from those shown here , and probably more so for the elderly .

the table and figures show that on net , federal tax credits more than offset the effects of federal and state income and fica taxes , leading to lower poverty rates .

after taxes and tax credits , the poverty rate under the official poverty thresholds is estimated at 12.6% ; under the fcsu thresholds with mortgage principal excluded , 15.1% ; and with mortgage principal included , 17.3% .

the effect of taxes on elderly poverty , both before and after credits , under the three poverty thresholds is virtually nil , whereas children and non - aged adults see net declines in after - tax poverty under all three threshold measures .

one - time federal stimulus payments received in 2008 as a rebate to taxes paid in 2007 further helped to reduce poverty among children and non - aged adults .

subtraction of work - related expenses ( including child care ) from income results in an increased number of poor persons , and inclusion of snap ( food stamp ) benefits , results in a decreased number of poor persons .

under the nas - based fcsu thresholds with an expanded resource definition ( one which includes taxes , tax credits , stimulus payments , work - related expenses including child care , and snap benefits , but excludes medical expenses ) , children continue to be the group most likely to be poor .

under the fcsu measure with expanded resources ( excepting medical expenses ) and excluding mortgage principal , 19.3% of children are estimated to be poor — a rate not much different than the official poverty rate based on pre - tax cash income alone ( 19.0% ) .

under the fcsu measure with mortgage principal factored in , 22.3% of children are estimated to be poor — somewhat higher than the official poverty rate .

in contrast , the aged poverty rate under an expanded resource definition that excludes medical expenses is 13.7% under the fcsu measure excluding mortgage principal , and 16.7% with mortgage principal factored in , which compares to a poverty rate of 9.7% under the official measure based on pre - tax money income .

inclusion of medical expenses into a poverty measure especially affects the aged , particularly when compared to children .

table 5 shows the effect of subtracting estimated out - of - pocket medical expenses ( moop ) from income using census bureau imputation procedures described earlier .

under the nas - based fcsu measure excluding mortgage principal , elderly poverty increases from 13.7% before counting moop to 21.0% after subtracting moop from income ( see figure 6 ) , slightly surpassing the child poverty rate ( 19.3% before counting moop , and 20.2% after ; see figure 4 ) .

under the fcsu thresholds with mortgage principal included , counting moop increases the aged poverty rate from 16.7% to 24.9% , again eclipsing the child poverty rate ( 22.3% before counting moop , and 23.5% after ) .

under either measure that includes moop , the elderly poverty rate is higher than that of children and is more than double the current official rate of 9.7% .

heretofore , poverty reduction among the aged has been heralded as a major policy accomplishment , as the incidence of poverty among the aged under the official measure was the highest of any age group a half century ago ( 35.2% , compared to 26.9% for children , and 17.0% for adults ages 18 to 64 in 1959 ) , but in 2008 was the lowest ( 9.7% , compared to 18.5% for children , and 11.7% for non - aged adults ) .

the incorporation of out - of - pocket medical expenses under a nas - based poverty measure markedly increases the incidence of poverty among the aged , giving pause to previously heralded accomplishments and raising new social policy concerns .

as noted earlier , since the nas panel issued its recommendations for a new u.s. poverty measure some 15 years ago , extensive research has been undertaken by federal statistical agencies , academics , and other researchers to devise and test methods , and to evaluate the results of implementing the nas panel's recommendations .

a number of working papers and journal articles have been published by census bureau and bls analysts and others , and a variety of "experimental" poverty measures based on variations of nas panel recommendations and methodologies have been published by the census bureau in a number of its official reports .

estimates of poverty under the various "experimental" nas - based measures may vary markedly from one another and from the current "official" poverty measure , both in terms of the total numbers of persons estimated as having income below poverty , but also in terms of their demographic composition of the poor , and where they live .

in part , as a consequence , none of the "experimental" nas - based measures has emerged as a preferred alternative or supplemental measure to the "official" poverty measure .

a bill introduced in the 111 th congress by representative mcdermott , the measuring american poverty act of 2009 ( map act , h.r .

2909 ) , and a companion bill introduced by senator dodd ( s. 1625 ) would instruct the census bureau and the bls to adopt many of the nas recommendations as a new ( "modern" ) poverty measure .

the legislation , if adopted , would result in a new "modern" poverty measure that would coexist with the current "official" poverty measure , and redesignate the current "official" measure as the "traditional" poverty measure .

the new "modern" poverty measure would not affect programs that use poverty as a criterion for either determining eligibility or allocating funds , but would stand as an additional statistical indicator to measure the effects of programs on poverty .

more recently , the department of commerce announced that the census bureau , in cooperation with the bls , is preparing to develop a supplemental poverty measure ( spm ) designed to implement many of the nas panel recommendations .

president obama's office of management and budget ( omb ) chief statistician formed a technical working group charged with developing a set of initial starting points to help the census bureau , in consultation with the bls , develop the new statistic .

observations from the working group are based on much of what has been learned over the past 15 years on developing data and methods to implement the nas panel's recommendations , as well as from conceptual discussions as to how to best estimate economic need .

the president's fy2011 budget proposal includes $5 million to assist the census bureau in creating the new statistic , and $2.5 million for the bls to modify the consumer expenditure survey and to continue research to develop supplemental poverty thresholds to be used by the census bureau .

statistics based on the spm , which has yet to be developed , are to accompany the census bureau's fall 2011 scheduled release of 2010 income and poverty statistics under the "official" measure .

the spm would not replace the "official" poverty measure , as it would be considered an experimental measure .

according to the working group , the spm should be considered a "work in progress," as improvements in data and methods are made over time .

the working group's observations serve as an initial starting point intended to assist the census bureau , in collaboration with the bls and other data agencies , in developing the new statistical measure .

ultimately , the census bureau is responsible for the development and final decisions relating to the development and initial publication of the spm , as well as making improvements to the measure over time .

as noted above , the proposed new poverty measure is intended to supplement the "official" statistical measure of poverty in current use .

used in conjunction with the "official" poverty measure , the spm would help in assessing the effects of economic and social conditions and government programs and policies on individuals and families in ways not possible with the "official" measure .

in addition to the spm , the census bureau would continue to publish estimates based on other nas - based "experimental" poverty measures , though the spm would be the preferred alternative nas - based measure highlighted by the bureau .

the "official" statistical poverty measure would continue to be used by programs that use it as the basis for allocating funds under formula and matching grant programs .

additionally , hhs poverty guidelines would continue to be derived from the "official" statistical poverty measure and continue to be used as a basis for determining income eligibility of individuals , families , and households for federal and state programs .

table 8 summarizes features of the current "official" poverty measure and three proposals ( nas , map act , and spm ) for the development of a new poverty measure .

