the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) has provided housing assistance for low - income households through numerous programs .

in some programs , hud provided assistance by entering into financial arrangements with private owners ( both for - profit and nonprofit ) , who in turn developed and continue to own rental housing projects .

in exchange for assistance from hud , owners agreed to provide affordable housing to tenants for a period of time , anywhere from 20 to 50 years depending on the program .

these hud programs are no longer active , but they created hundreds of thousands of units of affordable housing from the late 1950s through the late 1980s , and these units continue to provide affordable housing to nearly 1.4 million families .

the affordability terms agreed to by property owners participating in these programs , sometimes referred to as "affordability restrictions," began to come to an end in the 1980s .

when the restrictions on these properties end , there is a risk that they will become unaffordable to low - and moderate - income tenants , and that those tenants will be displaced .

efforts to maintain the affordability of the remaining hud - assisted properties as their affordability restrictions come to an end are often referred to as "assisted housing preservation. .

this report focuses on assisted housing preservation efforts involving six specific hud programs , three of which provided financing assistance to private owners through low - interest loans and / or mortgage insurance , and three of which provided rental assistance to owners .

these programs were often used in combination with each other , with a property owner receiving both financing assistance and rental assistance .

the following financing assistance programs are covered in this report: the section 202 loan program , active from 1959 to 1990 .

hud extended low - interest , direct loans to property owners for durations of 40 or 50 years .

the section 202 loan program helped finance the development of approximately 216,000 units of affordable housing ; today , about 145,000 units are in properties that still have active loans .

the section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) bmir ( below market interest rate ) program , active from 1961 to 1968 .

hud provided mortgage insurance for low - interest , 40-year loans to private developers .

the section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) bmir program helped finance the creation of approximately 159,000 units of affordable housing , more than 15,000 of which are in properties that still have active loans insured through the bmir program .

the section 236 program , active from 1968 to 1974 .

hud provided mortgage insurance for 40-year loans along with mortgage subsidy payments to private developers .

the section 236 program helped finance the development of approximately 400,000 units of affordable housing , more than 150,000 of which are in properties that still have active loans insured through the section 236 program .

the following rental - assistance programs are also covered in this report: the rent supplement program , active from 1965 to 1973 .

hud provided long - term ( up to 40 years ) rental - assistance contracts to owners of properties with hud - assisted financing .

most rent supplement contracts were converted to section 8 project - based contracts ( described below ) , although nearly 13,000 units continue to receive rent supplement assistance .

the rental assistance payment ( rap ) program , active in the mid - 1970s .

hud provided long - term ( up to 40 years ) rental - assistance contracts to owners of section 236 properties .

most rap contracts have been converted to section 8 assistance ( described below ) , although nearly 16,000 units continue to receive rap assistance .

the section 8 project - based program , active from 1974 to 1983 .

hud provided long - term ( up to 40 years ) rental - assistance contracts to owners of newly constructed or substantially rehabilitated properties , as well as existing properties ( including section 202 , section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) bmir , and section 236 properties ) .

roughly 1.2 million units continue to receive section 8 project - based rental assistance .

while other affordable housing programs also face expiring use restrictions , this report focuses on these six programs for several reasons: ( 1 ) many of the property owners are private for - profit organizations that may have interests other than providing affordable housing when their affordability restrictions come to an end .

this contrasts with , for example , the public housing program , where owners are quasi - governmental entities whose primary purpose is providing affordable housing .

 ( 2 ) the majority of the affordability restrictions in these six programs will come to an end during the next 5-15 years , depending on the program .

this contrasts with newer housing production programs , such as the section 202 supportive housing for the elderly capital grants program , the section 811 supportive housing for persons with disabilities program , or low income housing tax credits , where affordability restrictions may extend many years into the future .

 ( 3 ) in past years , congress has enacted laws that attempted to address housing preservation related to many of these six programs .

these attempts met with varying success .

this report does not address the programs of the department of agriculture's rural housing service .

figure 1 illustrates the universe of rental units that were created as part of the six programs discussed in this report .

the large circle in the center represents the housing units that receive rental assistance through the section 8 , rent supplement , and rap programs .

the circle on the left represents housing units that continue to have active financing through the section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) bmir and section 236 mortgage insurance programs , and the circle on the right represents units that continue to have active financing through the section 202 loan program .

as can be seen in the diagram , the area of overlap between the left and center circles represents section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) bmir and section 236 units that also receive some form of rental assistance , while the overlap between the right and center circles shows section 202 units that receive some form of rental assistance .

see also table a - 1 , in appendix a , which provides a summary of the properties at issue in assisted housing preservation and their characteristics .

this report is divided into six main sections .

the first section provides greater detail about the six programs for which housing preservation is an issue .

the second section describes how affordability restrictions come to an end .

in the case of financing assistance , this can occur through mortgage prepayment or maturation , and in the case of rental assistance , it can occur when contracts expire .

and in cases of both financing and rental assistance , properties may become unavailable as affordable housing due to physical deterioration .

the second section also discusses what happens to tenants when affordability restrictions end .

in the third section , the report describes efforts by both congress and hud to extend affordability restrictions in these programs .

some of these efforts have been successful , and some have not .

the fourth section discusses preservation priorities — factors that interested parties ( owners , tenants , local communities , hud , members of congress ) may take into consideration when determining whether a property should be preserved as assisted housing .

in the fifth section , the report presents data about the numbers of properties and units of housing involved in the six programs discussed throughout the report .

the final section of the report discusses various options regarding how to preserve assisted housing , including current legislation .

additionally , a review and summary of the properties at issue can be found in appendix a , and a glossary of key terms can be found in appendix b .

numerous hud programs have used subsidies to private owners as a way to develop affordable rental housing units .

hud first began to interact with private developers and owners in the early 1960s , largely by providing low - interest loans , and later , federal housing administration ( fha ) insurance on mortgages , to developers so that they would have lower debt payments and would in turn be able to charge lower rents to tenants .

units in developments that resulted from these arrangements were considered rent restricted , with property owners agreeing to keep rents at an affordable level .

later , primarily with the creation of section 8 project - based rental assistance in 1974 , the federal government began to pay a portion of tenant rents directly to owners .

in some cases , property owners received both financing and rental assistance from hud .

this section of the report discusses six hud programs through which private owners ( both for - profit and nonprofit ) received assistance from hud and for which housing preservation is now a concern .

a variety of circumstances may lead owners to stop providing affordable housing and leave hud subsidized housing programs .

in high - rent areas , owners may decide to pay off their assisted mortgages or choose not to renew a section 8 rental - assistance contract in order to convert a property to market - rate housing or to sell the building at a profit .

in cases where a property has been allowed to deteriorate significantly or the owner has violated the hud program rules in other ways , hud may choose to end a contract with an owner .

this section details these possibilities .

by the mid - 1980s , congress and hud had become concerned about the potential loss of hundreds of thousands of units of privately owned , assisted housing serving low - income families .

under the direction of congress and hud , a "national housing preservation task force" was convened .

the task force's final report , issued in 1987 , identified four primary threats to the inventory: expiration of rental - assistance contracts , maturation of secondary financing , an aging housing supply with limited incentives for owners to maintain properties , and owners becoming eligible to prepay .

of the more than 2 million units in the assisted housing inventory at the time , the task force identified 645,000 as being the most vulnerable to loss .

in response to these concerns about the loss of the assisted housing inventory , congress enacted several laws that gave private owners of hud - assisted housing incentives to maintain the affordability of their properties .

one of these laws , the multifamily assisted housing reform and accountability act ( p.l .

105-65 ) is currently in effect and addresses the renewal of section 8 contracts between hud and property owners .

two other laws , neither of which are currently in effect , addressed mortgage prepayments by private owners .

these are the emergency low - income housing preservation act ( p.l .

100-242 ) and the low - income housing preservation and resident homeownership act ( p.l .

101-625 ) .

while these laws are no longer in effect , the properties that went through their preservation processes are still governed by the agreements that were established at the time .

this section describes these laws and their current status .

an initial question in discussing preservation is whether the government should intervene to maintain federally assisted housing beyond its original contract term at all .

the modes of subsidy that led to the creation of these properties — subsidized multifamily mortgages and project - based rental - assistance contracts — have been replaced with different models of assistance , such as the section 8 tenant - based voucher program and the low - income housing tax credit .

the original hud subsidy programs were ended , in part , because of their perceived limitations , particularly their high costs and concerns that they concentrated poverty .

today , section 8 housing vouchers have become the primary form of deeply targeted housing assistance ; there have even been proposals to replace the stock of federally assisted housing with vouchers .

vouchers are considered less expensive than project - based assistance and provide families with mobility and housing choices .

however , the voucher program has its limitations .

landlords are not required to accept vouchers , and for some populations , especially persons who are elderly or have disabilities , accessible housing may not be available in the private market .

these critiques of the voucher program are used to support calls for the preservation and development of project - based housing assistance .

with few exceptions , no statutory authority exists to create new , deeply targeted hud - assisted housing .

the low - income housing tax credit , and , to a lesser degree , the home investment partnerships block grant program , help to fund the creation of new affordable housing developments ; however , they are not as deeply subsidized as the older , hud rent - assisted properties .

given the limited funding and authority for developing new , deeply subsidized housing , the stock of federally assisted housing is currently irreplaceable .

further , in many cases , it would be more expensive to build new housing than it would be to preserve the existing stock .

as evidenced by the history of federal housing preservation policy discussed earlier in this report , congress and the federal government have generally taken the position that preserving assisted housing is a desirable federal housing policy goal .

however , even if it is less expensive than new construction , preservation can be costly .

many properties were built in the 1960s and 1970s and may be in need of repair in order to be habitable for an additional 20 to 40 years .

as a result , funds are often needed for rehabilitation and improvements , possibly requiring federal grants or insured loans .

another cost could be funds for ongoing or new rental assistance .

in cases where units already receive rental assistance ( principally through section 8 ) , continued rental assistance is needed to maintain affordability for low - income tenants .

in addition , some currently unassisted units may need rental assistance to help pay for increased operating costs after rehabilitation has occurred .

a third possible cost may be providing incentives to owners to encourage them to maintain affordability or to sell to a purchaser who will .

in addition to the costs of preservation , a transaction may require the cooperation of multiple parties — building owners , tenants , the local community , and hud — each of whom could have their own interest in whether and how a property is preserved .

in addition , each property may have characteristics that make its preservation more or less costly and feasible .

these characteristics can include the property location , its physical condition , the needs of the tenants , and the type of owner organization ( nonprofit versus for - profit ) , together with the effectiveness of the owner .

these factors , in turn , can create different options for owners , present the federal government with varying preservation costs , and affect community interest in maintaining the property as affordable housing .

this section of the report discusses several of the factors that may play a part in the decision to preserve federally assisted housing: property location , property condition , tenant needs , and type of owner .

given the reality of limited federal resources , hud and congress may have to weigh competing priorities to determine which preservation strategies are the most cost effective and which properties should be preserved .

as noted earlier , there are several different types of assisted housing properties at issue in terms of preservation .

some have assisted financing ( through fha or the section 202 loan program ) , some have rental - assistance contracts , and some have both .

the level of affordability of the property , the length of time the affordability must be maintained , and the options at the end of the assistance contract all vary depending on the type of subsidy provided .

this section of the report presents detailed characteristics of properties at issue in preservation , organized around types of assistance .

the first section presents data regarding the section 202 loan program , the second section covers the section 236 and section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) bmir programs , and the third section presents data regarding units receiving rental assistance through the rent supplement , rap , and section 8 programs .

note that there may be some overlap among data presented in the three sections .

for example , table 1 includes section 202 units that receive rental assistance ; these units are also included in table 7 , which shows all rent - assisted units .

see table a - 1 in appendix a for disaggregated units .

as described earlier in this report , the federal government has a limited set of preservation tools .

hud has the authority to renew expiring rental - assistance contracts for those properties that have them , and , in some circumstances , restructure the outstanding debt on a property if it has fha - insured financing .

in other circumstances , hud has the authority to provide residents facing displacement with rental assistance .

for properties with maturing mortgages , hud has no preservation authority .

earlier preservation laws gave hud additional tools , including the authority to provide new rental - assistance contracts , secondary financing to shore up troubled properties , and enhanced restrictions on property owners' rights to exit certain programs .

these additional preservation tools are no longer available ; they were eliminated out of concern about their high cost and about their infringement on property owners' rights .

in recent years , particularly as concern about maturing mortgages has grown , there have been calls from low - income housing advocates , tenants' - rights organizations , and property owners to adopt policies that encourage preservation and expand the set of preservation tools available to hud .

a number of proposals that would encourage housing preservation have been made as part of legislation or through recommendations from interested groups .

these proposals generally fall into two broad categories: ( 1 ) incentives for current owners to maintain their properties or sell them to preservation purchasers , and ( 2 ) restrictions on owners .

it is important to note that federal efforts are not the only preservation efforts .

in recent years , state and local governments , along with affordable housing preservation advocates , have increased the local role in affordable housing preservation .

several states and localities have set aside their own funds , or prioritized the use of their federal funds , for preservation incentives .

for example , according to crs analysis of 2008 state low - income housing tax credit ( lihtc ) qualified allocation plans , 27 states awarded additional points to preservation projects in their competitions for tax credits , and an additional 17 states set aside a portion of tax credits for preservation purposes .

the following section of the report discusses current federal preservation policy options .

in the 111 th congress , one extensive preservation bill was introduced , the housing preservation and tenant protection act ( h.r .

4868 ) , and another was enacted , the section 202 supportive housing for the elderly act ( p.l .

111-372 ) .

while comparable legislation has not been introduced in the 112 th congress , hud has issued several notices announcing policy changes that are designed to help owners rehabilitate and preserve existing properties .

in addition , the administration has proposed a rental assistance demonstration that is meant , in part , to preserve rental assistance payment ( rap ) program and rent supplement - subsidized units .

these initiatives , as well as legislation from the 111 th and 112 th congresses , are described below .

toward the end of 2010 , hud began publishing notices regarding policy changes that enable multifamily property owners to make improvements to their housing developments .

these policy changes are designed to preserve affordable units that would otherwise fall into disrepair .

one notice , published on december 20 , 2010 , gives hud the discretion to subordinate section 202 loans when owners have "immediate needs for rehabilitation , significant or emergency repairs," but are unable to go through the refinancing process to pay off the section 202 loan .

owners must be able to show that the subordination is necessary in order to preserve the project , and must enter into extended use agreements for the longer of 20 years beyond the loan's original maturity date or the date on which the subordinated loan is repaid .

similarly , hud issued a notice that gives it the authority to defer the repayment of flexible subsidy debt in circumstances that would assist in preserving properties .

from the late 1970s to the mid - 1990s , the flexible subsidy program provided loans to properties with hud - assisted financing that were having financial difficulties ( the last year in which congress gave new obligation authority was fy1995 ) .

under the terms of the notice , hud may approve deferral of payment in cases where an owner refinances a loan but the funds are not sufficient to pay off the flexible subsidy debt .

as with subordination of section 202 loans , an owner has to show that the deferral is necessary to ensure preservation of the project and must agree to an extended use agreement for the longer of 20 years beyond the flexible subsidy loan's original maturity date or the date on which the subordinated loan is repaid .

another hud notice , issued on february 1 , 2011 , allows multifamily project owners to convert efficiency units to one - bedroom units , even if conversion results in fewer total units in the building .

owners may wish to pursue conversion because efficiency units are undesirable in some markets and owners are unable to rent them , resulting in lack of income to keep properties operational .

in order to be able to convert units under the terms of the notice , owners must demonstrate that the local market demand is such that conversion is necessary and that it will put the property in a better financial position .

as part of its fy2012 budget , hud proposed a new rental assistance demonstration ( rad ) that would convert rental assistance provided through several rental assistance programs to a new form of section 8 project - based rental assistance .

two of the programs would be rent supplement and rap , which were discussed earlier in this report .

under current law , hud does not have the authority to renew rent supplement and rap contracts , so when the contracts expire , owners are no longer eligible to receive rental assistance for the previously subsidized units .

while tenants living in units assisted through rent supplement may receive tenant - protection vouchers , those in rap - assisted units are not eligible for vouchers .

under the proposed legislation , rent supplement and rap assistance contracts could be voluntarily converted to this new form of section 8 contracts , which would allow units to maintain their subsidies .

in its budget , hud requested authorizing language for the demonstration and $200 million to cover the expected cost of the conversions .

the fy2012 appropriations law ( p.l .

112-55 ) included a modified version of rad , which limits participation to public housing properties and section 8 moderate rehabilitation properties .

an extensive preservation bill , the housing preservation and tenant protection act ( h.r .

4868 ) was introduced in the house on march 17 , 2010 , by the then - chairman of the house financial services committee .

the bill was similar to a draft preservation bill that had been circulated as part of a hearing held by the subcommittee on housing and community opportunity of the house financial services committee in july 2009 .

the bill was marked up and approved by the house financial services committee in july 2010 ; however , it was not considered on the house floor before the end of the 111 th congress .

the bill included versions of most of the proposals discussed in the previous section of this report .

among others , the bill included the following provisions: regarding section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) bmir and section 236 properties with maturing mortgages , h.r .

4868 would have authorized hud to make grants or loans available to rehabilitate the property if owners so chose , and would have extended enhanced voucher protections to unassisted tenants upon mortgage maturation .

the bill would also have created a "preservation exchange program," through which hud could facilitate the transfer of a property with a maturing mortgage to a preservation purchaser .

the bill would have authorized hud to provide incentives both to current owners and purchasers , including the forgiveness of outstanding flexible subsidy loans .

h.r .

4868 would have authorized the conversion of rap and rent supplement contracts to section 8 , which would have allowed them to be renewed and would have expanded certain owners' access to their residual receipts accounts .

the bill would have established a form of right of first refusal / right of first purchase for hud ( or its assignee ) whereby hud could match the offer of a third party and purchase a hud - assisted property in order to maintain its affordability .

h.r .

4868 would have permitted owners to request project - based assistance in lieu of enhanced vouchers , and would have required hud to provide such assistance , as long as the owner agreed to extend the contract at least 20 years .

in terms of tenant protection and assistance , h.r .

4868 would have authorized funding for technical assistance for tenant organizations and given tenants a private right of action to enforce program rules .

the bill also contained a version of the section 202 preservation legislation ( discussed in the next section of this report ) , as well as an authorization and modification to rural housing preservation initiatives that have been authorized and funded through recent appropriations acts .

the legislation would have authorized "such sums as necessary" to fund various preservation incentives , making it dependent on the appropriations committees to fund most of the new initiatives .

both low - income housing advocates and industry organizations representing assisted property owners provided feedback on the draft legislation during the hearings in 2009 .

while many of the proposals contained in the draft legislation were supported by both advocates and owners groups , provisions related to restrictions on owners ( right of first purchase / right of first refusal and private right of standing for residents ) proved controversial , with tenant advocates in support of the provisions and owners groups opposed .

based on testimony given during a hearing on march 24 , 2010 , property owners continued to be concerned about the right of first refusal and private right of standing provisions and tenant advocates continued to support such provisions in the introduced version of the bill .

at the end of 2010 , congress passed the section 202 supportive housing for the elderly act ( p.l .

111-372 ) , a law that gives owners of older section 202 developments the ability to refinance , improve , and potentially preserve their properties , and that also extends the term of affordability in cases of refinancing .

the law allows owners of older section 202 developments ( those financed with low interest rate loans ) to refinance without the requirement of a lower interest rate and reduced debt service , as had previously been the case .

in addition , p.l .

111-372 extended the term of affordability to 20 years beyond the term of the original section 202 loan .

previously , owners who refinanced were required to maintain affordability only through the term of the original section 202 loan .

another change to existing law contained in p.l .

111-372 is a new "preservation project rental assistance" program , which is to be available to owners who refinance their section 202 loans in order to prevent displacement of tenants .

not all section 202 units receive rental assistance , particularly those financed prior to 1974 , and if owners have to increase rents due to increased debt service , the rental assistance may prevent displacement of tenants .

for more information about p.l .

111-372 , see crs report rl33508 , section 202 and other hud rental housing programs for low - income elderly residents , by [author name scrubbed] .

the fy2012 hud appropriations law ( p.l .

112-55 ) contained several preservation - related provisions .

as noted earlier , the law authorized a modified version of the president's rad initiative , which will be available to section 8 moderate rehabilitation properties .

further , the law funds tenant protection vouchers for residents of some properties with maturing mortgages , expiring rap contracts , or expiring elihpa / lihprha use restrictions .

it also authorizes the conversion of tenant protection vouchers to project - based vouchers for some residents in rap and rent supplement properties , permits hud to extend for one year expiring rap and rent supplement contracts , and extends the authority for the mark - to - market program through october 1 , 2015 .

finally , the law continued provisions from previous years requiring hud to maintain project - based assistance contracts on hud - held properties and permitting the transfer of project - based assistance contracts between properties .

appendix a. preservation properties at a glance appendix b. glossar .

