global climate change is a widespread and growing concern that has led to extensive congressional and international discussions and negotiations .

climate change mitigation strategies have focused on reducing emissions of greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) , especially carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) .

one significant source of co 2 emissions is deforestation .

reducing deforestation to lower co 2 emissions is seen as one of the least costly methods of mitigating climate change .

forests are carbon sinks in their natural state ( i.e. , they store more carbon than they release ) .

trees absorb co 2 and convert carbon into leaves , stems , and roots , while releasing oxygen .

forests account for more than a quarter of the land area of the earth , and store more than three - quarters of the carbon in terrestrial plants and nearly 40% of soil carbon .

when forests are cleared , some of their carbon is released to the atmosphere — slowly through decay or quickly through burning .

one estimate shows that land use change , primarily deforestation , releases about 5.9 gtco 2 ( gigatons or billion metric tons of co 2 ) annually , about 17% of all annual anthropogenic ghg emissions .

this contribution to ghg emissions makes efforts to reduce deforestation significant in international strategies to mitigate climate change .

there has also been some discussion of the relationship between forests and methane ( ch 4 ) , a less prominent but far more potent ghg than co 2 .

however , the evidence of the relationship is still limited .

it generally shows forests to be net ch 4 sinks , except in water - saturated soils ( i.e. , forested wetlands ) , and it is unclear whether activities that modify forest cover ( eg , deforestation ) affect ch 4 absorption and release .

thus , this report addresses only the relationship between forests and carbon as it affects climate change .

the loss of tropical forests is of particular concern .

the existing data show little , if any , net deforestation in boreal and temperate forests , and thus the carbon consequences of deforestation in these ecosystems might not be significant .

in contrast , the loss of tropical forests is substantial and continuing .

tropical deforestation has significant climate impacts because of the large amount of co 2 sequestered in the vegetation — nearly half of all the carbon in terrestrial plants .

thus , the lowest cost and largest carbon benefit of reducing deforestation is with tropical forests .

in the united states , tropical forests are largely limited to hawaii and puerto rico .

congress has addressed international deforestation through laws that authorize funding to conserve forests and in proposed climate change legislation that would provide resources to reduce deforestation in developing countries .

the tropical forest conservation act of 1998 ( 22 u.s.c .

§2431 et seq .

 ) , for example , authorizes the united states to conduct debt - for - nature swaps with developing countries to conserve their tropical forests .

under pending climate change legislation ( eg , h.r .

2454 , the american clean energy act of 2009 , and s. 1733 , the clean energy jobs and american power act ) , congress is considering providing resources for developing countries to establish programs and implement projects to reduce deforestation and forest degradation , and creating policy mechanisms to establish standards and markets for international offsets to reduce ghgs .

three deforestation issues are likely to be of particular importance to congress .

the first two are geographic variation in the causes and the consequences of deforestation .

these then suggest approaches for efforts to reduce deforestation .

the third issue is the poor quality of information about forests generally , which might point to needed research and infrastructure as well as suggesting caution in relying on existing data for decision - making .

congressional interest in reducing deforestation to lower co 2 emissions parallels several international initiatives that aim to accomplish the same objective .

international proposals focus on reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation ( redd ) in developing countries .

these proposals were discussed and debated in climate meetings associated with the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) in copenhagen in december 2009 .

boreal forests , or taiga , generally occur north of about 50" north latitude , as shown in figure 1 .

although boreal forests account for about a third of the world's forests ( see table 1 ) , relatively few countries have boreal forests .

countries with boreal forests include russia , canada , the united states ( in alaska ) , sweden , finland , and norway .

there are few boreal forests in the southern hemisphere , including minor acreages on scattered mountaintops in southern argentina , chile , and new zealand ( not shown in figure 1 ) .

boreal forests are dominated by relatively few tree species , such as spruce , fir , larch , and pine .

they commonly grow in expanses of trees with relatively similar sizes , generally as a result of infrequent broad - scale destructive events , particularly wildfires .

these conifer forests often contain substantial volumes of timber , but they generally are not managed for timber production , because of slow growth rates .

boreal forests are important for carbon sequestration because of their high carbon storage in forest soils .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

carbon in vegetation is slightly greater than for temperate forests , and about half of the level in tropical forests .

however , soil carbon levels in boreal forests are high — more than for any other biome except wetlands .

carbon accumulates to high levels in boreal soils because of slow decomposition rates , which are depressed by short summers and acidic soils .

temperate forests generally occur in the mid - latitudes , typically from the tropic of cancer ( 23½" north latitude ) to about 50" north latitude , and south of the tropic of capricorn ( 23½" south latitude ) , as shown in figure 2 .

temperate forests account for about a quarter of global forests .

the most extensive temperate forests are in the united states and southern canada , europe , china , and australia .

there is a wide variety of temperate forests — oak , maple , pine , and more — but the species diversity within temperate forests , while greater than in boreal forests , is substantially lower than in tropical forests .

as with boreal forests , temperate forests commonly have extensive areas covered by a few tree species with similar sizes , often the result of destructive events — wildfires and major storms ( hurricanes , tornadoes , wind or ice storms , etc. ) .

many temperate forests are managed for commercial wood production , because of the modest species diversity , moderate tree growth rates , and desirable wood characteristics of many of the dominant conifer trees .

temperate forests are less significant for carbon release than tropical or boreal forests , because of the lower levels of carbon stored in vegetation and soils .

however , they take on added significance because of the more intensive management of these forests for wood products .

tropical forests are generally defined by their location — between the tropic of cancer and the tropic of capricorn , 23½" north and south of the equator , respectively .

tropical forests occur in many settings , from very wet to quite dry locations .

tropical rainforests , shown in figure 3 , are the dominant form , characterized by heavy rainfall , dense vegetation , and an enormous diversity of plant and animal species .

tropical rainforests are considered to be among the earth's most biologically diverse ecosystems ; indeed , some claim that tropical rainforests hold nearly 50% of the earth's biodiversity .

dry tropical forests have sparser tree cover and less species variability , typically with grasses and other herbaceous vegetation growing underneath .

tropical countries account for about 42% of global forestlands .

rainforests are common in central and south america , southern and southeast asia , and the congo basin and madagascar in africa .

the countries with the most extensive tropical rainforests include brazil , the democratic republic of congo , and indonesia .

about half of dry tropical forests occur in a band from the easternmost part of brazil southwest into paraguay and eastern bolivia , and scattered elsewhere in latin america ( eg , in mexico ) .

other dry tropical forests occur in a band across africa , south of the sahara desert , southward through east africa , and south of the congo basin , as well as scattered in southern asia and in northern australia .

tropical forests have an enormous diversity of plant and animal species .

in contrast to boreal and temperate forests , tropical forests generally have been free from infrequent , broad - scale destructive events .

thus , the trees ( and other species ) on each site can respond to minor localized climatic differences that , over thousands of years , can lead to diversification .

as a result , tropical areas are generally not well suited for intensive forest management or plantations , although teak and mahogany ( as well as coffee , oil palms , and bananas ) are sometimes grown in plantations .

many of the desired species have narrow habitat requirements , often making it difficult for them to grow near other trees of the same species or requiring a variety of species to provide the necessary micro - climatic conditions .

further , modest soil carbon levels and rapid decomposition effectively prevent sustained intensive management over extended periods without substantial and continuing applications of fertilizers .

the wide variety of trees also leads to a wide variety of insects and diseases , so pest management is an issue for tropical plantations .

tropical forests are important for carbon sequestration .

they contain substantial amounts of carbon in vegetation — double the level in other forests , and four times more carbon than the global average .

 ( see table 1 , above. ) .

in contrast to the vegetative carbon , tropical forest soils contain only average levels of carbon .

in tropical rainforests , the carbon is quickly depleted when vegetation is cut , because the warm , humid conditions cause rapid decomposition and the high rainfall leaches minerals from the soils .

the drivers of deforestation suggest various approaches to reducing deforestation: adjusting markets and assisting tropical countries with infrastructure and governance .

for a description of u.s. programs that address deforestation , see the appendix .

in addition , the net effect of deforestation might , in some circumstances , be offset by afforestation or reforestation — planting trees on the cleared sites .

various sources report data on forest area and deforestation .

however , the data differ , sometimes substantially .

sources have noted the discrepancies among reported data .

why are the data discrepancies so substantial , even in relatively developed areas ( eg , the united states ) , where one might expect relatively high - quality data ? .

there are two principal reasons: the classification of forest lands , and the measurement and reporting systems used .

table 2 presents data from two sources that cover most of the world's forests .

the u.n. food and agriculture organization ( fao ) has been assessing global forests for decades ; its most recent report is the global forest resources assessment 2005 .

the world resources institute ( wri ) , in cooperation with the u.n. development programme , the u.n .

environment programme , and the world bank , has also published data on global forests , in world resources , 2002-2004: decisions for the earth: balance , voice , and power .

table 2 shows that , although generally similar , the data do not match .

for example , for the two most forested countries in the world , russia and brazil , wri reported more forest area ( 5% and 14% more , respectively ) than fao reported .

in contrast , fao reported substantially more forest area in the united states ( 34% more ) and canada ( 27% more ) than wri reported .

similarly , data on deforestation amounts and rates differ widely .

for example , the fao data show brazil accounting for 27% of tropical forests and 24% of tropical deforestation .

other data , limited to humid tropical forests ( and thus excluding many african and brazilian tropical forests ) , also show brazil accounting for 27% of tropical forests , but 48% of tropical deforestation .

in addition , the fao and wri data by biome differ from the forest biome area data from the ipcc , shown in table 1 .

the accuracy of the fao data , especially deforestation rates , has particularly been questioned .

one observer has noted "inconsistencies" in "three successively corrected declining trends" in fao reports on forested areas .

this researcher argues that measurement errors , as well as changes in the statistical design and new data sources , raise serious questions about the reliability of the reported trends .

fao has acknowledged changes in reported acreages because of changes in standards for measuring forests .

lowering co 2 emissions is a central focus of u.s. and international climate change policy .

an estimated 75% - 80% of global co 2 emissions stem from industrial sources , specifically burning fossil fuels .

about 20% of emissions are attributed primarily to deforestation .

some contend that reducing deforestation is one of the least costly methods of reducing co 2 emissions , and that "forestry can make a significant contribution to the low - cost global mitigation portfolio. .

one study found that a 10% reduction in deforestation between 2005 and 2030 could provide emissions reductions of 0.3-0.6 gtco 2 per year ( about 5% - 10% of u.s. emissions ) at a cost of $0.4 billion - $1.7 billion annually .

forests occur around the globe , at many latitudes .

many are concerned with the possible impacts of losing boreal and temperate forests .

however , existing data show little , if any , net deforestation in these ecosystems , and the carbon consequences of boreal and temperate deforestation are relatively modest .

in contrast , the loss of tropical rainforests is substantial and ongoing , with significant climate impacts because of the large amount of co 2 currently stored in vegetation in the tropics — 40% - 50% of the carbon in all terrestrial vegetation .

thus , the largest cost and carbon benefit of reducing deforestation is with tropical forests .

measuring forests is complicated .

definitions differ .

forests are extensive and often inaccessible .

technologies to assess forests remotely exist , but are expensive and their availability is limited .

monitoring deforestation adds to the difficulty and complexity , because forest areas must be measured repeatedly , using consistent definitions and technologies .

compensating landowners and / or countries for reducing deforestation requires that measuring and monitoring forests become more standardized .

existing forest area data , and especially the data on forest area changes , should be used with caution , perhaps seen more as indicative than as precise , accurate measurements .

the causes of tropical deforestation are manifold , and vary regionally around the globe .

in some places , the drivers are commercial logging , followed by slash - and - burn agriculture that may prevent regrowth of tropical forests .

elsewhere , the major cause of deforestation is large - scale commercial agriculture , especially for cattle ranching , soybeans , and oil palm .

deforestation may also result from weak land tenure and / or weak or corrupt governance to protect the forests .

nonetheless , there is a broad consensus that the highest potential for reduced deforestation is in tropical regions where forests are abundant , carbon stocks are high , and the threat of deforestation is high .

further , reducing deforestation in the tropics would likely have ancillary benefits , including preserving biodiversity , providing livelihoods for rural poor , and sustaining indigenous communities and their cultures , among other things .

policies and practices to reduce emissions from deforestation and degradation ( redd ) vary considerably and depend on several factors that are particular to the regions they address .

some forestry practices can reduce the impacts of net deforestation , and several market approaches are evolving that could compensate landowners for not deforesting their lands .

existing u.s. programs provide overseas development assistance to conserve forests , but funding levels have been modest .

also , the programs are relatively narrow in their approach to forest conservation , and in some cases , require outstanding debt to the united states to generate funding .

some of the challenges for implementing redd programs include accurately and effectively monitoring redd activities and projects and improving the capacity of developing countries to implement redd programs and to ensure compliance .

evidence from past efforts to reduce deforestation as well as from existing data on forests and deforestation suggest this might be a significant challenge .

congress is considering redd in pending climate legislation ( eg , h.r .

2454 and s. 1733 ) .

also , redd was discussed in copenhagen in december 2009 at a conference of the parties to the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) , and is expected to continue to be significant in future unfccc negotiations .

options being discussed include funding to improve developing country capacity ( eg , inventories to establish national baselines , training for law enforcement to combat illegal logging , and improvements in governance and land tenure systems ) and mechanisms to fund national and subnational deforestation reduction activities .

federal agency activities united states agency for international development the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) is an independent federal agency established to administer international economic and humanitarian assistance programs , in conjunction with the department of state .

usaid has international and regional programs that address international forest conservation .

in particular , the biodiversity program ( 22 u.s.c .

§2151q ) aims to help developing countries maintain biological diversity , wildlife habitats , and environmental services .

the program funds projects and activities throughout the world , emphasizing sustainable development and community - based conservation .

the program began in the 1970s to address the conservation of forests , and later expanded to address biological diversity and tropical deforestation in the 1980s .

usaid also coordinates with six u.s. - based nongovernmental organizations through the global conservation program .

this program was initiated in 1999 to promote landscape - scale conservation in high - priority ecosystems , where partner organizations work toward reducing conservation threats ( eg , wildlife poaching and illegal logging ) and building capacity in local groups .

this program is being implemented to conserve forests in indonesia and papua new guinea , in the democratic republic of the congo , and in bolivia , colombia , ecuador , and peru .

in addition , usaid administers region - specific programs related to forest conservation , such as the amazon basin conservation initiative and u.s. participation in the congo basin forest partnership .

the amazon initiative aims to conserve biodiversity ( which includes forests ) managed by indigenous and traditional groups , and to promote regional cooperation for sharing knowledge and improving governance to help conserve resources of the amazon basin .

objectives of this program include maintaining forest cover and maximizing use of non - timber forest products ( eg , fruits and nuts ) .

the congo partnership is similar , but involves several additional countries .

the united states financially supports the congo partnership through the usaid central african regional program for the environment ( carpe ) , which began as a regional initiative in 1995 .

the congo partnership and carpe focus on projects to support a network of managed protected areas , to improve forest governance , and to develop sustainable management practices for resource use in the congo basin .

u.s. forest service the u.s. forest service ( fs ) , within the department of agriculture , administers the national forest system ; conducts research on forest management , protection , and use ; and provides financial and technical assistance to other forestland owners .

fs has an international program that promotes sustainable international forest management and biodiversity conservation .

the program supports specific activities that include managing protected areas , protecting migratory species , engaging in landscape - level forest planning , providing fire management training , curbing invasive species , preventing illegal logging , promoting forest certification , and reducing the impacts of forest use .

u.s. department of the interior the u.s. department of the interior has two agencies that assist with global forest conservation: the national park service ( nps ) and the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) .

nps has an international program that helps other nations establish and manage park systems .

this program helps poorer countries benefit from conservation , cultural heritage , and recreation opportunities .

nps has provided technical assistance and training to foreign agencies that manage park systems containing forests .

fws addresses international wildlife conservation and trade and implements relevant u.s. wildlife laws through its international affairs office .

fws implements the convention on international trade in endangered species of wild flora and fauna ( cites ) , to which the united states is a party .

cites indirectly promotes forest conservation by regulating the trade of several tropical timber species that are listed in appendices to the agreement .

the fws international affairs office coordinates programs that address forest conservation indirectly by supporting the conservation of species and ecosystems .

it is responsible for supporting wildlife conservation initiatives around the globe .

for example , it implements the multinational species conservation fund ( mscf ) , supporting conservation efforts ( including habitat protection ) for tigers , the six species of rhinoceroses , asian and african elephants , marine turtles , and apes ( gorillas , chimpanzees , bonobos , orangutans , and the various species of gibbons ) .

the fund provides grants to foreign countries to help build law enforcement capacity , mitigate human - animal conflicts , conserve habitat , conduct population surveys , and support public education programs .

the program is active on the islands of borneo and sumatra , as well as in russia , india , indonesia , nepal , and several african countries .

further , fws implements the wildlife without borders program .

this program funds conservation activities through four regional initiatives: ( 1 ) latin america and the caribbean ; ( 2 )  mexico ; ( 3 ) russia and east asia ; and ( 4 ) near east and south asia .

the program funds projects for training wildlife managers and conserving species of international concern , including tree species and forest habitats for animal species .

these projects could also include habitat management training , education , information and technology exchange , and networks and partnerships for professionals in developing countries .

u.s. department of state the international conservation programs of the u.s. department of state assist in negotiating global treaties , promoting treaty enforcement , developing international initiatives addressing sustainable development and conservation , and creating a foreign policy framework addressing u.s. interests .

specifically , the office of ecology and natural resource conservation coordinates the development of u.s. foreign policy approaches for managing ecologically and economically important ecosystems , including forests , wetlands , coral reefs , and the species that depend on these areas .

the office also advances u.s. interests in a variety of international organizations , institutions , treaties , and other forums , including the united nations forum on forests .

bilateral efforts debt - for - nature swaps under the tropical forest conservation act congress enacted the tropical forest conservation act ( tfca ; p.l .

105-214 ; 22 u.s.c .

§2431 ) in 1998 to protect tropical rainforests for preserving biological diversity , reducing atmospheric carbon dioxide , and regulating hydrological cycles .

tfca authorizes "debt - for - nature" transactions , where developing country debt is exchanged for local conservation funds to conserve tropical forests .

to be eligible , a developing country must contain at least one tropical forest with unique diversity , or a tropical forest tract that is representative of a larger tropical forest on a global , continental , or regional scale .

conservation funds ( in local currency ) from these exchanges are deposited in a tropical forest fund for each country .

interest earned from the principal balance , as well as the principal itself , is usually given as grants to fund tropical forest conservation projects .

eligible conservation projects include ( 1 ) establishing , maintaining , and restoring forest parks , protected reserves , and natural areas , as well as the plant and animal life within them ; ( 2 ) training to increase the capacity of personnel to manage reserves ; ( 3 ) developing and supporting communities near or within tropical forests ; ( 4 ) developing sustainable ecosystem and land management systems ; and ( 5 ) identifying the medicinal uses of tropical forest plants and their products .

free trade agreements the united states has developed free trade agreements ( ftas ) with many countries , and is negotiating ftas with other countries .

some of the negotiations have addressed illegal logging , which is a significant contributor to tropical deforestation in some areas .

for example , in 2006 , the united states and indonesia signed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) to enhance bilateral efforts to combat illegal logging and associated trade .

the united states committed $1 million with this agreement to fund projects that would reduce illegal logging in indonesia , such as using remote sensing to identify illegally logged tracts of land .

the mou also set up a working group to assist in implementing the initiative under a pending u.s. - indonesia trade and investment framework agreement .

similarly , a third - party agreement within the u.s. - peru fta is expected to increase awareness of illegal logging in peru and add additional mechanisms to address illegal logging .

the third - party agreement requires each country to effectively enforce its own environmental laws that affect trade between the parties .

further , it establishes a policy mechanism to address public complaints that a party is not effectively enforcing its environmental laws , regardless of whether the failure is trade - related .

u.s. involvement in international programs global environmental facility the global environment facility ( gef ) was established in 1991 to fund international environmental needs in four areas: climate change , stratospheric ozone depletion , biological diversity , and international waters .

in recent years , gef has also addressed land degradation — particularly deforestation and desertification — and persistent organic pollutants .

the gef is designed to provide incremental funding to cover additional costs for development projects needed to provide environmental benefits connected to issues on the gef agenda .

however , gef has evolved into funding a variety of activities for planning , including national action plans , in addition to providing incremental funding for specific projects .

some 176 donor and recipient nations , including the united states , are participants in gef , and meet every four years in a general assembly to agree on funding levels .

international tropical timber organization the international tropical timber organization ( itto ) was founded in 1986 under the auspices of the united nations because of concerns over tropical deforestation .

the organization was derived from the international tropical timber agreement , which provides a framework for tropical timber producing and consuming countries to consult on issues related to international trade of tropical timber , and methods of improving forest management to promote conservation .

the itto has 60 members ( including the united states ) , which together have about 80% of the world's tropical forests and conduct 90% of the global tropical timber trade .

the itto promotes sustainable forest management and forest conservation strategies , and assists tropical member countries in adopting such strategies in timber harvesting projects .

the itto also collects , analyzes , and disseminates data on the production and trade of tropical timber .

united nations reduction in deforestation and forest degradation program ( unredd ) the united states provides expertise to the united nations and other countries for developing global forest carbon accounting systems through unredd and advancing carbon markets .

fs experts in forest inventory and monitoring technology and in carbon cycle modeling have been working with the fao to develop carbon accounting methods for forests worldwide .

these experts are helping international communities determine how governments can be paid for the service of carbon sequestration in forests .

other u.s. agencies are working with the fs to track forest cover worldwide .

in the department of the interior , the u.s. geological survey's data acquisition platform , landsat , provides remotely sensed data that are interpreted using fs forest inventory and monitoring information .

this information can be used by unredd in worldwide applications .

