the international criminal court ( "icc" or "court" ) is the first permanent international court with jurisdiction to prosecute individuals for "the most serious crimes of concern to the international community. .

it sits at the hague in the netherlands but may hold proceedings anywhere in the world .

it is funded primarily by states parties .

the statute of the international criminal court ( the "rome statute" or "statute" ) , which created the icc , established icc jurisdiction over persons who , following the statute's entry into force on july 1 , 2002 , commit certain offenses .

one hundred and ten countries , not including the united states , are states parties to the icc .

since its inception , the icc has received referrals for investigations from three states parties and one referral from the united nations security council .

after receiving referrals , the chief prosecutor carries out a preliminary analysis to determine whether to initiate an investigation .

the chief prosecutor opened investigations into all four of these referred cases .

additionally , in november 2009 , the prosecutor of the icc requested authorization to investigate alleged post - election crimes in kenya without a referral .

this marked the first time that the icc prosecutor has sought to open an investigation on his own initiative instead of by referral .

to date , the court has issued 12 arrest warrants , four of which have resulted in actual arrests .

the icc currently has nine cases before it , although some of the defendants in these cases remain at large .

the icc prosecutor has also announced preliminary , but not formal , investigations into situations in palestine and afghanistan , both of which were ongoing at the date of this report's publication .

the court may impose a period of imprisonment on persons convicted under the rome statute as well as a fine and forfeiture of proceeds , property , and other assets derived from the crime .

this report focuses first on the process by which the office of the prosecutor investigates allegations of war crimes and second on u.s policy toward the icc .

in particular , this report seeks to address the concern that the icc might assert jurisdiction over u.s. nationals by providing insight into ( 1 ) how the icc and prosecutor determine whether the icc has jurisdiction over the situations under preliminary investigation ; ( 2 ) how the prosecutor and icc determine whether a situation would be admissible as a case before the icc ; ( 3 ) the basis for concerns that the icc has the authority to request the surrender of a u.s. national ; and ( 4 ) steps taken by the united states to prevent or deter the icc from exercising jurisdiction over u.s. nationals .

while the u.s. executive branch initially supported the idea of creating an international criminal court and was a major participant at the united nations conference of plenipotentiaries on the establishment of an international criminal court ( "rome conference" ) , which produced the statute , the united states ultimately voted against the statute .

president clinton signed the treaty at the close of 2000 but declared that it contained "significant flaws" and would not be submitted to the senate for ratification "until our fundamental concerns are satisfied. .

the united states stated that its primary objection to the treaty is the potential for the icc to assert jurisdiction over both u.s. civilian policymakers and u.s. soldiers charged with "war crimes" even if the united states does not ratify the rome statute .

following the rome statute's entry into force in 2002 , both president george w. bush's administration and the u.s. congress took several steps to weaken the icc's potential effect on u.s. citizens .

first , the bush administration "unsigned" the rome statute by informing the united nations that the united states did not intend to become a party to the rome statute .

this action released the united states from its treaty obligation to refrain from undermining the rome statute and enabled both congress and the executive branch to take actions that could be perceived as undercutting the rome statute .

additionally , the united states secured a u.n. security council resolution deferring any potential icc prosecution of u.s. personnel involved in international peacekeeping missions ; concluded bilateral immunity agreements to prevent the icc from being able to exercise jurisdiction over u.s. nationals ; and enacted the american servicemembers' protection act .

a detailed explanation of each action is provided below .

the icc office of the prosecutor ( the office ) , which is headed by prosecutor luis moreno - ocampo , is composed of three divisions: the prosecutions division , the jurisdiction complementarity and cooperation division , and the investigations division .

the prosecutor is elected by secret ballot by an absolute majority of the members of the assembly of states parties .

the prosecutor must have "high moral character," competence and extensive practical experience in prosecuting or trying criminal cases , and fluency in one of the six working languages of the court ( arabic , chinese , english , french , russian , and spanish ) .

the prosecutor holds office for a term of nine years and is not eligible for re - election .

the office of the prosecutor is required to act as an independent and separate organ of the court .

it is responsible for ( 1 ) receiving referrals about alleged war crimes and any substantiated information on crimes within the jurisdiction of the court ; ( 2 ) examining these referrals and conducting investigations ; and ( 3 ) conducting prosecutions before the court .

the prosecutor must not participate in any matter in which his impartiality might reasonably be doubted , and he is disqualified from a case if he has previously been involved either in that case before the court or in a case at the national level involving the person being investigated or prosecuted .

if the icc prosecutor decides to prosecute someone , article 89 of the rome statute permits the court to request the arrest and surrender of that person from any country where that person may be found .

however , a country that is not a party to the rome statute is not mandated to comply with such a request .

in addition , article 98 precludes the icc from making a request for the surrender of a person when doing so would require the requested country to act inconsistently with its obligations under international law or international agreements .

relying on this language in article 98 , the united states has frequently entered into international agreements , often referred to as bilateral immunity agreements ( bias ) or article 98 agreements , with states parties that create obligations designed to prevent the icc from proceeding with a request to those states parties for the surrender of a u.s. citizen .

the proliferation of article 98 agreements has triggered a vigorous international debate over when and whether article 98 prevents the icc from requesting that a state party arrest and surrender a person in its territory .

this section of the report seeks to frame and explain that debate .

the vienna convention on the law of treaties ( "vclt" or "vienna convention" ) states that a treaty should be interpreted in accordance with the "ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose. .

however , the debate over the meaning of article 98 in the context of bias suggests that there are conflicting interpretations of the "ordinary terms" of article 98 , and , more specifically , whether article 98 permits icc states parties to enter agreements that protect the citizens of a particular country from being surrendered to the icc .

according to some , the primary intention behind article 98 , and particularly its second paragraph , which explicitly discusses international agreements , was to preserve certain prototypical provisions of status of forces agreements ( sofas ) .

sofas traditionally contain a guarantee that a nation deploying military forces on foreign soil retains primary criminal jurisdiction over its soldiers unless it consents to local prosecution .

advancing that line of thought , the european union ( eu ) has argued that article 98 ( 2 ) only protects from icc interference those international treaty obligations that , like the obligations in traditional sofas , give immunity to persons who are present on the territory of a requested state because they have been sent on official business .

in addition to the negotiating history of article 98 , the eu also draws support from ( 1 ) the vienna convention on the law of treaties , which obliges countries who have signed or otherwise accepted an international agreement pending ratification or formal approval to refrain from acts that would defeat the object and purpose of that agreement ; and ( 2 ) the provisions in the rome statute that require states parties to cooperate with and assist the court .

consequently , the eu has argued that , in deciding whether compliance with a request for surrender would conflict with a country's treaty obligations , the icc may ignore any international treaty obligations that would prevent a member - country from surrendering a person who was not sent to the requested country on official business .

however , this position is potentially complicated by reports that , several years after the rome conference , the head of the u.s. delegation claimed the united states had contemplated the development of bia - type agreements during negotiations on article 98 ( 2 ) .

a second position advanced by the eu and some scholars contends that article 98 was only intended to permit states parties to continue to adhere to obligations imposed by agreements that predated their entry into the icc .

the eu maintains that article 98 ( 2 ) does not extend to agreements that the requested country entered into after signing the rome statute .

the eu commission reached this conclusion largely on the grounds that the concern guiding the negotiations on article 98 was the elimination of any obstacle to ratification that could result from already existing agreements .

scholars who support this position have also pointed to language in an earlier draft of the rome statute that refers only to existing treaty obligations in its description of when an icc request might be barred for conflicting with international obligations .

critics of this position , on the other hand , argue that article 98 applies to all agreements , whether pre or post - dating the rome statute , because the actual ratified language of article 98 ( 2 ) does not contain a limitation regarding the time of the conclusion of the international agreements in question .

the icc has yet to request the surrender of a u.s. citizen from a state party that has entered a bia with the united states .

accordingly , it is unclear whether the court would interpret article 98 of the rome statute as permitting the icc to proceed with a request to surrender when the sending state has entered an agreement that forbids it from honoring the request .

regardless of international and scholarly opinion as to the proper interpretation of article 98 , the rome statute vests the icc with the ultimate legal authority to interpret the requirements and obligations that the statute imposes on states parties .

however , at least one commentator has suggested that the court's decision making does not take place in a vacuum , but , rather , may be affected by predictions about the implementation and practicality of its judgments .

if this is true , the court may consider not only the text and history of the rome statute , but also non - textual concerns , such as whether a request to surrender in the context of a bia would be worth the cost of requiring the sending state to upset its relations with another country and the possibility that the sending state might choose not to honor the icc's request .

if considered , these practicalities could weigh in favor of the u.s. position on the purpose and effect of article 98 .

a shift in the overall u.s. government policy and treatment of the icc is apparent from legislative and executive branch actions in recent years .

as discussed earlier , the united states has based its opposition to the icc on sovereignty concerns , the possibility for overreach by the icc prosecutor , and the desire to protect members of the u.s. armed forces from politically motivated prosecutions before the court .

while these concerns do not seem to have abated , the views of the u.s. government , beginning under the george w. bush administration and continuing under the obama administration , appear to have shifted toward the conclusion that the icc may sometimes serve as a useful tool in bringing perpetrators of the worst atrocities to justice .

in addition , representatives of the obama administration have stated that despite continuing concerns about the court , the united states can best protect and promote its interests through engaging with the icc .

congress , after passing a number of pieces of legislation evincing opposition to the icc and any effect of the court on u.s. individuals or interests , has recently moved to roll back restrictions on u.s. foreign assistance to icc states parties .

although remaining opposed to united states becoming a state party to the rome statute , the bush administration in its second term took actions that evidenced an acceptance of the work and importance of the icc in bringing perpetrators of atrocities to justice .

in its first year , the obama administration was at times supportive of the icc in its statements , and began to engage with the icc , but did not adopt a policy to join the court .

the obama administration has undertaken an interagency review of its icc policy and is expected to complete the review and make public its conclusions sometime in 2010 .

in november 2009 , the united states participated as an observer in the icc's annual assembly of states parties in the hague .

in announcing the decision , stephen rapp , the u.s. ambassador - at - large for war crimes issues , stated , "our government has now made the decision that americans will return to engagement with the icc. .

he insisted , however , that the united states still does not intend to become party to the rome statute at this time .

ambassador rapp specifically mentioned continuing concerns over the possibility that u.s. service members "might be subject to politically inspired prosecutions. .

both ambassador rapp and the state department legal advisor , harold koh , attended the icc assembly of states parties .

in his remarks to the assembly , ambassador rapp asserted that while not a state party to the rome statute , the united states did not at any point abandon its commitment to bringing perpetrators of atrocities to justice , including through international criminal tribunals such as those created by the united nations for crimes committed in the former yugoslavia and rwanda .

he stated that there are instances when only the international community , working together , can ensure justice is done , and cited the u.s. support of and cooperation in the icc's investigation into alleged crimes in darfur .

he also explained the u.s. intention to gain a "better understanding of the issues being considered [by the icc states parties] and the workings of the court. .

ambassador rosemary dicarlo , u.s. alternate representative to the united nations for special political affairs , stated in the security council on december 4 , 2009 , "although the united states is not a party to the rome statute , the united states was pleased to participate last week for the first time as an observer to the assembly of states parties to the rome statute .

this decision reflected the u.s. commitment to engage with the international community on issues that affect our foreign policy interests. .

ambassador rapp has also stated that the united states will participate in the review conference of the rome statute , to take place in kampala , uganda , in may - june 2010 .

at the assembly , he spoke about the possibility of amending the rome statute to include the crime of aggression within the icc's jurisdiction , an issue that will be a topic of discussion at the 2010 review conference .

his remarks reflected the continuing u.s. opposition to inclusion of such a crime within the court's purview , stating that determining and dealing with aggression is the responsibility of the u.n. security council , and that decisions on icc prosecution of aggression could draw the icc "into a political thicket that could threaten its perceived impartiality. .

on march 31 , 2005 , the u.n. security council by a vote of 11 in favor with four members abstaining , including the united states , adopted resolution 1593 , which referred allegations of crimes committed by president omar hassan ahmad al - bashir of sudan to the icc prosecutor .

on july 31 , 2008 , the united states abstained in a council vote on resolution 1828 , which contained language implying that the security council would consider an article 16 deferral of the bashir prosecution under the rome statute .

the obama administration has opposed an article 16 deferral of the prosecution of president bashir .

upon the issuance of the arrest warrant for president bashir , ambassador susan rice , u.s .

permanent representative to the united nations , released a statement calling for restraint from all parties in darfur , and cooperation from the government of sudan .

with regard to the enforcement of the warrant for the arrest of the president of sudan , ambassador rapp stated in his confirmation hearing that it is the obama administration's intent to support icc efforts to enforce the arrest warrant .

the obama administration has also reversed a bush administration policy to oppose language in security council resolutions referring to the icc .

on september 30 , 2009 , the u.n. security council , chaired by u.s. secretary of state hillary clinton , unanimously adopted resolution 1888 , which contains a specific reference to sexual violence crimes listed in the rome statute .

although the obama administration has expressed general support for the icc and has stated that the icc may sometimes service as a useful tool for prosecuting war crimes and other atrocities , the administration has not announced a policy to automatically back every proposed icc investigation and prosecution .

instead , as ambassador rapp stated before the icc assembly of states parties , the united states will support international tribunals when they are necessary to achieve justice , but will continue to place "greatest importance" on helping individual states set up their own systems of justice to deal with the worst atrocities .

the obama administration has treated possible u.s. adherence to the icc statute as a separate issue from its willingness to support the court's work , continuing to cite the security of u.s. armed forces as a stumbling block to the united states joining as a state party to the rome statute .

indications that the obama administration would shift u.s. policy toward the icc were apparent early on , with administration representatives characterizing the icc as a body with potential to provide justice for victims of atrocities .

in response to written questions from senator john kerry prior to her nomination hearing to become secretary of state , hillary clinton stated that the obama administration would end u.s. "hostility" to the icc , and would support the work of the icc .

she stated that the icc had so far operated with "professionalism and fairness," citing the icc's work on cases in darfur , congo , and uganda .

she explained that the obama administration would conduct a full review of the u.s. position on becoming a state party to the rome statute , citing the continuing concern about the security of members of the u.s. armed forces deployed overseas .

in january 2009 , u.n .

ambassador susan rice stated that the icc is "look[ing] to become an important and credible instrument for trying to hold accountable the senior leadership responsible for atrocities committed in the congo , uganda and darfur. .

in august 2009 , secretary of state hillary clinton spoke about the fact that the united states had not become party to the rome statute .

responding to arguments regarding an apparent contradiction between u.s. support for a possible icc investigation into the massacres that marked the 2007 elections in kenya and the u.s. refusal to become party to the rome statute , she stated it is "a great regret" that the united states is not a party to the rome statute , adding , "i think we could have worked out some of the challenges that are raised concerning our membership by our own government , but that has not yet come to pass. .

she asserted , however , that the united states will support the icc in its investigations and prosecutions .

the obama administration has continued to adhere to a policy of encouraging local and national justice systems to take up prosecutions of alleged atrocities , or to create special tribunals within communities where the violence has occurred .

ambassador rapp , during his nomination hearing , stated that the office for war crimes issues is committed to bringing individuals to account for war crimes and other atrocities .

he expressed the u.s. government's continuing preference for local and specialized forms of justice for such crimes , but acknowledged the need for international efforts in some cases: our first preference should be for a process of accountability at the level that is closest to the affected communities .

however , peace and reconciliation can best be assured by a justice system that is independent and has sufficient capacity to hold to account those bearing the greatest responsibility for atrocities .

achieving accountability in different situations will require varying levels of assistance and international participation .

this statement seems to reflect the continuation of the view that the united states will cooperate with the icc when it believes it is a useful forum for bringing criminals to justice , but that it will encourage other special courts or the use of national justice systems when feasible .

this position is , arguably , consistent with the principle of complementarity that underlies the icc because it sees icc involvement as limited to those situations when local justice systems lack the capacity to effectively deal with alleged atrocities .

this approach has been reinforced in obama administration comments concerning specific icc investigations and other proceedings .

with regard to the 2007 election violence in kenya , secretary clinton in august 2009 stated that it is the hope of the united states that kenya can use its own national justice system to bring alleged criminals to justice , therefore negating the need for the icc to conduct prosecutions .

the united states has urged kenya to create a special tribunal to prosecute alleged perpetrators of the violence , but has also urged kenyan officials to cooperate fully with the icc in its investigations into these criminal allegations .

if kenya cannot set up a special tribunal , u.s. diplomatic officials have stated support for action by the icc .

in the democratic republic of the congo ( drc ) , the icc has brought charges against certain military commanders for war crimes , crimes against humanity , and sexual crimes .

the united states has not opposed these cases , but has stated that other mechanisms of justice and accountability are needed in the drc .

some observers have criticized the icc for effectively discouraging the settlement of armed conflicts , arguing that alleged perpetrators of war crimes and other atrocities will lose any incentive to bring hostilities to an end if an icc warrant for their arrest is issued .

in addition , some have criticized the united states and others for negotiating with governments whose representatives are currently wanted by the icc for alleged crimes .

ambassador rapp has addressed these concerns , claiming that while the united states is currently working to achieve a peace settlement with the sudanese government and rebel groups in darfur , for example , such efforts are not "inconsistent with pressing for accountability for those responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law. .

in addition , he stated that the indictments of charles taylor by the special court for sierra leone and of joseph kony by the icc enhanced , rather than hindered , prospects for peace in sierra leone and uganda , respectively .

as explained previously , the united states has executed bias with scores of countries , in the hope of limiting the icc's ability to request that states parties surrender u.s. nationals to the icc .

the united states concluded the most recent bia in 2007 , with montenegro .

crs has located the texts of 96 bias , but there are six additional bias that were reported but not located .

a number of countries have concluded bias with the united states despite not being states parties to the rome statute .

these agreements remain in effect , although , as discussed above , their effectiveness under international law has been questioned .

although several provisions in legislation opposing u.s. adherence to and support for the icc statute remain in effect , recent congresses have eliminated or refrained from renewing sanctions provisions that affect u.s. assistance for countries that are icc states parties .

although these actions could be interpreted as indicating a change in congress's position toward the icc , the changes might also be interpreted as being primarily rooted in a concern that sanctions may have begun to hurt u.s. interests .

enacted in 2002 , section 2007 of the american servicemembers' protection act ( aspa ) prohibited u.s. military assistance to icc states parties .

such assistance was defined in section 2013 ( 13 ) of the act as assistance provided under chapter 2 ( military assistance ) or 5 ( international military education and training , or imet ) of part ii of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended ( faa , p.l .

87-195 ) , as well as credit sales of defense articles or services under section 23 of the arms export control act , as amended ( aeca , p.l .

90-629 ; 22 u.s.c .

ยง 2463 ) .

section 2007 contained a general prohibition on assistance , two bases for presidential waivers of that prohibition , and an exemption from the prohibition .

subsection ( a ) stated that effective one year after the date on which the rome statute enters into force , no u.s. military assistance may be provided to states parties to the icc .

subsection ( b ) provided that the president could waive , without prior notice to congress , the prohibition with regard to a country if he determines and reports to congress that it is in the u.s. national interest to do so .

subsection ( c ) authorized the president to waive , again without prior notice to congress , the prohibition with regard to a country if ( 1 ) the country entered into a bia with the united states and ( 2 ) the president reported the agreement to congress .

subsection ( d ) exempted nato members , designated major non - nato allies ( mnnas ) , and taiwan from the prohibition .

provisions enacted in the 2005 , 2006 , and 2008 foreign operations appropriations bills ( so - called "nethercutt amendment" provisions ) contained similar funding prohibitions for economic support fund ( esf ) assistance to icc states parties: section 574 of the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , 2005 ( fy2005 appropriations act ; division d of p.l .

108-447 ; 118 stat .

3027 ) prohibited economic support fund ( esf ) assistance to icc states parties for funds available through september 30 , 2006 .

section 574 of the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , 2006 ( fy2006 appropriations act ; p.l .

109-102 ; 119 stat .

2229 ) contained the same general esf prohibition for funds available through september 30 , 2007 .

section 671 of the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2008 ( fy2008 appropriations act ; division j of p.l .

110-161 ; 121 stat .

2354 ) prohibited esf assistance for icc states parties with regard to funds available through september 30 , 2009 .

each nethercutt amendment provision differed somewhat from the other two .

section 574 of the fy2005 appropriations act contained a general prohibition on esf assistance , two bases for a presidential waiver of the prohibition , and an exemption from the prohibition .

subsection ( a ) prohibited the use of esf funds to assist a country that is a party to the icc and that has not entered into an article 98 agreement with the united states .

subsection ( b ) authorized the president to waive , without prior notice to congress , this prohibition for nato members , mnnas , or taiwan , if he determines and reports to congress that it is important to u.s. national security interests to do so ( emphasis not in legislation ) .

subsection ( c ) allows the president to waive , without prior notice to congress , the prohibition with regard to a country if the country entered into an agreement with the united states pursuant to article 98 of the rome statute preventing the icc from proceeding against u.s. personnel in such country , and if the president reports to congress on the agreement .

subsection ( d ) provided that the prohibition does not apply to countries otherwise eligible for assistance under the millennium challenge act of 2003 ( mca , title vi of division d of the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 ; p.l .

108-199 ) .

section 574 of the fy2006 appropriations act contained the general prohibition on esf assistance , two bases for a presidential waiver of the prohibition , an exemption from the prohibition in that section , and an additional exemption from the prohibition contained in the nethercutt amendment provision from the 2005 act .

subsection ( a ) provided the identical prohibition on esf funds to icc states parties without an article 98 agreement with the united states .

subsection ( b ) also provided for a presidential determination justifying a waiver of the prohibition , but it required prior notice to congress , included "such other country as he may determine" along with nato members , mnnas , and taiwan as eligible to receive the waiver , and changed the standard from a determination of national security interest to one of national interest .

subsection ( c ) of the fy2006 act provision is similar to that of fy2005 , allowing the president to waive if a country entered an article 98 agreement , except this waiver also became dependent on prior notice to congress .

subsection ( d ) contained the identical exemption from the prohibition for mca - eligible countries .

subsection ( e ) exempted democracy and rule of law programs and activities from the fy2005 nethercutt amendment's prohibition on esf funds to icc states parties .

subsections ( a ) through ( d ) of section 671 of the fy2008 appropriations act were identical to those of section 574 of the fy2006 appropriations act , with the same general prohibition ; national interest waiver eligibility for nato , mnnas , taiwan , and "such other" countries as the president may determine ; article 98 agreement waiver ; and mca - eligible country exemption .

there was no further subsection concerning previous nethercutt amendment provisions .

although section 2007 of aspa and the nethercutt amendment provisions articulated a strong policy of opposition to the icc , in line with the u.s. policy toward the court during much of the bush administration , questions from within the executive branch on the costs and benefits of such sanctions surfaced as early as 2006 .

secretary of state condoleezza rice was quoted as describing the sanctions as akin to "shooting ourselves in the foot" when they prohibited military aid to key u.s. allies .

the 2005 quadrennial defense review characterized apsa's restrictions as a burden on the u.s. military in its efforts to combat terrorism .

in addition , president bush granted nearly 90 waivers of aspa or nethercutt prohibitions during his administration on national interest grounds where no bia was in place , revealing a substantial need to continue military and esf assistance to u.s. partners that were also icc states parties .

a number of members of congress shared the concerns of certain bush administration officials .

in 2006 , congress amended section 2013 ( 13 ) ( a ) of the aspa to remove imet funding from the definition of u.s. military assistance ( section 1222 of division a of the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 , p.l .

109-364 ) .

in 2007 , section 1212 ( a ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l .

110-181 ; 122 stat .

371 ) repealed section 2007 of aspa altogether , thus ending the prohibition on faa military assistance and aeca military credit sales for states parties to the icc .

after being included in the previous three bills , nethercutt amendment language was not included in the most recent foreign operations appropriations legislation ( department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2009 ; division h of p.l .

111-8 ) .

at present , therefore , icc - related prohibitions on military and esf assistance are no longer operative .

to date , no bills have been introduced in the current congress relating to the icc or u.s. becoming party to the rome statute , or participating in or cooperating with the court .

members in the house have proposed non - binding resolutions concerning the icc as it relates to alleged atrocities .

h.res .

867 : this resolution characterizes the goldstone report concerning the 2008-2009 conflict in gaza as biased and unbalanced in its criticism of israel's actions during that conflict .

it calls on president obama to veto "any united nations security council resolution that endorses the contents of this report , seeks to act upon the recommendations contained in this report , or calls on any other international body to take further action regarding this report. .

the goldstone report recommended that the security council refer the gaza case to the icc prosecutor to investigate allegations of war crimes if no prosecutions by national justice systems are undertaken within 6 months .

it passed the house on november 3 , 2009 .

h.res .

241 : this resolution commends the icc for issuing a warrant for the arrest of omar hassan ahmad al - bashir , president of the republic of the sudan .

it was referred to the house foreign affairs committee on march 12 , 2009 .

h.con.res .

97 : this concurrent resolution calls on the president to ( 1 ) support u.n. security council referrals of atrocities to the icc ; ( 2 ) state as u.s. policy a commitment to support the rome statute and to reactivate the united states as signatory to the statute ; ( 3 ) cooperate with icc investigations unless it is not in the u.s. national interest ; ( 4 ) participate as observer at the annual icc assembly of states parties ; ( 5 ) and grant waivers , based on national interest , of prohibitions against assistance and cooperation with the icc .

it was referred to the house foreign affairs committee on april 2 , 2009 .

