the biomass crop assistance program ( bcap ) is intended to assist with some of the feedstock supply challenges facing the cellulosic biofuels industry .

one ongoing hurdle for cellulosic biofuels development and manufacturing is the need for a constant supply of available biomass .

however , the cellulosic biofuels industry has struggled with the quintessential "chicken and egg" problem — investors are reluctant to invest in processing plants based on a technology ( i.e. , the conversion of cellulosic biomass to biofuels ) that has yet to achieve success at a commercial scale , while producers are unwilling to devote land and resources to planting a dedicated biomass crop without nearby biofuels plants to buy it .

in other words , the development of a cellulosic biofuels industry hinges simultaneously on the effective availability and use of new biomass feedstocks .

this report provides a description of bcap's main components — annual & establishment payments , matching payments , and project areas — as outlined in usda's final rule , along with a discussion of program funding and implementation issues .

initially bcap's chst matching payments raised questions and concerns about feedstock eligibility , sustainability , and the slow development of cellulosic biofuels .

some of these issues were addressed by the 2014 farm bill .

they are briefly reviewed here for historical context .

defining what is considered an eligible material or eligible crop under bcap became somewhat contentious during the early years of implementation .

by 2010 , concerns had surfaced about eligible material creating direct competition with existing uses through the chst matching payments .

others have expressed concerns about allowing certain fast - growing non - native plants to be included as eligible crops .

many of the issues that initially arose around bcap have been addressed , and so have become less acute over time .

among lingering issues is a concern that a number of grasses that are considered invasive species , and that also have favorable characteristics as energy crops , may in theory have the potential to cause economic and environmental damage in spite of efforts to prevent such an outcome .

another concern centers on the continued slow development of a commercial - scale cellulosic biofuels industry that bcap was meant to support .

a summary of issues related to eligible crops and materials follows .

in early 2010 , after usda's 2009 notice on chst matching payments , some manufacturing and nursery industries that use wood shavings , wood chips , sawdust , and other wood "scraps" noticed an increase in price for their raw materials .

this increase was linked , by some , to the chst matching payments , which offered a federal payment match for the same materials if delivered to a qualified biomass conversion facility .

the chst matching payment of up to $45 per ton created an incentive for material owners to sell to biomass facilities rather than to manufacturers that use the same raw materials for products such as composite panels , particle board , and fiberboard , or to nurseries and landscaping firms that use bark and wood chips for mulch .

renewable biomass harvested from the national forest system and other public land is subject to a statutory provision that prohibits material that would otherwise be used for higher - value products .

this prohibition , however , did not initially apply to renewable biomass harvested from private land .

in usda's initial proposed rule ( february 8 , 2010 ) , such biomass remained eligible for chst matching payments , largely because the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) did not specifically prohibit biomass that would have otherwise been used for higher - value products produced on private land .

however , based on the initial reaction to the chst matching payments , usda expanded the public land restriction to private land as well .

therefore , all biomass material that would otherwise be used for higher - value products , from either public or private sources , is considered ineligible under usda's final rule .

in an effort to enforce this division between higher - value products , in its final rule ( october 27 , 2010 ) usda added the requirement that "eligible material be directly harvested from the land " in accordance with an approved conservation plan , forest stewardship plan , or equivalent plan ; be separated from a higher - value product ; and not be classified as a higher - value product by usda .

for example , wood chips are considered eligible material if they are collected directly from the land .

therefore , wood chips collected from delivered and processed trees after the trees are delivered to pulp and paper facilities do not qualify .

however , wood chips created in the field from diseased trees for ease of transport to a biomass conversion facility are eligible for matching payments .

another example would be corn cobs as an eligible material .

if corn cobs are separated from the higher - value product ( i.e. , corn kernels ) in the field and the cobs are then collected as residue in accordance with a conservation plan and delivered to a conversion facility they are considered eligible for matching payment .

if the corn cobs are collected at a vegetable processing facility after being delivered and separated from the higher - value product , they are not considered eligible .

this is considered incidental to the normal marketing of the crop and not representative of the collection or harvesting of biomass that would not otherwise be collected .

while manufacturing industries that use wood residue offered the greatest opposition to chst matching payments as published under the usda notice , those in the lumber industry that were receiving higher prices also questioned the sustainability of the provision .

some in the biomass industry highlight the temporary nature of the chst matching payments ( maximum two years ) , and hope that future implementation will focus on the bcap annual and establishment payments , which are longer - term .

as mentioned earlier , in its final rule for the bcap program , usda announced a re - prioritization of program funds that emphasized annual and establishment payments , especially under existing contracts , over chst matching payments .

in addition , the 2014 farm bill lowered the maximum chst payment rate per ton to $20 , in part , to further minimize any incentive or preference away from existing uses .

others questioned usda's ability to distinguish between high - value product material and renewable biomass material in the future , despite the language in the final rule requiring it to be harvested directly from the land .

some believe the fungible nature of wood could continue to generate competition between wood - based product output and renewable energy production .

the 2014 farm bill explicitly addressed this issue in section 9010 , where the definition of "eligible material" in previous law was rewritten to include the following exclusion: " ( vi ) any woody eligible material collected or harvested outside contract acreage that would otherwise be used for existing market products. .

finally , the watchdog group taxpayers for common sense has asserted that the great majority of facilities for chst payments are in the mature wood products industry , with relatively few participating facilities utilizing alternative biomass sources , such as municipal waste and bioenergy crops , in the production of advanced biofuels .

some have expressed concern that eligibility criteria for materials and crops under bcap may conflict with practices aimed at limiting the introduction of invasive and noxious species .

others , including usda , praise invasive and noxious species' inclusion in bcap as an incentive to further eradication efforts .

the bcap program provides separate definitions of eligible material and eligible crops .

eligible crop criteria apply to the annual and establishment payments portion of bcap and eligible material criteria refer to bcap's chst matching payments .

invasive and noxious species are considered ineligible as crops for bcap's annual and establishment payments , but are not excluded as eligible material under bcap's chst matching payments .

the inclusion of invasive and noxious species as eligible material has generated both concern and interest in the environmental community .

some note that while the incentive for removal is praiseworthy , such removal could have the unintended consequence of perpetuating the species .

usda's final rule addresses this concern by excluding removal and transportation during reproductive periods and requiring removal be in accordance with a new or amended conservation plan , forest stewardship plan , or equivalent plan .

if a material owner violates the current federal standards for noxious weeds , then all matching payments must be repaid .

according to usda , removal costs associated with spreading or establishing an invasive or noxious species while carrying out the activities to receive a matching payment are "outside the scope of bcap" and would rely on state and other federal laws for penalties .

several plant traits of an ideal biomass crop are also commonly found among invasive grasses: low energy requirements for maintenance ; efficient use of light , water , and nutrients ; perennial growth ; and high yields .

based on comments received from usda's proposed rule , crops of species such as giant miscanthus , pennycress , and black locust may be considered eligible energy crops .

many of these are non - native , fast - growing , perennial grass or trees that some consider an ideal energy crop for many of the reasons stated above .

others are concerned that non - sterile varieties can become invasive and noxious or that genetically engineered ( ge ) varieties could result in hybridization with wild relatives , resulting in invasive or noxious species causing economic and ecological damage .

some states include varieties of these species on statewide noxious weed listings .

in these states , they would be ineligible as a crop under usda's final rule ; however , there is continued concern that the plant's introduction as a crop could have unintended consequences , given that the usda final rule does not distinguish between the sterile varieties and non - sterile varieties .

even the bcap final programmatic environmental impact statement ( fpeis ) highlights potential issues associated with the introduction of ge species and non - native varieties for use as biomass crops .

to prevent the spread of invasive or noxious species , usda is relying on thorough , site - specific environmental evaluation of a project area prior to selection .

this could potentially slow implementation of the program or impose costs on biomass producers .

in 2009 , concerns emerged about "black liquor" meeting the definition of renewable material under bcap , and thus potentially qualifying for chst matching payments .

black liquor is a waste product from the paper production process composed of mostly organic lignin and inorganic pulping chemicals , and has long been used in the pulp and paper industry as a source of energy .

an existing alternative fuel excise tax credit targeting blends of biofuels with petroleum products for transportation purposes was expanded under the 2007 energy independence and security act ( eisa ; p.l .

110-140 ) to include alternative fuels used by non - transportation industries .

as a result , paper companies , who were already using black liquor for processing energy at the treatment plant , by including a small mixture of diesel were now able to claim their black liquor as a biofuel that qualified for the biofuel excise tax credit .

according to news reports , the black liquor loophole cost taxpayers over $4 billion in 2009 .

a provision in the enacted health care bill ( p.l .

111-148 ) disqualified black liquor from eligibility as of january 1 , 2010 .

usda's final rule for bcap states that black liquor is considered an industrial waste by - product and therefore is not eligible under bcap .

despite this declaration , those in favor of black liquor's inclusion as an eligible source object to usda's reasoning that black liquor is made from "inorganic" material , citing that "neither the statute nor the bcap eligible materials list requires that eligible biomass actually originate directly from the land. .

the 2008 farm bill definition of "eligible material" simply referred to renewable biomass as: " ( a ) in general. — the term 'eligible material means renewable biomass .

the 2014 farm bill explicitly addressed this issue in section 9010 by adding precision to the definition of "eligible material" as follows: " ( a ) in general. — the term 'eligible material means renewable biomass harvested directly from the land ... .

bcap has a dual purpose of establishing new dedicated biomass crops for bioenergy production ( annual and establishment payments ) and increasing the collection of existing and underutilized biomass for bioenergy production ( matching payments ) .

the latter purpose — incentives for biomass removal in areas where it is possible but not currently profitable — is a key factor for the forestry sector .

the removal of hazardous wildfire fuels and invasive species could provide biomass for renewable energy conversion rather than being disposed of in ways that contribute additional carbon to the atmosphere .

in addition to biomass removal from forestland , crop residue is also considered to be viable biomass for renewable energy production .

following harvest , the remaining plant , or residue , can be left on the ground for soil health , erosion and weed control , water quality , and nutrient management .

many federal conservation programs provide financial assistance for practices that increase crop residue retention on the land , because of the environmental benefits .

the bcap payments to remove this residue for bioenergy production have caused some to question whether this is a duplication of the federal effort and is counterproductive .

soil scientists in particular are concerned that the benefits to bioenergy would not outweigh the potential soil and environmental concerns associated with the removal of crop residue and caution against removing too much residue in sensitive areas .

dedicated biomass crops , such as switchgrass , hybrid poplars , and hybrid willows , are considered by many to be more desirable crops because they have a short rotation ( re - grow quickly after each harvest ) and use fewer resources , such as water and fertilizers , than traditional field crop production .

compared with field crops such as corn , dedicated biomass crops are also thought to have less impact on available food supplies .

despite potential environmental benefits , concerns persist about the additional use of fertilizers and water resources that could be required to increase the per - acre yields for these crops to become economically feasible .

the potential development of a cellulosic - based ethanol industry is presently impeded by the state of cellulosic conversion technology , which has been slow to move production from laboratory setting to commercial scale and which is thought to be expensive relative to corn - based production .

in addition , u.s. ethanol production now appears to have hit the "blend wall" — the potential inability of the domestic market to absorb ethanol above a 10% share of domestic gasoline fuels .

however , the enormous potential supply of low - cost cellulosic plant material available in the united states makes it an attractive prospective feedstock and helps to explain the continuing interest in it among policy makers .

the 2014 farm bill energy title provides nearly $1.5 billion in financial incentives and support to encourage the production and use of advanced ( mainly cellulosic ) biofuels , including the $125 million in mandatory funding for bcap .

grants and loan guarantees leverage industry investments in new technologies and infrastructure , as well as in the production of cellulosic feedstocks .

however , bcap is the principal program designed to help "kick start" the u.s. cellulosic biofuels sector .

bcap attempts to remove some of the risk for biomass growers by supporting the production of dedicated crop and forest cellulosic feedstocks and by providing incentives for harvest and post - production storage and transport .

despite government support for bcap and other related federal programs , the cellulosic ethanol sector has been slow to develop .

prior to the startup of several commercial - scale facilities earlier this year , including the poet - dsm project liberty plant in iowa and the abengoa sa plant in kansas , only small volumes of cellulosic ethanol had been produced by a few small refineries ( mostly pilot or demonstration in scope ) .

due to the slow progress in establishing a commercial - scale cellulosic ethanol industry , epa has been compelled to substantially reduce the cellulosic biofuel rfs mandates set by congress for the years 2010 through 2014 .

the epa waiver of the cellulosic biofuels rfs for five consecutive years , coupled with reduced bcap funding under the 2014 farm bill , and the congressional climate of budget austerity , likely has increased the uncertainty associated with the future investments needed to kick - start this sector .

