the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) is an agency within the department of defense with both military and civil works responsibilities .

for its civil works mission , congress directs the agency through authorizations , appropriations , and oversight of the agency's study , construction , and ongoing operations of water resource projects .

the agency's civil works responsibilities are principally to support navigation , reduce flood and storm damage , and protect and restore aquatic ecosystems .

the corps attracts congressional attention because its projects can have significant local and regional economic benefits and environmental effects .

the civil works program is led by a civilian assistant secretary of the army for civil works , who reports to the secretary of the army .

a military chief of engineers oversees the agency's civil and military operations and reports on civil works matters to the assistant secretary for civil works .

a director of civil works reports to the chief of engineers .

the agency's civil works responsibilities are organized under eight divisions that are further divided into 38 districts .

this report provides an overview of the corps water resource activities , including congressional authorization and appropriations .

the report also covers the standard project development process for corps projects and other corps activities and authorities .

congress generally authorizes corps activities prior to funding those activities .

the authorization can be project - specific , programmatic , or general .

authorizations by themselves are usually insufficient for the corps to proceed with a study or construction project ; agency action on an authorization often requires funding .

the corps is typically funded through congressional appropriations provided in the annual energy and water development appropriations bill .

because the rate of corps authorizations exceeds the rate of the agency's annual appropriations , only a subset of authorized activities typically are included in the president's budget request and eventually funded by enacted appropriations .

this situation results in competition for funds among authorized activities during the budget and appropriations processes .

in mid - 2017 , the estimated total for authorized corps construction activities was $75 billion .

to concentrate limited resources and move ongoing projects toward completion , budget requests by the george w. bush , obama , and trump administrations focused funding on projects near completion and limited the initiation of new studies and construction projects .

these administrations also focused requested funds on projects within the agency's primary missions of flood and storm damage reduction , navigation , and aquatic ecosystem restoration .

over the last decade , enacted annual corps civil works appropriations ( excluding supplemental appropriations ) have remained steady or increased slightly , ranging from $4.5 billion to nearly $6.0 billion , whereas the president's request consistently has been less than the final enacted amount .

congress appropriated $6.0 billion to the corps for fy2017 in p.l .

115-31 .

recent trends in corps budget requests and enacted appropriations are shown below in figure 1 .

the congressional authorization and the appropriations processes are critical actions in a multi - step process to deliver a corps project .

this section describes the standard study and construction process for most corps projects , and it provides some exceptions to the standard process .

the standard process consists of the following basic steps: congressional study authorization is obtained in a wrda or other legislation .

the corps performs a feasibility study if funds are appropriated .

congressional construction authorization is pursued .

the corps can perform preconstruction engineering and design while awaiting construction authorization if funds are appropriated .

congress authorizes construction in wrda or other legislation , and the corps constructs the project if funds are appropriated .

the process is not automatic .

appropriations are required to perform studies and construction ; that is , congressional study and construction authorizations are necessary but alone are insufficient for the corps to pursue a project .

major steps in the process are shown in figure 3 .

for most activities , the corps also needs a nonfederal sponsor to share the study and construction costs .

since wrda 1986 ( p.l .

99-662 ) , nonfederal sponsors have been responsible for a significant portion of the financing of studies , construction , and o&m of most projects .

nonfederal sponsors generally are state , tribal , county , or local agencies or governments .

although sponsors typically need to have some taxing authority , some corps activities can be cost shared with nonprofit and other entities ; a few authorities allow for private entities as partners .

generally , projects take longer than shown in table 1 because some steps require congressional authorization before they can begin and action on each step is subject to the availability of appropriations .

wrrda 2014 expanded and consolidated the authorities for nonfederal entities to both perform studies and construct projects ( or elements of projects ) that typically would be undertaken by the corps and for the cost of these nonfederal - led studies and construction to be shared by the federal government largely as if the corps had performed them .

while nonfederal study and project delivery may increase under these authorities , the process described herein is the standard corps process in which the corps is the manager of the study and project , and the nonfederal sponsor contributes a portion of the costs and associated real estate , easements , etc .

although the project delivery process described above is standard , there are exceptions .

the corps has some general authorities to undertake small projects , technical assistance , and emergency actions .

congress also has specifically authorized the corps to undertake numerous municipal water and wastewater projects .

these exceptions are described below .

the agency's authorities to undertake small projects are called continuing authorities programs ( caps ) .

projects under these authorities can be conducted without project - specific congressional study or construction authorization or project - specific appropriations ; these activities are performed at the discretion of the corps .

for most cap authorities , congress has limited the project size and scope as shown in table 3 .

the caps typically are referred to by the section number in the bill in which the cap was first authorized .

wrrda 2014 requires the assistant secretary of the army to publish prioritization criteria for the caps and an annual cap report .

congress also has granted the corps some general authorities to provide technical assistance and assistance specifically for tribes .

the corps does not need project - specific authority to undertake activities that are eligible under the authorities listed in table 4 .

for assistance for presidentially declared disasters pursuant to the stafford act ( p.l .

93-288 ) , the corps may be tasked with performing various response and recovery activities that are funded through the disaster relief fund , and performed at the direction of the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) and the president and the request of the governor of a state or territory with an affected area .

under the national response framework , the corps coordinates emergency support for public works and engineering .

this includes technical assistance , engineering , and construction management as well as emergency contracting , power , and repair of public water and wastewater and solid waste facilities .

the corps also assists in monitoring and stabilizing damaged structures and demolishing structures designated as immediate hazards to public health and safety .

the agency also provides technical assistance in clearing , removing , and disposing of contaminated and uncontaminated debris from public property , and establishing ground and water routes into affected areas ; contaminated debris management is coordinated with the u.s. environmental protection agency .

in addition to work performed as part of the national response framework , congress has given the corps its own emergency response authority .

this authority is commonly referred to as the agency's p.l .

84-99 authority , based on the act in which it was originally authorized , the flood control and coastal emergency act .

p.l .

84-99 ( 33 u.s.c .

§701n ) authorizes the corps to perform emergency response and disaster assistance .

p.l .

84-99 authorizes disaster preparedness , advance measures , emergency operations ( disaster response and post - flood response ) , rehabilitation of certain damaged flood control works , protection or repair of certain federally authorized shore protection works threatened by coastal storms , emergency dredging , and flood - related rescue operations .

these activities are limited to actions to save lives and protect improved property ( public facilities / services and residential or commercial developments ) .

the corps also has some authorities to assist with select activities during drought .

most of the agency's emergency response work ( including the repair program described below ) generally is funded through supplemental appropriations provided directly to the corps .

until supplemental appropriations are provided , congress has provided the corps with authority to transfer money from ongoing corps projects to emergency operations ( 33 u.s.c .

§701n ) .

in p.l .

84-99 , congress also authorized the corps to rehabilitate damaged flood control works ( eg , levees ) and federally constructed hurricane or shore protection projects ( eg , federal beach nourishment projects ) and to conduct related inspections .

this authority is referred to as the rehabilitation and inspection program ( rip ) .

to be eligible for rehabilitation assistance , the project must be in active status at the time of damage by wind , wave , or water action other than ordinary nature .

active rip status is maintained by proper project maintenance as determined during an annual or semiannual inspection and by the correction of deficiencies identified during periodic inspections .

approximately 14,000 miles of levees participate in rip: 2,250 miles of locally constructed and operated levees ; 9,650 miles of corps - constructed , locally operated levees ; and 2,100 miles of federally operated levees .

for locally constructed projects , 80% of the cost to repair the damage is paid using federal funds and 20% by the levee owner .

for federally constructed projects , the repair cost is entirely a federal responsibility ( except for cost of obtaining the sand or other material used in the repair ) .

for damage to be repaired , the corps must determine that repair has a favorable benefit - cost ratio .

local sponsors assume any rehabilitation cost for damage to an active project attributable to deficient maintenance .

wrda 2016 allows that in conducting repair or restoration work under rip , an increase in the level of protection can be made if the nonfederal sponsor pays for the additional protection .

since 1992 , congress has authorized and provided for corps assistance with design and construction of municipal drinking water and wastewater infrastructure projects .

this assistance has included treatment facilities , such as recycling and desalination plants ; distribution and collection works , such as stormwater collection and recycled water distribution ; and surface water protection and development projects .

this assistance is broadly labeled environmental infrastructure at the corps .

although no administration has included environmental infrastructure in a corps budget request since the first congressional authorization in 1992 , congress regularly includes corps environmental infrastructure funds in appropriations bills .

environmental infrastructure assistance at times has been called out by various administrations and others as a low priority for the corps , in part because other federal and state agencies have programs for which these projects may be eligible ( eg , u.s. environmental protection agency's state revolving funds ) .

most corps environmental infrastructure assistance is authorized for a specific geographic location ( eg , city , county , multiple counties ) under section 219 of wrda 1992 ( p.l .

102-580 ) , as amended ; however , other similar authorities , sometimes covering regions or states , exist in multiple sections of wrdas and in select energy and water development appropriations acts .

the nature of the involvement of the corps ( i.e. , a grant from the corps to the project owner or the corps acting as the construction project manager ) and nonfederal cost - share varies according to the specifics of the authorization .

most corps environmental infrastructure assistance requires cost sharing , typically designated at 75% federal and 25% nonfederal ; however , some of the assistance authorities are for 65% federal and 35% nonfederal cost sharing .

under section 219 , the corps performs the authorized work ; for environmental infrastructure projects authorized in other provisions , the corps often can use appropriated funds to reimburse nonfederal sponsors for work they perform .

since 1992 , congress has authorized the corps to contribute assistance to more than 400 of these projects and to state and regional programs , with authorizations of appropriations totaling more than $5 billion .

wrrda 2014 expanded authorizations and authorization of appropriations for specific environmental infrastructure activities in multiple states .

the corps received $140 million for environmental infrastructure assistance in fy2010 and $200 million in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

the obama administration did not fund any environmental infrastructure activities in its fy2013 work plan .

congress recommended $44 million for environmental infrastructure assistance in fy2014 , $50 million for fy2015 , and $55 million for each of fy2016 and fy2017 .

because environmental infrastructure activities are not traditional corps water resources projects , they are not subject to the corps planning process ( eg , a benefit - cost analysis is not performed , a feasibility report is not produced ) .

the corps environmental infrastructure assistance activities , however , are subject to federal laws , such as the national environmental policy act .

the civil responsibilities of the u.s. army corps of engineers began with creating and regulating navigable channels and flood control projects .

navigation projects include river deepening , channel widening , lock expansion , dam operations , and disposal of dredged material .

flood control projects are intended to reduce riverine and coastal storm damage ; these projects range from levees and floodwalls to dams and river channelization .

many corps projects are multipurpose — that is , they provide water supply , recreation , and hydropower in addition to navigation or flood control .

its environmental activities involve wetlands and aquatic ecosystem restoration and environmental mitigation activities for corps facilities .

the agency's regulatory responsibility for navigable waters extends to issuing permits for private actions that might affect wetlands and other waters of the united states .

navigation and flood control ( 1802-1950s ) in the 19 th century , the agency's mission evolved into civil and military building for the nation .

in 1824 , congress passed legislation charging military engineers with planning roads and canals to move goods and people .

in 1850 , congress directed the corps to engage in its first planning exercise — flood control for the lower mississippi river .

during the 1920s , congress expanded the agency's ability to incorporate hydropower into multipurpose projects and authorized the agency to undertake comprehensive surveys to establish river - basin development plans .

the modern era of federal flood control emerged with the flood control act of 1936 ( 49 stat .

1570 ) , which declared flood control a "proper" federal activity in the national interest .

the 1944 flood control act ( 33 u.s.c .

§708 ) significantly augmented the agency's involvement in large multipurpose projects and authorized agreements for the temporary use of surplus water .

the flood control act of 1950 ( 33 u.s.c .

§701n ) began the agency's emergency operations through authorization for flood preparedness and emergency operations .

the water supply act of 1958 ( 43 u.s.c .

§390b ) gave the corps authority to include some reservoir storage for municipal and industrial water supply in reservoir projects at 100% nonfederal cost .

changing priorities ( 1960-1986 ) by the late 1960s , construction of major waterworks had declined .

changing national priorities and local needs , increasing construction costs , and completed projects at most prime locations decreased the attractiveness of additional water projects .

water supply for traditional off - stream uses , such as domestic , commercial , industrial , and agricultural uses , was increasingly in direct competition with in - stream uses , such as recreation , fisheries , and wildlife habitat .

from 1970 to 1985 , congress authorized no major water projects , scaled back several authorized projects , and passed laws that altered project operations and water delivery programs to protect the environment .

the 1970s marked a transformation in corps project planning .

the 1969 national environmental policy act and the endangered species act of 1973 ( 16 u.s.c .

§1531 ) required federal agencies to consider environmental impacts , increase public participation in planning , and consult with other federal agencies .

executive orders ( e.o .

11988 and e.o .

11990 ) united the goals of reducing flood losses and environmental damage by recognizing the value of wetlands and required federal agencies to evaluate potential effects of actions on floodplains and to minimize impacts on wetlands .

environmental mission and local responsibility ( 1986-2000 ) congress fundamentally transformed the rules for corps water projects and their funding through wrda 1986 ( 33 u.s.c .

§2211 ) ; it established new cost - share formulas , resulting in greater financial and decisionmaking roles for local stakeholders .

wrda 1986 reestablished the tradition of biennial consideration of an omnibus corps civil works authorization bill .

wrda 1986 also provided the corps with authority to determine if changes can be made in existing structures or operations to improve environmental quality .

wrda 1990 ( 33 u.s.c .

§§1252 , 2316 ) explicitly expanded the agency's mission to include environmental protection and increased its responsibility for contamination cleanup , dredged material disposal , and hazardous waste management .

wrda 1992 ( 33 u.s.c .

§2326 ) authorized the corps to use the "spoils" from dredging in implementing projects for protecting , restoring , and creating aquatic and ecologically related habitats , including wetlands .

wrda 1996 ( 33 u.s.c .

§2330 ) gave the corps the authority to undertake aquatic ecosystem restoration projects .

while the corps has been involved with numerous environmental restoration projects in recent years , wrda 2000 approved a restoration program for the florida everglades that represented the agency's first multiyear , multibillion - dollar effort of this type .

these legislative changes gave the corps an aquatic ecosystem restoration and environmental protection mission .

evolving demands and processes ( 2001-present ) the agency's aging infrastructure and efforts to enhance the security of its infrastructure from terrorism and natural threats have expanded corps activities in infrastructure rehabilitation , maintenance , and protection .

wrda 2007 continued the expansion of the agency's ecosystem restoration activities by authorizing billions of dollars for ecosystem restoration activities , including large - scale efforts in coastal louisiana and in the upper mississippi river .

the corps also retooled its long - standing flood control mission to use a flood risk management approach .

this was undertaken in response to congressional direction in wrda 2007 and disasters like hurricanes katrina , rita , ike , and sandy and significant floods in the midwest .

this approach emphasizes a greater appreciation for the shared responsibilities across levels of government for managing flood risks and damages .

the regularity with which the corps has received significant congressional appropriations for natural disaster response has increased attention to its role in emergency response , infrastructure repair , and post - disaster recovery .

wrrda 2014 expanded opportunities for nonfederal ( including private ) participation in project delivery and financing and aimed to improve the efficiency of corps planning activities .

congress resumed the biennial enactment of wrda legislation with wrda 2016 and used some of the processes established by wrrda 2014 for identifying studies and projects to authorize in wrda 2016 .

wrda 2016 authorized projects within the agency's primary mission areas as well as continued or expanded corps involvement in regional restoration efforts in various locations across the nation .

