on may 10 , 2010 , president obama nominated solicitor general elena kagan to replace retiring justice john paul stevens .

if confirmed , elena kagan would be the first serving solicitor general to be appointed to the court since the elevation of thurgood marshall in 1967 .

she would also be only the fifth of 111 justices to come to the bench with such experience .

given that solicitor general kagan has made few public statements on important legal and policy issues , some have looked to her record as solicitor general for some indication of her views .

others have looked to her time as solicitor general as an important element of her professional experience , especially in light of the criticism of some that her lack of judicial and litigation experience make her unqualified to sit on the bench .

understanding the role and responsibilities of the solicitor general can provide a useful backdrop against which to evaluate elena kagan's statements and official actions and assess her professional qualifications .

this report examines both the office of the solicitor general and the justices who held that position before their elevation to the court .

first , the duties and responsibilities of the solicitor general are discussed .

next , scholarly studies of the relationship between the solicitor general and supreme court are examined .

this research , conducted by political science and legal scholars , posits theoretical foundations and presents empirical evidence to explain the nature of the relationship between the court and the solicitor general's office .

in each of these sections , particular attention is paid to the claim that a "special relationship" exists between the court and the office of the solicitor general .

for those trying to assess the meaning of statements made by elena kagan in her capacity as solicitor general , the discussion in these two sections may help place her comments and actions in context .

after examining the office of the solicitor general and its success before the court , the report describes the professional careers of the four justices who served as solicitor general before joining the court: william howard taft , stanley reed , robert jackson , and thurgood marshall .

information on each justice's senate confirmation process is provided , with a focus on any relevant questions or issues that emerged in response to that justice's service as solicitor general .

the final section of the report examines the career of elena kagan , noting in particular her service as solicitor general .

as the current holder of this office , elena kagan is ultimately responsible for the government's appellate litigation before the supreme court .

if confirmed , it is possible that she would have to recuse herself from a number cases in which the government took part during the supreme court term beginning in october 2010 .

accordingly , the conditions under which elena kagan may have to recuse herself are discussed .

the position of solicitor general was created in 1870 at the same time as the department of justice .

the solicitor general is the only federal public official required by statute to be "learned in the law. .

the solicitor general , who is nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate , is responsible for assisting the attorney general with the performance of the duties of his or her office , principally focusing on appellate litigation .

to date , 45 individuals have served as solicitor general .

the office of the solicitor general also employs four deputy solicitors general , four recent law school graduates serving as legal fellows , and a small support staff .

the office of the solicitor general is generally responsible for coordinating executive branch litigation at all levels of appeal and representing the executive branch in litigation before the supreme court .

while the solicitor general is appointed by the president , his or her client is seen to be the united states , and he or she is expected to represent the "interests" of that client during litigation .

in some cases , this may give rise to disagreements between attorneys in the white house and the solicitor general's office .

what is even more unique about the solicitor general , however , is that the office , by tradition , has been assigned the added responsibility of attending to the needs of the supreme court .

because the department of justice has primary responsibility for litigation on behalf of the executive branch and the various agencies , the supreme court relies on the solicitor general to help it screen out unnecessary litigation and to serve as a "gatekeeper" for the court .

due to this additional responsibility , the solicitor general has often been referred to as the "tenth justice. .

given this responsibility to the supreme court , the solicitor general has been seen to have the discretion to pursue his or her own legal agenda , and that the office should , although may not always , be insulated from presidential control or pressure .

there appears to be a general consensus that the independence of the solicitor general's office would be seriously undermined if the policy goals of an administration were consistently permitted to influence the solicitor general's decision making regarding the litigation posture of the united states .

the office of the solicitor general performs a number of different tasks which can influence the supreme court's agenda .

the four main tasks include ( 1 ) screening federal cases in which the united states was the losing party to determine which cases to appeal to the federal courts of appeal or the supreme court ; ( 2 ) submitting briefs to and arguing before the supreme court in cases in which the united states is a direct party ; ( 3 ) filing briefs for and against granting certiorari in cases not directly involving the united states ; and ( 4 ) filing amicus curiae briefs in cases in which the united states is not a direct party .

the task of determining which federal cases to present to the supreme court is probably the most significant power exercised by the solicitor general .

the office of the solicitor general must authorize any certiorari petitions filed by the government , and the office will draft these petitions , file briefs on the merits , and perform oral argument .

nearly 800 government cases are submitted annually to the solicitor general as potential cases for appeal or certiorari , and the solicitor general chooses between 60 and 80 to bring before the court .

traditionally , the court has accorded significant deference to the decisions by the solicitor general as to when to seek a writ of certiorari , so that between 70% and 80% of the cases presented by the federal government to the supreme court are accepted .

the court , recognizing the importance of the office in its gatekeeping functions , has stated , "[w]e depend heavily on the solicitor general in deciding whether to grant certiorari in cases in which the government is a party. .

the solicitor general also controls any amicus curiae filings by the united states .

since the office is free to choose which side to support , these filings are more likely to be directed toward developing areas of law in a chosen direction rather than protecting the interests of the united states .

unlike others seeking to file an amicus brief , the solicitor general is not required to obtain the permission of the court or the parties before making such a filing , thus enhancing the ability of the solicitor general to choose which cases to join .

while the solicitor general can become amicus to a case on his or her own initiative , she is reported to limit the filing of an amicus brief to those cases where she believes it is important that the view of the united states be represented .

on occasion , the supreme court will invite the solicitor general to submit an amicus brief .

in both cases , the amicus brief is seen as an important way for the president and the executive branch to communicate their desires to the court with respect to policy positions and willingness to support the court's decision .

in general , the solicitor general is very successful in amicus filing , supporting the prevailing side between 75% to 90% of the time .

among all executive officers , the solicitor general has distinct advisory and cooperative responsibilities with respect to the supreme court .

the "special relationship" resulting from these obligations contributes to much of the solicitor general's success .

as stated by one former supreme court law clerk , "the court looks at the [solicitor general] as more than just a litigant. .

as mentioned above , although the solicitor general is accountable to the attorney general and serves at the pleasure of the president , the solicitor general needs to be attuned to the institutional interests both the executive and judicial branches .

this commitment to the court fosters a relationship founded on "mutual need and interdependence. .

according to one scholar , "solicitors [g]eneral make their decisions on the basis of what they believe the court will accept and do not overburden the judicial branch with numerous petitions .

the court recognizes the needs of the executive branch and rules in its favor when the [s]olicitor [g]eneral claims a valid governmental interest. .

the court also grants privileges to the solicitor general that it does not extend to other attorneys , such as the ability to file an amicus brief without the consent of the parties .

in response , the solicitor general engages in practices , such as confessing error , that signal the office's commitment to the court .

the solicitor general may choose to confess error , meaning that she recommends that the court overturn a "flawed" decision , in a case when she feels that a lower court decision in favor of the government is unjust or unfair .

according to one scholar , "[m]ost confessions of error involve criminal convictions , and happen for a range of reasons: a jury was selected unfairly ; a judge gave faulty instructions to the jury before asking its members to reach a verdict ; [or] there was scant evidence supporting the verdict. .

former solicitor general archibald cox , when discussing the practice of confessing error , noted , it tests the strength of our belief that the office has a peculiar responsibility to the court.. .

it affects the way all our other cases are presented .

if we are willing to take a somewhat disinterested and wholly candid position even when it means surrendering a victory , then all our other cases will be presented with a greater degree of candor , and with a longer view , perhaps , than otherwise .

given the loyalty of the solicitor general's office to the court , some scholars argue , the court has placed a great deal of confidence and trust in the judgment of the solicitor general's office .

this trust is more centrally reflected in the office's impressive success rate in securing review for and winning on the merits in the cases supported by the office .

individuals who have clerked in the office expressed the sentiment that the solicitor general "did not waste his capital on bringing up a poor case" and "was very careful not to squander his reputation with the court. .

some observers of the court argue , however , that the relationship between the court and the office of the solicitor general is not a function of a "special relationship," but the skill of the office's advocates .

to be sure , supreme court justices have been reported to praise the quality of the attorneys in the solicitor general's office , noting , "[the] solicitor general's office by tradition has had a very high calibre lawyer working on its staff ... [the] ablest advocates in the u.s. are the advocates in the solicitor general's office. .

the key to the solicitor general's notable aggregate success rate in persuading the court to accept the cases it chooses and winning cases on the merits is argued to be the natural result of superior lawyering skills developed by the attorneys in the solicitor general's office through repeated interaction with the court .

in other words , the solicitor general and the attorneys in her office are repeat player s , as compared with one - shotters , whose success is a result of arguing many more cases before the court than other litigants .

the opportunity to argue multiple times before the court not only hones one's skills , but also generates familiarity with the preferences of the justices and the operation of the court .

as one justice noted , the attorneys in the solicitor general's office were not only superb lawyers , but "the [s]olicitor [g]eneral knows all the catchwords , and they just know how to write them in a brief ; they know how to put things [to be effective]. .

the status of the solicitor general as a repeat player , however , does not account for variations in the success of the solicitor general before the court on a case - by - case basis .

to understand the relationship between the solicitor general and the court , some argue , one also must understand that the solicitor general is not just a trusted partner or a familiar litigant , but that in addition to those roles , she is also a political actor who is fundamentally an agent of the president and , as a result , whose views reflect those of the executive .

in studying the relationship between the solicitor general and the supreme court , some scholars frame both actors as political in nature , meaning that both the solicitor general and the court are perceived as actors motivated by policy goals and preferences regarding the interpretation of the law .

the implications of this framework in predicting the conditions under which the solicitor general will be successful are clear .

first , the solicitor general will be successful when she and a majority of the members of the court have similar policy goals .

for example , according to this theory , one would expect a solicitor general serving in the administration of a conservative president to be more successful before a conservative court than a more liberal court .

one study found a 50% increase in the probability that the court would decide a case in a manner consistent with a solicitor general's amicus brief when the court and solicitor general had similar preferences , as compared with when the court and solicitor general were measured to have highly divergent preferences .

second , if through repeated interactions , both the court and the solicitor general learn the preferences of the other , the solicitor general will be able to signal "good" legal and policy outcomes to the court through the positions it takes .

in particular , when the solicitor general espouses a legal or policy position that appears to contradict the solicitor general's known preferences , the court may be able to confidently conclude that this position will result in a "good" legal or policy outcome .

three scholars found that when a comparatively conservative solicitor general espouses a liberal position in an amicus brief or , alternatively , when a comparatively liberal solicitor general espouses a conservative position , the court is 22% more likely to vote in a manner consistent with the solicitor general's brief than otherwise .

some argue that an important limitation of political theories of supreme court - solicitor general interaction is that one cannot necessarily infer from the solicitor general's success rate that she is actually persuading the court to decide in a way it would not otherwise without her participation .

rather , it is possible that her success rate is , in part , an artifact of the presence of similar policy and legal preferences .

additionally , some have hypothesized that frequent or extremely political behavior by the office may limit the solicitor general's effectiveness .

one study has suggested that the greater the overt politicization of the solicitor general's office , the less effective the office will be before the court on the merits when the office participates as amicus curiae and when the government is a party to the case .

some argue that scholarly focus on the similarity between the policy preferences of the solicitor general and the justices fails to recognize the important component of this interaction — the weight of the law .

although evidence supporting political theories of the solicitor general's influence are compelling , even when a justice's legal and policy preferences run contrary to the recommendation of the solicitor general , the justice adopts that recommendation 30% to 38% of the time .

moreover , when the weight of the law runs contrary to the solicitor general's arguments , justices are 25% to 34% less likely to follow her recommendations .

it is clear from the preceding discussion that not only does the solicitor general have what some would describe as a "special relationship" with the court , but also that the solicitor general's office is highly successful both in securing review for the cases it deems worthy and winning on the merits when arguing before the court .

given the solicitor general's personal and institutional knowledge of the court , such experience could be seen as beneficial in preparing an individual to serve as a supreme court justice .

yet , only 4 of the 111 justices — william howard taft , stanley reed , robert jackson , and thurgood marshall — have served as solicitor general prior to their elevation to the court .

each of these justices served as solicitor general from one to three years .

two justices ( reed and marshall ) were appointed to the court while serving in this role .

beyond this shared experience , the professional histories of these justices vary widely .

all practiced law in a private firm at some point in their careers , although the length of time each spent in private practice ranged from 4 years ( taft and marshall ) to 21 years ( jackson ) .

alone among these four , marshall spent 21 years litigating public interest cases for the naacp legal defense fund .

two of these justices , chief justice taft and justice marshall , served as federal appellate judges prior to their elevation ; justices reed and jackson did not .

like solicitor general kagan , chief justice taft also served as the dean of a law school .

finally , chief justice taft , justice reed , and justice jackson all served in multiple executive branch positions , the most notable being chief justice taft's tenure as president of the united states from 1909-1913 .

the following four sections present short biographies of these justices .

particular attention is paid to their qualifications and professional experiences .

additionally , issues that arose during each justice's senate confirmation process are discussed .

this information is presented chronologically , beginning with chief justice william howard taft and ending with associate justice thurgood marshall .

after graduating magna cum laude from harvard law school in 1986 , elena kagan served as a clerk for the judge abner mikva on the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit , and then for the associate justice thurgood marshall on the u.s. supreme court .

after her clerkships , she was employed as an associate for the law firm of williams & connolly from 1989 through 1991 , after which she became a law professor at the university of chicago law school .

during her time at chicago , she taught courses on constitutional law , civil procedure , labor law , and federal election law .

in 1993 , she also worked as a special counsel for the senate judiciary committee during confirmation hearings for justice ruth bader ginsburg .

elena kagan served in the clinton white house from 1995 through 1999 as an associate counsel , then as a deputy assistant to the president for domestic policy and deputy director of the domestic policy council .

during her tenure at the white house , she worked on a wide variety of legal and policy issues , including crime , consumer safety , abortion , education , health , immigration , civil rights , tobacco , social security , and welfare .

in 1999 , elena kagan became dean of the harvard law school .

she was the first woman to hold that position , and she was credited with building consensus across ideological lines at harvard , including hiring professors with diverse political outlooks .

during that time , she also became involved in a controversy surrounding harvard's anti - discrimination policy and whether to allow military recruiters to recruit through the school's office of career services despite the ban on gays serving in the military .

the role of the solicitor general is unique in the american legal system .

not only does the solicitor general represent the interests of the u.s. government before the court , but the office is also charged with assisting the supreme court in the exercise of its judicial function .

through repeated opportunities to argue before the court , some suggest that the office of the solicitor general has built a "special relationship" with the supreme court based on trust and interdependence established over multiple and continuing interactions .

the court relies on the solicitor general to perform a "gatekeeping" function by recommending for review only the most meritorious of the government's cases and providing the highest quality arguments for the court's consideration .

through these actions , the solicitor general seeks to convince the supreme court that the government's position is the correct one .

although scholars disagree on the exact nature of the office's influence , most of the time , the solicitor general is successful in this task .

despite this close relationship and the institutional knowledge that comes with it , few solicitors general have been appointed to the supreme court .

since the creation of the office in 1870 , only four former or current solicitors general have been elevated to the highest bench .

the first , william howard taft , served in both the executive and judicial branches before his joining the court , most notably as the 27 th president of the united states .

stanley reed , who was elevated directly from the position of solicitor general to the court , spent most of his professional career in private practice and had never been a judge before becoming an associate justice .

robert jackson , like reed , had no judicial experience before his appointment .

he had , however , served in five different positions in the department of justice , including that of attorney general , prior to his elevation .

unlike reed and jackson , thurgood marshall , who had served as a federal appellate judge , had little experience in private practice and had only served as a government attorney for two years prior to his nomination to the court .

however , between working as the director and general counsel of the naacp legal defense fund for 21 years and serving as solicitor general , justice marshall had extensive supreme court litigation experience before joining the bench .

if elena kagan is confirmed , she would be the fifth solicitor general to serve on the court .

although service as the solicitor general has generally been viewed as an important and relevant qualification , her lack of judicial and litigation experience has raised questions by some as to whether she is qualified to sit on the court .

although the ultimate judgment as to appropriate qualifications to be a supreme court justice must be left to the senate , it is clear that the experience of serving as solicitor general provides the occupant of the office with unique insights into the supreme court .

