federal forestry historically has been associated with agriculture , and with agriculture legislation .

forestry programs have been addressed in past farm bills and other agriculture legislation .

this report provides brief background on the house and senate agriculture committees' jurisdiction over forestry , with examples of bills addressed by the committees .

it then presents information on some forestry issues that have been debated and might be discussed during consideration of the next farm bill .

both the house and senate committees on agriculture have jurisdiction over "forestry in general" and acquired national forests .

thus , the committees have been able to exert considerable influence over federal forestry activities over the years .

for example , the forest and rangelands renewable resources planning act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-378 ; 16 u.s.c .

§§ 1600-1614 ) and the national forest management act of 1976 ( p.l .

94-588 ) , which guide u.s. forest service ( usfs ) planning and management , were both initially referred to the agriculture committees .

more recently , the healthy forests restoration act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-148 ; 16 u.s.c .

§§ 6501-6591 ) was referred to and reported by the agriculture committees .

in addition to general forestry for national forests , the agriculture committees have jurisdiction over forestry research and forestry assistance to states and to private landowners .

forestry research is governed largely by the forest and rangeland renewable resources research act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-307 ; 16 u.s.c .

§§ 1641-1647 ) , which revised and updated the mcsweeney - mcnary act of 1928 .

forestry assistance is governed largely by the cooperative forestry assistance act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-313 ; 16 u.s.c .

§§ 2101-2111 ) , which revised and updated the clarke - mcnary act of 1924 .

both laws were referred to and reported by the agriculture committees .

recent farm bills have also included forestry provisions , primarily addressing the forestry assistance programs .

the first to contain a separate forestry title was the 1990 farm bill ( the food , agriculture , conservation , and trade act of 1990 , p.l .

101-624 ) , which: created four new forestry assistance programs ; revised two existing forestry assistance programs ; amended two forestry assistance programs ; revised the administrative provisions for forestry assistance ; created five special forestry research programs ; amended three existing forestry research programs ; authorized a private , nonprofit tree planting foundation ; and created a new usfs branch: international forestry .

the 1996 farm bill ( the federal agriculture improvement and reform act of 1996 , p.l .

104-127 ) included only a few forestry provisions , extending the authorization for the one expiring assistance program and adding a new funding option within an existing program .

the 2002 farm bill ( the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 , p.l .

107-171 ) contained a separate forestry title .

the conference could not resolve many of the differences between the house and senate forestry provisions , and thus the conference report contained fewer provisions than either .

 ( some of the disputed provisions were enacted one year later in the healthy forests restoration act , p.l .

108-148 . ) .

the 2008 farm bill ( the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l .

110-246 ) included a forestry title and several forestry provisions in other titles .

the forestry title: established national priorities for private forest management and assistance ; required statewide forest assessments and strategies for assistance ; provided for competitive funding for certain programs ; created new programs for open space conservation and for emergency reforestation ; established a usfs tribal relations program for cultural and heritage cooperation and a competitive grants program for hispanic - serving institutions ; reauthorized four existing programs ; amended the lacey act amendments to prohibit imports of illegally logged wood products ; and modified three national forest boundaries and certain timber contract provisions .

in addition , the 2008 farm bill conservation title revised the definition of conservation actions to include forestry activities for all conservation programs .

the statute required special reporting on softwood lumber imports , to assure implementation of the 2006 u.s. - canada softwood lumber agreement .

three provisions altered tax treatments for forests and landowners .

finally , the energy title of the 2008 farm bill included two new woody biomass energy programs .

reauthorization of the many agriculture programs is a major reason for the periodic farm bills , but most forestry programs are permanently authorized .

this may reduce the pressure to include a forestry title in a future farm bill .

nonetheless , interest groups have raised various forestry issues other than the authorization levels for possible discussion within a farm bill .

possible issues include funding forestry assistance programs ; controlling invasive species ; increasing wildfire protection ; producing energy from woody biomass ; marketing ecosystem services ; supporting carbon sequestration projects ; and diversifying local economies .

federal funding for forestry assistance programs has generally been rising , but the increase has not been spread equally among the various programs .

funding has risen for cooperative fire programs ( assistance to states and volunteer fire departments ) and for forest legacy ( acquisition of lands or easements on lands threatened with conversion to non - forest uses ) .

in contrast , the economic action program ( economic assistance to rural , forest - dependent communities ) has been proposed for termination , having fallen from peak funding of $54 million in fy2001 to $5 million or less since fy2008 , with no funds in fy2012 ( see the " diversified economies " section , below , for more information ) .

funding for private landowner assistance programs has been a concern for many .

these programs provided cost - shares to qualified landowners for forestry practices to increase tree growth , improve wildlife habitat , protect watersheds ( thus improving water quality ) , and more .

one of the changes enacted in the 2002 farm bill was to replace two programs — the forestry incentives program ( fip ) and the stewardship incentives program ( sip ) — with the forest land enhancement program ( flep ) .

because funding for fip and sip had been discretionary and either stagnant ( fip ) or absent ( sip ) , flep was given mandatory funding through the commodity credit corporation of $100 million total through the end of fy2007 .

however , some flep funds were "borrowed" ( temporarily transferred to another account ) to pay for firefighting and were not repaid , and other funding was cancelled ; in total , about half of the $100 million "guaranteed" for flep was actually spent on landowner assistance .

flep was not reauthorized in the 2008 farm bill , but congress might revisit the issue of separate funding for forest landowner assistance programs in the next farm bill .

however , some question whether a modest forestry - specific assistance program is needed , since a small share of the much larger conservation programs might provide more forestry assistance funding .

most farm bill conservation programs are authorized to receive mandatory funding , which some view as a more consistent annual funding source compared to discretionary programs funded in the annual appropriations process .

the 2008 farm bill included forestry as an accepted practice for almost all agriculture conservation programs .

invasive species — non - native plants and animals that are displacing native ones — are becoming recognized as a substantial problem .

according to the usfs national strategy and implementation plan for invasive species management , invasive species as one of the four major threats to the nation's forests and rangelands .

the usfs forest health management program has evolved from a mechanism to survey and control insects and diseases to a program to address all forest pests , including invasive species .

programs to address rapidly developing problems of invasive species have been proposed , but not enacted or funded .

in its deliberations over a future farm bill , congress could address the structure and financing of programs to prevent and control invasive species in federal , state , and private forests .

congress could also choose , implicitly or explicitly , to have the agencies address invasive species through existing programs .

the threat of wildfire damages to resources and property seems to have increased in recent years .

attention has focused on high biomass fuel levels ( particularly in federal forests ) and on homes in or near at - risk forests , an area known as the wildland - urban interface .

the 2002 farm bill ( § 8003 ) created a new community and private land fire assistance program to assist communities and private landowners in planning and other activities to protect themselves from wildfires .

the program was authorized at $35 million annually through fy2007 and "such sums as are necessary .. .

thereafter. .

the usfs has included such expenditures as authorized activities in its state fire assistance program .

however , congress has not appropriated funds explicitly for this program .

despite being a state and not a federal responsibility , protecting private lands and structures from wildfires continues to garner congressional attention , as the threat of wildfire persists .

whether and how to assist private landowners and communities , to combine this assistance with other assistance and incentive programs , and to fund such assistance could be debated in the farm bill context or in other legislative settings , such as the annual appropriations bills , or not at all .

interest in producing energy from woody biomass and other renewable sources derives from both demand and supply interests .

demand is driven by the need to produce renewable transportation fuels , such as ethanol , to meet the renewable fuel standard ; by state requirements , and possible federal standards , for electricity production from renewable sources ; and by the general interest in , and possible legislation for , reducing greenhouse gas emissions ( eg , cap - and - trade legislation ) .

supply interests are driven by concerns over hazardous wildlife fuels and invasive species — the removal of both provides biomass that could be converted into renewable energy rather than disposed of in ways that contribute their carbon to the atmosphere .

numerous programs exist to induce or assist energy production from biomass .

some were created in the 2008 farm bill , including two directed specifically at woody biomass .

others have been created under authorities such as § 210 of the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) and § 203 of the healthy forests restoration act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-148 ) .

concerns over these programs include duplication and inconsistencies among authorities , definitions , and efforts ; and the potential diversion of wood waste from existing markets ( eg , for pulp and paper , particleboard , and other products that use wood fiber ) to energy production , rather than increasing sustainable and beneficial removals of biomass from the forests .

congress might examine and modify existing programs to be more consistent and efficient in encouraging sustainable and beneficial use of biomass to produce renewable energy .

some , concerned about incentives or "subsidies" for renewable energy , might seek to constrain or terminate programs that could shift biomass from current beneficial uses to energy production .

forests provide a broad array of environmental services — clean air and water , wildlife habitats , pleasant scenery , and more — for which private landowners are generally not compensated , because these services are typically not bought and sold in a marketplace .

a variety of interests have examined the possibility of finding ways to compensate landowners for continuing to provide ecosystem services .

one means would be to develop such markets , and the 2008 farm bill included a provision ( § 2709 ) to facilitate this development .

a new farm bill might extend , expand , alter , or terminate the 2008 provision .

alternatively , some propose federal "green payments" to directly reward farmers and other landowners who provide environmental benefits through their land management practices .

others suggest that farmers should simply be required to provide such public benefits , while still others assert that the environmental benefits farmland can provide are too modest to warrant compensation .

green payments or market development for forest and other landowners' ecosystem services might be discussed in congress's deliberations on a future farm bill .

the potential for forest landowners to sell the carbon sequestered by their forests and forestry projects has attracted substantial attention .

while voluntary markets for forest carbon projects exist , they are relatively small and carbon prices are quite low .

legislation to establish a domestic cap - and - trade system to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases was introduced and debated in the 111 th congress , but no similar action has been taken in the 112 th congress .

most of these legislative proposals exclude agriculture and forestry from the regulated sectors required to reduce emissions , and allow those regulated sectors to buy carbon sequestered by offset projects in the unregulated agriculture and forestry sectors .

this could significantly expand carbon markets and raise carbon prices for forest carbon sequestration activities .

there are various concerns about the nature and structure of carbon offsets .

some relate to carbon markets generally — concerns about additionality ( ensuring that projects go beyond business - as - usual ) , verification ( proof that carbon is sequestered ) , and more .

such concerns have particular implications for forestry .

for example , projects need to be additional — beyond legal requirements and business as usual — to qualify as offsets ; thus reforestation following timber harvests , in states that require reforestation , would not qualify as a carbon offset .

verification — measuring and monitoring carbon sequestration — can be a particular challenge for forestry .

in addition , some interests are concerned about the potential impacts of significant carbon markets for farmers and landowners .

these several concerns , as well as the possibly substantial benefits , might lead congress to consider the nature and structure of carbon offsets in a future farm bill .

alternatively , congress might choose to address provisions and protocols for agriculture and forestry carbon offsets in other legislative vehicles or not at all .

the economies of many rural communities have evolved around the use — finding , extracting , processing , and selling — of natural resources .

in some of these areas , one resource ( eg , timber , minerals , livestock ) has traditionally dominated the local economy , and the economies of such areas can be devastated when that resource is depleted or when its markets are depressed ( permanently or even temporarily ) .

many communities have sought approaches to diversifying their economies , to mitigate the economic and social disruption that can occur when a dominant economic sector is depressed .

the national forest - dependent rural communities economic diversification act of 1990 was enacted in §§ 2372-2379 of the 1990 farm bill to authorize forestry and economic diversification technical assistance to "economically disadvantaged" rural communities .

funding for such assistance , provided under the economic action program , rose from $14 million in fy1996 to $54 million in fy2001 , but has declined since , and has been proposed to be terminated in several budget requests from the bush and obama administrations .

in its future farm bill deliberations , congress might consider whether and how to perpetuate economic assistance programs for traditional wood products - dependent communities , either as a continued usfs program or as part of other usda rural assistance programs , or whether to terminate forestry - related economic assistance programs .

