in 1933 , during the first 100 days of president franklin d. roosevelt's new deal , the securities act of 1933 and the glass - steagall act ( gsa ) were enacted , setting up a pervasive regulatory scheme for the public offering of securities and generally prohibiting commercial banks from underwriting and dealing in those securities .

gsa prohibited affiliations between banks ( which , for the purposes of this report , means bank - chartered depository institutions , that is , financial institutions that hold federally insured consumer deposits ) and securities firms ( which are commonly referred to as "investment banks" even though they are not technically banks and do not hold federally insured consumer deposits ) ; further restrictions on bank affiliations with non - banking firms were enacted in bank holding company act of 1956 ( bhca ) and its subsequent amendments , eliminating the possibility that companies owning banks would be permitted to take ownership or controlling interest in insurance companies , manufacturing companies , real estate companies , securities firms , or any other non - banking company .

as a result , distinct regulatory systems developed in the united states for regulating banks , on the one hand , and securities firms on the other .

banks are institutions of limited power ; they may only engage in the activities permissible pursuant to their charter , which generally limits them to the "business of banking" and all powers incidental to the business of banking .

included in these activities restrictions are certain limitations on their ability to engage in proprietary trading , that is , investing as principal , rather than at the behest or for the benefit of customers , for the bank's own account .

in addition to activity restrictions , banks are subject to capital standards , affiliation restrictions , management interlocking restrictions , and many other standards ; they are subject to regular examinations to ensure they are being well - managed , conducting business in a safe and sound fashion , and complying with numerous consumer protection and other laws ; and federal banking regulators have a full range of strong and flexible enforcement tools , such as prompt corrective action powers , to rectify problems that are found during examinations .

one of the benefits of being a bank , and thus being subjected to heavy , expensive regulation , is access to what is referred to as the "federal safety net," which includes the federal deposit insurance corporation's ( fdic's ) deposit insurance , the federal reserve's discount window lending facility , and the federal reserve's payment system .

the regulation and oversight of securities firms are very different from that of banks .

securities firms may be primarily regulated by the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) at the federal level , or they may not be regulated directly at the federal level at all , which often is the case for hedge funds , private equity firms , and special purpose vehicles ( spvs ) .

rather than regulating for safety and soundness , the sec's regulatory regime is predominately built around registration , disclosure of risk , and the prevention and prosecution of insider trading and other forms of fraud .

sec - regulated firms generally are not subject to capital and liquidity standards or to regular safety and soundness examinations .

and aside from a general prohibition on accepting federally insured consumer deposits , securities firms generally are not subject to activity restrictions , as are banks .

as a result , these institutions generally do not have access to the federal safety net .

while there are two distinct regulatory systems , the distinguishing lines between the traditional activities engaged in by commercial and investment banks became increasingly difficult to discern as a result of competition , financial innovation , and technological advances in combination with permissive agency and judicial interpretation .

beginning in the late 1970s , the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( frb ) , as the primary regulator for bank holding companies ( bhcs ) , and the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , as the primary regulator for national banks , issued a series of regulations and orders , liberally interpreting the limitations imposed on the activities of commercial banks through laws such as the gsa and the bhca .

the result was the incremental expansion of the types and levels of securities activities permissible for bhcs and financial subsidiaries of banks .

the gramm - leach - bliley act of 1999 ( glba ) continued this trend by repealing two of the four sections of the gsa and the bhca and by establishing the financial holding company ( fhc ) structure , which permits commercial banks and full - service investment banks ( as well as insurance companies ) to coexist under common control .

in the wake of the great recession of 2008 , there have been calls to reexamine the activities that should be permissible for commercial banks in light of the fact that they receive governmental benefits through access to the federal safety net .

some have called for the reenactment of the repealed provisions of the gsa , which is discussed in greater detail in another crs report .

while neither the house - nor the senate - passed version of h.r .

4173 , the comprehensive financial regulatory reform proposals of the 111 th congress , includes provisions that would reenact the gsa , both bills do propose curbs on "proprietary trading" by banking institutions .

the bills would limit the ability of commercial banking institutions and their affiliated companies and subsidiaries to engage in trading unrelated to customer needs and investing in and sponsoring hedge funds or private equity funds .

such an approach has been referred to as the "volcker rule," having been urged upon congress by paul volcker , former chairman of the frb and current chairman of the president's economic recovery advisory board .

this report briefly discusses the permissible proprietary trading activities of commercial banks and their subsidiaries under current law .

it then analyzes the volcker rule proposals under both the house - and senate - passed financial reform bills .

appendix a , appendix b , and appendix c of the report provide the full legislative language from both bills .

while the conference committee was at work , there appeared to be some apprehension within the financial services industry about the reach of § 619 , the imprecision of its definitions and prohibitions , and its implementation .

some concerns may have been allayed by the conference report's final version of section 619 .

for example , there are specific provisions providing for ( 1 ) distinct treatment for insurance company portfolio investments ; ( 2 ) the ability of banking entities and non - financial companies determined to be systemically important to sponsor hedge fund and private equity funds that are limited to customer investments ; ( 3 ) conditions under which bank investments in hedge funds and private equity funds may be permitted ; and ( 4 ) phase - in periods .

although the outlines of a new regulatory framework for proprietary trading and hedge fund operations of banking entities and other systemically important companies are fully outlined in the legislation , the actual reach and practical effect of the provisions await the clarifying hand of the regulators .

to illustrate , subsection ( d ) ( 1 ) ( c ) authorizes banking entities to engage in "risk - mitigating hedging activities" related to "positions , contracts , or other holdings of the banking entity that are designed to reduce specific risks to a banking entity in connection with and related to such positions , contracts or other holdings. .

it delineates no parameters for these hedging activities .

with this and other provisions of the bill , there is likely to be an intensive rulemaking process wherein virtually every possible interpretation of the statutory language will be subjected to a full airing .

it also might be noted that a related provision of the legislation provides clear indication that congress will continue to monitor the scope of investment activities permitted to banking concerns .

section 620 of the conference report gives the federal banking agencies 20 months to study and report on investment and other activities that banking entities may conduct under federal and state law .

the agencies are to evaluate and make recommendations on ( 1 ) types of activities or investments ; ( 2 ) associated risks ; ( 3 ) risk mitigation activities ; ( 4 ) safety and soundness concerns ; ( 5 ) potential negative effects of each activity with respect to banking entities and the u.s. financial system ; ( 6 ) whether each activity or investment is appropriate for banking entities ; and ( 7 ) any necessary additional restrictions .

appendix a .

text of h.r .

4173 § 1117 , as passed by the house sec .

1117 .

restriction on proprietary trading by designated financial holding companies .

 ( a ) in general - if the board determines that propriety trading by a financial holding company subject to stricter standards poses an existing or foreseeable threat to the safety and soundness of such company or to the financial stability of the united states , the board may prohibit such company from engaging in propriety trading .

 ( b ) exceptions permitted - the board may exempt from the prohibition of subsection ( a ) proprietary trading that the board determines to be ancillary to other operations of such company and not to pose a threat to the safety and soundness of such company or to the financial stability of the united states , including — ( 1 ) making a market in securities issued by such company ; ( 2 ) hedging or managing risk ; ( 3 ) determining the market value of assets of such company ; and ( 4 ) propriety trading for such other purposes allowed by the board by rule .

 ( c ) rulemaking authority - the primary financial regulatory agencies of banks and bank holding companies shall jointly issue regulations to carry out this section .

 ( d ) effective date - the provisions of this section shall take effect after the end of the 180-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this title .

 ( e ) proprietary trading defined - for purposes of this section and with respect to a company , the term 'proprietary trading' means the trading of stocks , bonds , options , commodities , derivatives , or other financial instruments with the company's own money and for the company's own account ( d ) effective date - the provisions of this section shall take effect after the end of the 180-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this title .

appendix b .

text of h.r .

4173 § 619 , as passed by the senate , and which is included as part of the conference - base text of h.r .

4173 sec .

619 .

restrictions on capital market activity by banks and bank holding companies .

 ( a ) definitions - in this section — ( 1 ) the terms `hedge fund ' and `private equity fund ' mean a company or other entity that is exempt from registration as an investment company pursuant to section 3 ( c ) ( 1 ) or 3 ( c ) ( 7 ) of the investment company act of 1940 ( 15 u.s.c .

80a - 3 ( c ) ( 1 ) or 80a - 3 ( c ) ( 7 ) ) , or a similar fund , as jointly determined by the appropriate federal banking agencies ; ( 2 ) the term `proprietary trading ' — ( a ) means purchasing or selling , or otherwise acquiring or disposing of , stocks , bonds , options , commodities , derivatives , or other financial instruments by an insured depository institution , a company that controls , directly or indirectly , an insured depository institution or is treated as a bank holding company for purposes of the bank holding company act of 1956 ( 12 u.s.c .

1841 et seq .

 ) , and any subsidiary of such institution or company , for the trading book ( or such other portfolio as the federal banking agencies may determine ) of such institution , company , or subsidiary ; and ( b ) subject to such restrictions as the federal banking agencies may determine , does not include purchasing or selling , or otherwise acquiring or disposing of , stocks , bonds , options , commodities , derivatives , or other financial instruments on behalf of a customer , as part of market making activities , or otherwise in connection with or in facilitation of customer relationships , including risk - mitigating hedging activities related to such a purchase , sale , acquisition , or disposal ; and ( 3 ) the term `sponsoring ' , when used with respect to a hedge fund or private equity fund , means — ( a ) serving as a general partner , managing member , or trustee of the fund ; ( b ) in any manner selecting or controlling ( or having employees , officers , directors , or agents who constitute ) a majority of the directors , trustees , or management of the fund ; or ( c ) sharing with the fund , for corporate , marketing , promotional , or other purposes , the same name or a variation of the same name .

 ( b ) prohibition on proprietary trading - ( 1 ) in general - subject to the recommendations and modifications of the council under subsection ( g ) , and except as provided in paragraph ( 2 ) or ( 3 ) , the appropriate federal banking agencies shall , through a rulemaking under subsection ( g ) , jointly prohibit proprietary trading by an insured depository institution , a company that controls , directly or indirectly , an insured depository institution or is treated as a bank holding company for purposes of the bank holding company act of 1956 ( 12 u.s.c .

1841 et seq .

 ) , and any subsidiary of such institution or company .

 ( 2 ) excepted obligations - ( a ) in general - the prohibition under this subsection shall not apply with respect to an investment that is otherwise authorized by federal law in — ( i ) obligations of the united states or any agency of the united states , including obligations fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by the united states or an agency of the united states ; ( ii ) obligations , participations , or other instruments of , or issued by , the government national mortgage association , the federal national mortgage association , or the federal home loan mortgage corporation , including obligations fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by such entities ; and ( iii ) obligations of any state or any political subdivision of a state .

 ( b ) conditions - the appropriate federal banking agencies may impose conditions on the conduct of investments described in subparagraph ( a ) .

 ( c ) rule of construction - nothing in subparagraph ( a ) may be construed to grant any authority to any person that is not otherwise provided in federal law .

 ( 3 ) foreign activities - an investment or activity conducted by a company pursuant to paragraph ( 9 ) or ( 13 ) of section 4 ( c ) of the bank holding company act of 1956 ( 12 u.s.c .

1843 ( c ) ) solely outside of the united states shall not be subject to the prohibition under paragraph ( 1 ) , provided that the company is not directly or indirectly controlled by a company that is organized under the laws of the united states or of a state .

 ( c ) prohibition on sponsoring and investing in hedge funds and private equity funds - ( 1 ) in general - except as provided in paragraph ( 2 ) , and subject to the recommendations and modifications of the council under subsection ( g ) , the appropriate federal banking agencies shall , through a rulemaking under subsection ( g ) , jointly prohibit an insured depository institution , a company that controls , directly or indirectly , an insured depository institution or is treated as a bank holding company for purposes of the bank holding company act of 1956 ( 12 u.s.c .

1841 et seq .

 ) , or any subsidiary of such institution or company , from sponsoring or investing in a hedge fund or a private equity fund .

 ( 2 ) application to foreign activities of foreign firms - an investment or activity conducted by a company pursuant to paragraph ( 9 ) or ( 13 ) of section 4 ( c ) of the bank holding company act of 1956 ( 12 u.s.c .

1843 ( c ) ) solely outside of the united states shall not be subject to the prohibitions and restrictions under paragraph ( 1 ) , provided that the company is not directly or indirectly controlled by a company that is organized under the laws of the united states or of a state .

 ( d ) investments in small business investment companies and investments designed to promote the public welfare - ( 1 ) in general - a prohibition imposed by the appropriate federal banking agencies under subsection ( c ) shall not apply with respect an investment otherwise authorized under federal law that is — ( a ) an investment in a small business investment company , as that term is defined in section 103 of the small business investment act of 1958 ( 15 u.s.c .

662 ) ; or ( b ) designed primarily to promote the public welfare , as provided in the 11 th paragraph of section 5136 of the revised statutes ( 12 u.s.c .

24 ) .

 ( 2 ) rule of construction - nothing in paragraph ( 1 ) may be construed to grant any authority to any person that is not otherwise provided in federal law .

 ( e ) limitations on relationships with hedge funds and private equity funds - ( 1 ) covered transactions - an insured depository institution , a company that controls , directly or indirectly , an insured depository institution or is treated as a bank holding company for purposes of the bank holding company act of 1956 ( 12 u.s.c .

1841 et seq .

 ) , and any subsidiary of such institution or company that serves , directly or indirectly , as the investment manager or investment adviser to a hedge fund or private equity fund may not enter into a covered transaction , as defined in section 23a of the federal reserve act ( 12 u.s.c .

371c ) with such hedge fund or private equity fund .

 ( 2 ) affiliation - an insured depository institution , a company that controls , directly or indirectly , an insured depository institution or is treated as a bank holding company for purposes of the bank holding company act of 1956 ( 12 u.s.c .

1841 et seq .

 ) , and any subsidiary of such institution or company that serves , directly or indirectly , as the investment manager or investment adviser to a hedge fund or private equity fund shall be subject to section 23b of the federal reserve act ( 12 u.s.c .

371c - 1 ) as if such institution , company , or subsidiary were a member bank and such hedge fund or private equity fund were an affiliate .

 ( f ) capital and quantitative limitations for certain nonbank financial companies - ( 1 ) in general - except as provided in paragraph ( 2 ) , and subject to the recommendations and modifications of the council under subsection ( g ) , the board of governors shall adopt rules imposing additional capital requirements and specifying additional quantitative limits for nonbank financial companies supervised by the board of governors under section 113 that engage in proprietary trading or sponsoring and investing in hedge funds and private equity funds .

 ( 2 ) exceptions - the rules under this subsection shall not apply with respect to the trading of an investment that is otherwise authorized by federal law — ( a ) in obligations of the united states or any agency of the united states , including obligations fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by the united states or an agency of the united states ; ( b ) in obligations , participations , or other instruments of , or issued by , the government national mortgage association , the federal national mortgage association , or the federal home loan mortgage corporation , including obligations fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by such entities ; ( c ) in obligations of any state or any political subdivision of a state ; ( d ) in a small business investment company , as that term is defined in section 103 of the small business investment act of 1958 ( 15 u.s.c .

662 ) ; or ( e ) that is designed primarily to promote the public welfare , as provided in the 11 th paragraph of section 5136 of the revised statutes ( 12 u.s.c .

24 ) .

 ( g ) council study and rulemaking - ( 1 ) study and recommendations - not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this act , the council — ( a ) shall complete a study of the definitions under subsection ( a ) and the other provisions under subsections ( b ) through ( f ) , to assess the extent to which the definitions under subsection ( a ) and the implementation of subsections ( a ) through ( f ) would — ( i ) promote and enhance the safety and soundness of depository institutions and the affiliates of depository institutions ; ( ii ) protect taxpayers and enhance financial stability by minimizing the risk that depository institutions and the affiliates of depository institutions will engage in unsafe and unsound activities ; ( iii ) limit the inappropriate transfer of federal subsidies from institutions that benefit from deposit insurance and liquidity facilities of the federal government to unregulated entities ; ( iv ) reduce inappropriate conflicts of interest between the self - interest of depository institutions , affiliates of depository institutions , and financial companies supervised by the board , and the interests of the customers of such institutions and companies ; ( v ) raise the cost of credit or other financial services , reduce the availability of credit or other financial services , or impose other costs on households and businesses in the united states ; ( vi ) limit activities that have caused undue risk or loss in depository institutions , affiliates of depository institutions , and financial companies supervised by the board of governors , or that might reasonably be expected to create undue risk or loss in such institutions , affiliates , and companies ; and ( vii ) appropriately accommodates the business of insurance within an insurance company subject to regulation in accordance with state insurance company investment laws ; ( b ) shall make recommendations regarding the definitions under subsection ( a ) and the implementation of other provisions under subsections ( b ) through ( f ) , including any modifications to the definitions , prohibitions , requirements , and limitations contained therein that the council determines would more effectively implement the purposes of this section ; and ( c ) may make recommendations for prohibiting the conduct of the activities described in subsections ( b ) and ( c ) above a specific threshold amount and imposing additional capital requirements on activities conducted below such threshold amount .

 ( 2 ) rulemaking - not earlier than the date of completion of the study required under paragraph ( 1 ) , and not later than 9 months after the date of completion of such study — ( a ) the appropriate federal banking agencies shall jointly issue final regulations implementing subsections ( b ) through ( e ) , which shall reflect any recommendations or modifications made by the council pursuant to paragraph ( 1 ) ( b ) ; and ( b ) the board of governors shall issue final regulations implementing subsection ( f ) , which shall reflect any recommendations or modifications made by the council pursuant to paragraph ( 1 ) ( b ) .

 ( h ) transition - ( 1 ) in general - the final regulations issued by the appropriate federal banking agencies and the board of governors under subsection ( g ) ( 2 ) shall provide that , effective 2 years after the date on which such final regulations are issued , no insured depository institution , company that controls , directly or indirectly , an insured depository institution , company that is treated as a bank holding company for purposes of the bank holding company act of 1956 ( 12 u.s.c .

1841 et seq .

 ) , or subsidiary of such institution or company , may retain any investment or relationship prohibited under such regulations .

 ( 2 ) extension - ( a ) in general - the appropriate federal banking agency for an insured depository institution or a company described in paragraph ( 1 ) may , upon the application of any such company , extend the 2-year period under paragraph ( 1 ) with respect to such company , if the appropriate federal banking agency determines that an extension would not be detrimental to the public interest .

 ( b ) time period for extension - an extension granted under subparagraph ( a ) may not exceed — ( i ) 1 year for each determination made by the appropriate federal banking agency under subparagraph ( a ) ; and ( ii ) a total of 3 years with respect to any 1 company .

appendix c. the conference report: section 61 .

