federal government programs can be funded with two different types of spending: discretionary and mandatory .

discretionary spending is provided and controlled through annual appropriations acts .

discretionary programs include the operations of running executive branch agencies ( eg , federal wages and salaries ) and can also include certain loans , grants , and other subsidy programs .

mandatory spending generally is controlled by laws other than appropriations acts .

it includes spending on entitlement programs such as social security , and other outlays such as the farm commodity programs .

congress sets eligibility requirements and benefit formulas for mandatory programs .

if recipients meet eligibility requirements , outlays are made automatically .

mandatory programs can be thought of as a multiyear appropriation in authorizing legislation ( eg , a farm bill ) .

in the context of agriculture , mandatory spending programs can have ( 1 ) a payment formula ( eg , $1.95 per bushel minus the market price of corn , multiplied by the bushels produced on farm ) or qualification criteria with no specified limit , ( 2 ) a statutorily authorized level of funding ( e.g , $1.2 billion available for a conservation program during a fiscal year ) , or ( 3 ) an acreage allotment ( eg , enroll up to 250,000 acres nationally ) .

mandatory funds from the authorizing law are assumed to be available unless they are expressly reduced to smaller amounts by a subsequent act of congress in the appropriations process or by the authorizing committees .

the 2008 farm bill ( the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l .

110-246 ) authorizes spending on many mandatory agricultural , conservation , nutrition , and bioenergy programs .

farm bills are viewed by many members and most in the agricultural community — including farmers and bankers — as a "contract. .

they do not want the farm bill to be reopened before it expires , or funding reduced below "promised" levels by intervening laws or appropriations .

the mandatory budget projection of the farm bill when it was enacted was $604 billion over 10 years .

two - thirds of this amount ( $406 billion ) was for domestic nutrition assistance ( eg , food stamps ) ; this mandatory budget category is outside the scope of this report .

most of the rest , about $147 billion over 10 years , is funded through the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) in the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the remaining mandatory outlays in the 2008 farm bill are from the federal crop insurance corporation ( $47 billion over 10 years ) and the agricultural disaster relief trust fund ( $4 billion over 10 years ) .

the ccc perhaps is best known as the funding mechanism for the mandatory farm commodity program payments that farmers receive from the usda farm service agency ( fsa ) , and some of the conservation payments from the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) and fsa .

the ccc also is or has been the funding source for a relatively small subset of usda programs for foreign trade , bioenergy , rural development , agricultural research , and other programs .

in the 2008 farm bill , the 10-year projection for mandatory budget outlays was $86 billion for the farm commodity programs , $55 billion for conservation , $4 billion for trade , $0.9 billion for bioenergy , $0.9 billion for horticulture / organic agriculture , $0.4 billion for research , and $0.2 billion for rural development .

these are large pools of mandatory funding from which many programs are authorized to operate .

the ccc is a permanently authorized , wholly owned government corporation that has the legal authority to borrow up to $30 billion at any one time from the u.s. treasury ( 15 u.s.c .

714 et seq. ) .

in many ways , it operates like a revolving line of credit that allows usda to make program payments when they are needed , separate from appropriations .

the ccc ( 1 ) borrows from the treasury in advance of appropriations ; ( 2 ) makes payments to recipients in the farm commodity and other programs according to formulas written into authorizing legislation ; and ( 3 ) later repays the treasury for the funds it borrows with appropriations from the annual agriculture appropriations law .

this appropriation usually is an indefinite "such sums as necessary" appropriation that may be more or less than the ccc's most recent year's outlays , but it nonetheless restores a level of borrowing authority .

historically , mandatory agricultural funding was reserved for the farm commodity programs that began in the 1930s .

because payments from these programs are tied to commodity prices , which are highly variable and difficult to predict or budget , the ccc was created to remove unpredictable funding issues from the annual appropriations process .

the concept of funding other agricultural programs with mandatory spending has expanded in recent years to include some conservation , rural development , research , and bioenergy programs .

this expansion has generated both concern and support .

some consider this expansion to be beyond the chartered purpose of the ccc , while others prefer the stability and consistency of mandatory funding to that of the appropriations process .

although congress as a whole makes final funding decisions , the rise in the number of agricultural programs with mandatory budget authority from the authorizing committees has not gone unnoticed or untouched by appropriators .

in recent years , appropriations bills have reduced mandatory program spending below authorized levels .

these reductions , estimated by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , are commonly referred to as "changes in mandatory program spending" ( chimps ) .

chimps can offset increases in discretionary spending that are above discretionary budget caps .

similarly , authorizing committees also have reduced mandatory spending levels that initially were enacted .

authorizers may make such reductions for two reasons .

first , they reduce programs to offset spending increases for other mandatory programs within their jurisdiction ( new authorizing laws that require pay - as - you - go budget rules ) .

second , they reduce programs to get credit for budget reconciliation ( savings that are required when a budget resolution adopted by congress forces many authorizing committees to reduce program spending to address budget deficits ) .

the u.s. constitution grants the power over appropriations ( the power of the purse ) to congress .

house and senate rules create a division of labor through the procedural separation between authorizations and appropriations .

legislative committees ( such as , for agriculture , the house committee on agriculture and the senate committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry ) are responsible for authorizing legislation .

appropriations committees ( such as the house and senate appropriations subcommittees on agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies ) are responsible for annual appropriations .

procedural rules generally prohibit encroachment on committee responsibilities .

however , as discussed above , multiyear appropriations for mandatory programs are provided in one step by authorizing legislation , and this bypasses the two - step authorization - appropriation process .

the current tension over which committee is responsible for bringing final budget recommendations to the floor for certain agricultural programs — appropriators or authorizers — has roots dating to the 1930s and the creation of the farm commodity programs .

some of the farm commodity subsidies that are required by a farm bill are volatile and therefore difficult to budget because they depend upon both future market prices and yields .

these payments resemble entitlements , and any appropriation that would be set in advance would likely be too little or too much .

thus a mandatory funding source — the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) — was created to remove an unpredictable funding issue from the annual appropriations process .

this separation operated for many decades with little tension .

but the dynamic changed , particularly in the late 1990s and in the 2002 farm bill , when authorizers began writing laws using mandatory funds for types of programs that typically were discretionary ( for example , conservation programs to rehabilitate small watersheds and dams , rural development programs to improve small business opportunities , or agricultural research programs to fund university - based research ) .

this created a sometimes more complicated and bifurcated process of establishing budget authority for certain agricultural programs .

tension arose over who should make final funding decisions for these activities that were typically discretionary .

should authorizers use multiyear mandatory funding that is set in permanent law outside the appropriations process ? .

or should appropriators determine funding on an annual basis in appropriations acts ? .

the following specific questions have been raised: appropriators ask whether creation of the ccc in the 1930s for the hard - to - predict farm commodity programs justifies modern mandatory spending on programs that are not highly variable and typically are considered discretionary .

given the use of chimps in recent agriculture appropriations bills , appropriators apparently believe that such mandatory spending is not always appropriate .

the authorizing committees contend that appropriators in recent years have not funded the agriculture committees' priorities as much as authorizers had desired .

authorizers therefore maintain that they are justified to write legislation using the mandatory funding at their discretion .

in a broader context , suppose that an appropriations subcommittee knows the amount of appropriations needed for a desired level of activity .

with enough foresight about the use of chimps , those goals could be met with a smaller discretionary spending allocation ( the "302 ( b ) " allocation ) than the desired level .

some may suggest that a lower discretionary allocation to one subcommittee ( assuming there will be chimps ) potentially allows other subcommittees to receive a higher allocation .

ultimately , congress as a whole — not individual committees — makes the final funding decisions when it enacts laws and appropriations .

congress may fund programs both in authorizing laws and in appropriations acts .

some say that tension among committees , interest groups , and political parties is part of the process by which congress enacts laws and appropriations .

in general , the production agriculture community has not raised strong opposition to most of the recently enacted reductions in mandatory programs because the farm commodity programs have not been targeted .

nonetheless , they are not supportive of any reductions that increase funding for nonagricultural programs .

conversely , environmental and conservation supporters have been more vocal and expressed significant concern over the reductions — by both authorizers and appropriators — because many cuts have targeted conservation programs .

these groups argue that when authorizers reduce conservation funding they undercut many of the programs that generated political support for the farm bill's initial passage .

they also argue that cuts by appropriators circumvent commitments made in the farm bill by the authorizers .

the 2002 and 2008 farm bills ( p.l .

107-171 and p.l .

110-246 , respectively ) used mandatory funding from the ccc to support an increasing number of conservation , rural development , and other programs .

the funding levels for these mandatory programs do not need to be determined in the annual appropriations process , since the authorizing committees set the eligibility rules , payment formulas , and / or mandatory funding levels in authorizing legislation .

funding for mandatory programs is thus available based on the authorization without appropriations action .

the baseline for a government program is a projection at a particular point in time of what the multiyear federal spending ( budget authority or outlays ) would be under current law if no policy changes were made .

the baseline serves as a benchmark or starting point for future budget analyses .

whenever new provisions ( such as in a farm bill , or chimps in an appropriations bill ) are introduced that affect federal mandatory spending , their impact ( or "score" ) is measured as a difference from the baseline .

any increase in costs above the baseline level may be subject to certain budget constraints ( such as pay - go ) .

the process of scorekeeping and estimating baselines is done in congress by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , acting under the supervision of the house and senate budget committees .

the method or impact of calculating the budgetary savings from reducing mandatory programs can sometimes raise questions .

for example , how much credit can or should appropriators get for limiting a program by using chimps ? .

what does a reduction by authorizers ( or the administration ) do to the baseline level of funding that is available for a program ? .

when mandatory funds are made available for only one fiscal year , the scorekeeping from a reduction is straightforward .

the savings are equal to the limit placed on the program in relation to the full funding level in the authorizing act .

other mandatory funding is made available using "no year" money ; that is , the mandatory funding is "to remain available until expended" ( the funding is not limited to a single fiscal year ) .

when appropriators block this type of mandatory funding in one year by using chimps , they typically are not cancelling the authority to obligate funds in future years ; therefore the funding is still available and could be used in a future fiscal year .

under cbo scoring procedures , appropriations acts in successive years can get credit for limiting the same pool of funding so long as the underlying "no year" funding authority remains available .

thus , what some might call an overstatement of budget savings can occur .

for example , suppose a program has a $50 million mandatory authorization to remain available until expended .

it can be blocked by $50 million in chimps in one year and another $50 million in chimps the following year .

over two years , $100 million in chimps could be credited from this $50 million program .

the next section has a specific example , " chimps by appropriators: the dam rehabilitation program . .

the method of calculating budgetary savings when authorizers make the reduction is somewhat more straightforward since it is a direct change in the authorizing law .

however , because the authorizing law is changed , a reduction affects the budget for future legislation ( such as a future farm bill ) by reducing the budget baseline .

as with many legislative developments , a farm bill debate is influenced by budgetary constraints imposed by congress .

the baseline establishes how much money authorizers have available to spend on a bill without having to seek offsets elsewhere .

the calculation of a baseline assumes a continuation of current policies under expected economic conditions .

therefore , any reduction in existing program funding affects the baseline estimates for future years .

as a mandatory program's budget authority is reduced , savings are generated by the difference between the previous authority and the new level .

this reduction is usually not annual , like chimps , but rather long - term ( a 5- or 10-year budget window ) .

it therefore affects the program's overall baseline .

for example , if an authorizing act provides ( or cbo estimates that a program will cost ) $100 million each year for a 5-year farm bill , then the baseline for the program is $100 million each year .

this baseline may likely extend beyond the life of the farm bill for an entire 10-year budget window .

if the authorization for the program is reduced to $85 million each year , then the baseline is reduced by $15 million each year to $85 million ( and the sum across a 10-year budget window from the $15 million / year reductions could result in $150 million of budget savings ) .

in addition to congress taking action to reduce spending , the administration sometimes can make changes that reduce mandatory outlays and these actions may affect the baseline .

for example , usda periodically negotiates a standard reinsurance agreement ( sra ) with the private insurance companies participating in the federal crop insurance program .

the current sra negotiation proposes to reduce various payments to crop insurance companies for delivering the program to farmers , something usda can do administratively within the scope of the authorizing legislation .

generally speaking , there is some support or at least recognition that a reduction in crop insurance delivery costs is needed .

budgetary savings in the range of $6-$8 billion over 10 years initially were proposed .

how such cuts are achieved — whether administratively through the sra or legislatively through congressional action — has been a topic of debate .

given the possibility of budget reconciliation in the next few years because of federal deficits , and the upcoming debate for a 2012 farm bill , leaders in the agriculture community do not want usda to make such changes administratively because congress would not get credit for the reduction .

they would prefer to preserve the baseline and let congress make any cuts .

if action waits until a future farm bill , the agriculture committees could make similar reductions in crop insurance and be able to use the savings to offset other programs elsewhere in the farm bill — funds that would not be available if usda makes cuts administratively .

alternatively , if budget reconciliation is used in the foreseeable future , these types of reductions to crop insurance might be one of the first choices to reduce outlays to help meet reconciliation targets , before reducing spending on other commodity or conservation programs .

the tension between agriculture appropriations and authorizing committees over which committee is responsible for bringing final spending recommendations to the floor for certain mandatory agricultural programs ( such as conservation ) is not likely to wane .

nonetheless , it is congress as a whole that makes the final decision by either endorsing or changing a committee's recommendations on the floor .

appropriators assert that many of these relatively new programs , like most other funding decisions , should rest with them and be discretionary in the annual appropriations process .

authorizers contend that a consistent funding stream is preferable for some programs and want to use the mandatory funds at their discretion , especially since they assert appropriators have not always funded the authorizers' priorities adequately .

beyond the jurisdictional tension , the budgetary effects of chimps and other budget reductions are not always straightforward .

for example , a multiyear total of chimps by appropriators can exceed the mandatory funds made available for the program in the authorizing legislation .

with enough foresight , chimps can reduce the discretionary budget allocation that is needed for an appropriations subcommittee to fund its programs .

a lower discretionary allocation to one subcommittee that uses chimps potentially allows other subcommittees to receive a higher allocation .

reductions in mandatory programs by authorizing committees can affect future farm bill baselines .

the administration can take actions with mandatory programs that affect baselines , and this can put it at odds with congress not only over policy implementation but also over the budget .

these types of funding issues are increasingly important in an era of budget deficits and the potential for budget reconciliation .

because of the federal budget deficit , many people argue that the next farm bill is very unlikely to receive additional funds from outside the agriculture committees' jurisdiction to increase program spending .

thus , preserving the existing baseline is a high priority for many in congress and affiliated agricultural , conservation , and rural development interest groups in order to maximize the resources available to write a new farm bill .

