on july 29 , 2010 , the president signed the final version of h.r .

4899 , p.l .

111-212 , which was passed by the house on july 27 and by the senate on may 27 , 2010 .

the enacted version of the bill includes $59.2 billion in spending for war costs , u.s. disaster assistance , haiti relief and reconstruction , and new benefits for vietnam veterans .

the house passed this bill under suspension of the rules by a vote of 308 to 114 after receding from ( or withdrawing its support of ) an amended version passed by the house on july 1 , 2010 , with $81.8 billion in spending .

with both houses adopting the same version of the bill , h.r .

4899 was cleared and sent to the president .

taking into account $380 million in rescissions of previously appropriated budget authority ( ba ) , p.l .

111-212 provides $58.8 billion in new ba , compared to the $65.1 billion in new ba provided in the previous july 1 house version including its rescissions .

although the earlier house version included $22.1 billion more in domestic spending , that was offset by $12.2 billion in offsetting rescissions , and $4.5 billion in mandatory savings over 10 years ( see table 1 ) .

rescissions and mandatory savings both offset or reduce the amount of new budget authority ( ba ) required to finance spending .

rescissions cancel previously unobligated appropriated budget authority ( ba ) , and that ba can then be used to finance new spending .

savings in mandatory programs reduce the amount needed for new direct spending .

as part of the consideration of h.r .

4899 , the house also debated house concurrent resolution 301 , proposed by representative kucinich and representative paul , that would require the president to withdraw all u.s. troops from pakistan within 30 days of adoption , or no later than december 31 , 2010 , if the president determines the earlier date would not be safe .

the resolution was defeated by a vote of 38 to 372 .

earlier , the house , passed h.res .

1566 , the rule which set up an hour of debate on h.con.res .

301 under the war powers act , by a vote of 222 to 196 .

the senate sent the house its message of disagreement with the july 1 house amended version of the bill on july 22 , 2010 , after failing by 46 to 51 , to adopt a cloture vote on the house july 1 version of h.r .

4899 , signaling an inability to limit debate , and prevent a filibuster .

in light of the senate's opposition to the house version of the bill which would have added $22.5 billion to the senate version to prevent teacher layoffs , for pell grants , for agricultural and energy loans , border security , and to settle the cobell and pigford ii court cases , the house dropped its support of this version and adopted the may 27 , 2010 , senate version .

the house also adopted the senate version because of concerns raised by defense department officials that the army would run out of funding in august unless additional funds were transferred from other dod accounts .

the enacted version of h.r .

4899 adopts the $59.2 billion in the senate's version for war funding , haiti relief and reconstruction , other foreign aid , and new benefits for vietnam veterans that were included in its may 27 , 2010 , version that passed by a vote of 67 to 28 .

that version includes $59.2 billion for wars , haiti relief , fema and other disaster relief , and new va benefits , but excludes funds to settle the pigford ii and cobell court cases requested by the administration ( see table 1 and appendix ) .

the house and senate debate on h.r .

4899 revolved around two main themes – whether additional domestic spending proposals were appropriately considered to be emergencies that would not require offsets , and whether the administration's new war policy in afghanistan was likely to succeed .

 ( see appendix for previous congressional action. ) .

the final version of h.r .

4899 appropriates $59.2 billion in spending , $5.0 billion below the request .

the total funding in the final version matches or is close to the administration's request for the following: $5.1 billion for fema's disaster assistance fund ; $13.4 billion for vietnam veterans affected by agent orange ; and $30.8 billion for the department of defense ( dod ) war - related funding ( $148 million below the request ) and $2.1 billion for dod's non - war request ; and $2.9 billion approved ( $129 million above the request ) for haiti with small adjustments in individual accounts ( see table 1 ) .

the chief differences in funding between the enacted version and the administration's request were: $3.8 billion in funding for war - related foreign aid vs. $4.5 billion requested , a decrease of $710 million ; zero vs. the $4.6 billion requested to settle the cobell and pigford ii court cases ; zero vs. $600 million requested for border security ; zero vs. $139 million requested to reduce backlogs in the u.s .

trademark and patent office ; $600 million added by congress in other foreign aid and humanitarian assistance for mexico , jordan , el salvador , vietnam , and congo that was not requested ; and $400 million added by congress for flood and drought relief .

in the final version , congress did not include additional domestic funding to prevent teacher layoffs , provide more pell grants , fund summer jobs , or provide agricultural and energy grants funding that was not requested by the administration , but which was included in an earlier version of the bill that the house passed on july 1 , 2010 , and then receded from ( withdrew its support ) on july 27 , 2010 .

on july 27 , the house adopted the senate version of the bill that was passed on may 27 , 2010 ( see table 1 ) .

the final version of h.r .

4899 also did not include $600 million for border security , and $129 million to reduce patent backlogs in the commerce department that was requested by the administration after passage of the senate bill that was ultimately adopted .

on july 28 , 2010 , the house passed separate bills with this funding ( h.r .

5874 and h.r .

5875 ) by voice vote , and those bills went to the senate .

the administration requested a total of $64.4 billion in supplemental funding in fy2010 to deploy more u.s. troops for the afghan war , replenish disaster assistance funds , support recovery and foreign aid funds for haiti in response to the january 2010 earthquake , enhance border security , and settle two recently decided court cases for american indians and black farmers .

specifically , the fy2010 supplemental requests included: $5.1 billion to replenish the u.s .

disaster relief fund administered by the federal emergency management agency ; $33.0 billion for the defense department , primarily to deploy 30,000 more troops to afghanistan ; $4.5 billion in foreign assistance for afghanistan , iraq , and pakistan ; $2.8 billion for haiti reconstruction and foreign aid in the wake of january's earthquake ; $13.4 billion to compensate veterans exposed to agent orange ; $243 million for appropriations - related responses to the deepwater horizon oil spill ; $600 million primarily for additional border security personnel ; and $3.4 billion to settle land trust claims of american indians in the long - standing cobell case and $1.2 billion to settle the discrimination claims of 70,000 black farmers in the pigford ii case ( see table 1 ) .

one of the chief issues that arose as the senate and house considered h.r .

4899 was the effect of this supplemental spending on the federal deficit .

each version had different amounts of rescissions to offset discretionary spending — rescissions cancel earlier appropriations and thus reduce the amount of new budget authority ( ba ) needed — and different amounts of mandatory savings spending , which offset direct spending .

in the first version of h.r .

4899 , passed by the house on march 24 , 2010 , the house bill included $600 million in offsets for the $5.7 billion in spending .

in the second version , passed by the senate on may 27 , 2010 , the bill included $380 million in offsets to offset the $59.3 billion recommended in the bill .

in the third version of the bill , amended by the house on july 1 , 2010 , h.r .

4899 included $12.2 billion in rescissions and $4.5 billion in mandatory savings to offset the $81.8 billion in proposed spending ( see table 1 ) .

the effect on the deficit depends on the net amount of new ba needed for each version .

congressional rules require that spending fit within totals set for discretionary and mandatory spending in the annual budget resolution , unless the funds are designated as emergencies .

although the budget resolution cites criteria for emergency spending , it is up to congress to designate spending as emergency .

of the $45.8 billion in discretionary spending in the final version of h.r .

4899 , almost all the spending was designated as emergency , and thus would not count against the budget caps set in the fy2010 concurrent resolution .

if those caps are exceeded , spending could be subject to a point of order , which would need to be waived for the spending to be approved ( see discussion below ) .

federal budget rules distinguish between two types of federal spending , discretionary spending ( eg , annual appropriations acts ) and direct ( or mandatory ) ( eg , medicare ) spending .

of the $64.4 billion in the president's supplemental request , $46.3 billion is discretionary spending and $18.1 billion is mandatory or direct spending ( see table 1 ) .

the administration submitted these requests to congress in supplemental proposals included as part of the administration's fy2011 budget , and in budget amendments submitted on february 12 , 2010 , march 24 , 2010 , april 5 , may 12 , may 22 , and july 12 , 2010 .

many see emergency supplemental appropriations as undermining budgetary discipline because funding is not subject to annual caps in budget resolutions on overall discretionary spending that often require trade - offs between different types of spending .

section 403 ( f ) in s.con.res .

13 , the fy2010 budget resolution , defines spending as emergency if it is "essential ... sudden ... compelling ... unanticipated," but it is a congressional prerogative to decide where the emergency designation is appropriate .

supplementals are also perceived as receiving less scrutiny than regular appropriations .

in the current fiscal environment , some members are concerned about the impact of this additional spending on the deficit .

the administration requested $5.1 billion for the federal emergency management agency's ( fema ) disaster relief fund ( drf ) because fema anticipated that this fund would run out of funds to meet expected disaster needs and pay unanticipated claims awarded by arbitrators to state , local , and nonprofits for public assistance ( pa ) recovery projects such as debris removal and rebuilding public structures ( see table 1 ) .

according to fema , drf spending averages about $350 million a month and the current drf balance is $600 million .

based on these figures , fema projected the account would run out in may or june 2010 .

in response to the anticipated shortage , fema sent guidance in february 2010 to reduce the rate of expenditures of the disaster relief fund by limiting payments to arbitration awards and projects considered immediate needs and delaying payments for other projects , like mitigation work .

representative james oberstar noted in a may 5 , 2010 , hearing that fema limited claims payments , delayed interagency reimbursements , and recovered funds from previous years in order to stretch its available funds .

the dod and state department / usaid fy2010 supplemental requests provide funding primarily to deploy the additional 30,000 troops being deployed to afghanistan and for economic assistance intended to reinforce military operations .

these two elements are considered essential to the counterinsurgency strategy adopted by the administration to "clear , build , hold , and transition" as dod and the state department focus on population centers in afghanistan .

the obama administration requested $2.8 billion in fy2010 supplemental funding to cover costs associated with relief and reconstruction support for haiti following the earthquake that devastated parts of haiti , primarily the capital , port - au - prince , on january 12 , 2010 .

the administration requested that all of the proposed funds be considered as emergency requirements , in response to urgent and essential needs in haiti .

some of the funds are available until september 30 , 2012 , others until expended .

the supplemental request covered both reimbursement of obligations already incurred and new activities by various u.s. agencies .

crs estimates that about 55% of the total haiti supplemental request is for reimbursement of relief activities related to the earthquake disaster , 40% for new recovery and reconstruction activities , and 6% for diplomatic operations administration .

according to an inter - american development bank study , the haiti earthquake may have been the most devastating catastrophe that any country has ever experienced .

approximately 3 million people , roughly one - third of the overall population in haiti , have been affected by the earthquake with more than 2 million displaced .

the government of haiti is reporting an estimated 230,000 deaths and 300,600 injured .

the relief effort is expected to last for many months .

prior to the earthquake , the united nations had already designated haiti as one of the 50 least developed countries in the world , facing higher risk than other countries of failing to come out of poverty , and therefore needing the highest degree of attention from the international community .

protection of the displaced population is currently one of the most challenging and critical issues .

it is estimated that there may be as many as 1.69 million displaced in port - au - prince , and up to 597,000 thought to have relocated in areas outside the capital that largely escaped earthquake damage , but were already poverty - stricken and lacking in basic services .

much smaller numbers of haitians have left the country , some as refugees , for other countries such as the dominican republic , nearby islands , and the united states .

in haiti , aid workers are delivering basic necessities to areas with concentrations of internally displaced populations ( idps ) , but emergency shelter is in short supply .

as the rainy season begins ( and with the hurricane season not far behind ) , providing adequate shelter and sanitation for the displaced has become an urgent priority .

attention is focused on providing waterproof emergency shelter , improving sanitation , and meeting basic needs of the displaced and other vulnerable haitians .

according to the haiti post disaster needs assessment conducted by haiti and international institutions , the total value of recovery and reconstruction needs is $11.5 billion at the international donors conference held march 31 , 2010 , 48 countries , multilateral institutions , and a coalition of non - governmental organizations pledged nearly $10 billion toward the long - term reconstruction efforts in haiti .

the u.s. pledge of $1.2 billion is included in the fy2010 supplemental request .

the obama administration , other international donors , the haitian government , and others have all stated the need for improved accountability of all donor assistance to haiti , to improve aid effectiveness and reduce the potential for corruption .

the government of haiti made major progress in recent years in reducing corruption , increasing transparency , and improving fiscal management .

these improvements qualified haiti for heavily indebted poor country ( hipc ) debt relief last year .

to ensure transparency further , the u.s. agency for international development has helped haiti establish an online system to monitor both donor pledges , and spending and implementation of assistance .

although the administration request was limited to pakistan , afghanistan , iraq , and haiti , the enacted version of h.r .

4899 added $592 million for foreign economic and humanitarian assistance programs for a number of other countries and specific aid accounts ( see table 12 ) .

under the enacted version of h.r .

4899 , mexico receives $5 million in state department diplomatic and consular program ( dc&p ) funding for emergency security support for u.s. diplomats in the country and $175 million in international narcotics and law enforcement ( incle ) funds for judicial reform , anti - corruption , and other activities related to the merida initiative .

jordan is provided $100 million in economic support fund ( esf ) aid to address iraqi refugee and other pressing economic issues and $50 million in foreign military financing ( fmf ) for "urgent security needs. .

el salvador receives $25 million in esf aimed at relief and reconstruction related to hurricane ida .

p.l .

111-212 also provides the democratic republic of congo with $15 million to assist civilians , particularly victims of rape and other violence , in the eastern region of the country .

usaid's global health and child survival account ( ghcs ) receives $45 million to address the worldwide threat of pandemic influenza and the state department's migration and refugee assistance ( mra ) account receives $165 million to assist iraqi , afghan , pakistani , congolese , burmese , and somali refugees and internally displaced persons ( idps ) .

in the senate appropriations committee report , appropriators recommended that vietnam receive $12 million in esf funds for the remediation of dioxin contamination at the da nang airport .

on june 22 , 2010 , the administration requested an additional $600 million for border security in response to concerns about a deteriorating security situation .

an earlier administration request also included additional funding for the capitol police .

the administration did not request additional funding to prevent layoffs of teachers , law enforcement officers , and firefighters , or to provide additional financing for farmers , energy loans and pell grants to aid those affected by limited credit availability , or for mine safety , all matters of considerable congressional concern .

in its may 12 , 2010 , budget amendment to respond to the deepwater horizon oil spill in the gulf of mexico , the administration requested $118 million in discretionary supplemental appropriations primarily to pay for activities that may not be recoverable from the responsible parties under the liability provisions of the oil pollution act of 1990 .

the administration also proposed a mandatory funding provision that would increase the current limitation on the amount that the u.s. coast guard can receive as "advances" from the oil spill liability trust fund to pay for its response activities , that was ultimately enacted separately in p.l .

111-191 ( s. 3473 ) on june 15 , 2010 , in response to concerns raised that the coast guard would run out of funds for its response activities ( see " final congressional action on oil spill trust fund and unemployment benefit " below ) .

the administration request included the following programs: $50 million to create an oil spill relief employment assistance program to provide national emergency grants for temporary employment and expanded employment search assistance , to be paid for by the parties responsible for the oil spill ; $29 million for the department of the interior to conduct additional inspections , enforcement , studies , and other activities related to the oil spill ; $13 million for the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) to "mitigate economic impact" on fishermen and fishery - related businesses affected by the oil spill , if the secretary of commerce determines that resources provided under other authorities are not sufficient ; $10 million for the department of justice to carry out enforcement actions under the oil pollution act and clean water act , and defensive litigation under the federal tort claims act ; $7 million for the national oceanic and atmospheric administration for research , including scientific investigations and sampling , in support of the oil spill response ; $5 million for the economic development administration to award grants to state and local governments and non - profit entities in affected areas for economic assistance , including the development of economic recovery plans ; $2 million for the environmental protection agency to study the long - term impacts of the oil spill and the use of dispersants as part of the cleanup effort ; and $2 million for the food and drug administration to purchase new technologies to enhance seafood inspection capabilities .

the administration requested a total of $17.9 billion in additional mandatory spending including $13.4 billion to provide additional benefits for veterans exposed to agent orange in vietnam ; $3.4 billion to settle the longstanding cobell case about government responsibility for handling indian land trusts ; $1.2 billion to settle the pigford ii case about discrimination claims of black farmers ; and $175 million to increase funding available to the coast guard for its response activities and for a proposed new unemployment benefit program for those affected by the spill .

in the case of the veterans' benefits , the secretary of the department of veterans' affairs ( va ) currently has the statutory authority to determine whether certain circumstances — such as exposure to hazardous substances like agent orange — merit a presumption that specific later health problems are service - connected .

under current scorekeeping conventions , spending for new benefits that is based on exercising current authority is not counted as new , or an increase in , federal spending for budget enforcement purposes .

therefore , the spending for the va benefits presumably would not be subject to budget procedural constraints , such as paygo rules .

the administration also proposed that the additional mandatory funding to respond to the deepwater horizon oil spill be categorized as emergency funding , and thus exempt from paygo rules .

spending for the two court settlements , however , requires new legislative authority as well as funds and therefore would count as new spending for budget enforcement purposes , and may be subject to certain budget rules , such as paygo rules ( see " budget rules and supplemental requests " ) .

some members have proposed finding offsets and others have suggested designating the funding as emergency .

the secretary of the department of veterans affairs ( va ) has statutory authority to determine presumptions of service - connection for conditions determined to be associated with exposure to agent orange .

on october 13 , 2009 , the secretary of the va announced his intention to establish a presumption of service connection for parkinson's disease , ischemic heart disease , and hairy cell / b cell leukemia for veterans who served in the republic of vietnam and were exposed to agent orange compounds .

proposed regulations were issued on march 25 , 2010 .

omb estimated that the costs for the new presumptions of service connection for these conditions will be $13.4 billion in fy2010 ( see table 1 ) .

the va estimates that there are approximately 86,000 veterans who will be able to receive retroactive benefits for the new presumptive conditions .

in addition , there are veterans who will be eligible for an increase in their current disability rating , or will be able to begin disability compensation based on the new presumptions .

payments of disability compensation related to the new presumptions will begin when final regulations are published .

the impact of the presumptions on disability compensation and pensions is in the baseline for fy2011 .

while the administration has requested the $13.4 billion as a supplemental appropriation for fy2010 in its fy2011 budget , the secretary of the va already has the authority under current law to make this determination , which requires the va to compensate veterans once regulations are issued .

cbo has estimated that $5 billion rather than $13.4 billion would be needed in fy2010 .

the differences between the cbo and omb estimate for fy2010 is due to the uncertainty about when the final regulations for the service connection presumptions will be released and the length of time for processing disability compensation claims by the va ( 179 days in fy2009 for initial disability compensation claims ) .

the enacted version of h.r .

4899 includes the $13.4 billion for additional veterans benefits related to agent orange requested by the administration .

the earlier senate may version and the house july - amended version also both approved the request .

section 902 , offered by senator webb , adopted by the senate , and included in the house july - amended version , prohibits the va from paying any of these claims related to agent orange until the period for congressional review has expired ( generally , 60 days after a report on the new action is submitted to congress ) .

unless congress enacts a joint resolution changing the regulations , there will be no impact on the amount of a veterans disability compensation because these claims would be "back - dated" to the date of eligibility .

the administration requested $4.6 billion to settle two longstanding cases against the government: $1.15 billion for the pigford black farmers discrimination case ; and $3.4 billion for the cobell indian trust litigation settlement .

in both cases , the claimants argue that unless funds are appropriated before a certain date , the settlements could be voided , but it is not clear that these are hard deadlines .

the most recent deadline for the cobell case is august 6 , 2010 , but this has been extended several times .

the fy2010 budget supplemental requested $1.15 billion in emergency appropriation to settle the pigford ii discrimination case brought by 70,000 black farmers against the u.s. department of agriculture , who were not covered by the original 1999 pigford class - action settlement .

a settlement in the pigford ii case was announced on february 18 , 2010 , by secretary of agriculture tom vilsack and attorney general eric h. holder , jr .

the administration had requested $1.15 billion for the claimants in its fy2010 budget but funds were not appropriated .

the pigford ii settlement is final and non - appealable .

a provision of the settlement states that should congress fail to make the $1.15 billion appropriation by march 31 , 2010 , the claimants could void the settlement .

no funds were appropriated by this deadline .

because the settlement is clearly a priority of both the usda and the white house , plaintiffs are unlikely to exercise their right to void the settlement in the near term .

the administration requested $3.4 billion in fy2010 supplemental appropriations to settle litigation over mismanagement of individual indian trust fund accounts in the cobell v. salazar case ( civil no .

96-1285 ( jr ) , d.d.c. ) ) .

of that total , $1.4 billion would be transferred to a fund to distribute to plaintiffs and $2 billion would be used to purchase and consolidate fractionated trust land interests ( owned by the plaintiffs ) and to award $60 million in education scholarships .

the settlement , agreed to by the plaintiffs and the departments of the interior , treasury , and justice on december 7 , 2009 , requires legislative authorization by august 6 , 2010 , a deadline recently extended for a fifth time .

it is not clear whether further extensions will be accepted by the parties or the presiding judge .

the cobell lawsuit arose from interior's inability to account accurately for payments into and from individual indian monies ( iim ) trust accounts set up in the 19 th century to deposit income from individuals' trust lands as well as other payments .

interior management of these accounts was difficult , not only because of the allotments' age , but also because of the splitting of interests in each tract as each generation of heirs divided their allotments , creating an estimated 384,000 iim accounts with a current total asset value over $460 million .

both the plaintiffs and the defendants may have reason to support the cobell settlement in order to end 14 years of "contentious and acrimonious litigation" that has cost both parties millions of dollars .

some indian organizations and plaintiffs oppose congressional approval of the cobell settlement , and some approve .

the enacted version of h.r .

4899 does not include the $4.6 billion appropriation for the cobell and pigford ii court settlements that the administration requested .

the earlier house version passed on july 1 , 2010 , included language providing direct spending authority to use the judgment fund , a permanent appropriation , to pay for these settlements ( 31 u.s.c .

1304 ) , and $4.5 billion savings from reducing the government's costs to purchase drugs in mandatory programs ( see below ) .

house and senate rules require that such direct spending must be offset by either increasing revenues or reducing other direct spending .

otherwise , a member could raise a point of order .

similar language providing for use of the judgment fund to make payments resulting from the cobell and pigford ii court settlements was included in an earlier version of h.r .

4213 but was dropped from the final version ( p.l .

111-205 ) .

senator reid's office has said that the senator may propose to pass these provisions in a separate bill by unanimous consent that could be offered as before the august recess or by attaching them to other bills .

if funding is included for the court settlements in some other bill , then offsets or savings in mandatory programs would be required under paygo provisions .

the final version of h.r .

4899 did not include provisions in the earlier house july amended version that identified $4.68 billion in mandatory savings over ten years from two new provisions intended to reduce government medical care expenditures .

one of these provisions would increase the rebates states receive from drug manufacturers by including more forms of drugs in the calculation of average manufacturer price ( amp ) .

the second provision would reduce drug expenditures for federal programs by providing the federal trade commission ( ftc ) with additional authority to limit the ability of brand name drug manufacturers to make deals with generic drug makers to not offer competing products .

neither provision was included in earlier versions of h.r .

4899 or in the administration request .

the july 1 amended house version of the supplemental appropriations act that was dropped by the house on july 27 , 2010 , would have amended medicaid law to include the injected , infused , and inhaled dosage forms of outpatient drugs in determining amp .

amp is a benchmark price used to calculate rebates for prescription drugs purchased by states on behalf of medicaid beneficiaries .

drug manufacturers that participate in medicaid are required to pay rebates to the states for these drugs , which states share with the federal government .

although the new health care reform laws revised the definition of amp to help ensure that medicaid rebates would be consistently calculated , certain forms of outpatient drugs were omitted from the amp definition changes .

this proposal would add the injected , infused , and inhaled forms of outpatient drugs to the amp calculation , which would increase the amount manufacturers would owe in medicaid drug rebates .

the change to medicaid drug rebates proposed by the house july 1 amended version of h.r .

4899 was not included in either the previous senate may version or the original house march version of the bill , or in administration's requests .

cbo estimated that this amendment to medicaid drug law to include injected , infused , and inhaled drugs in the calculation of amp would reduce federal medicaid expenditures by $2.1 billion over 10 years , but would not have a measureable impact in fy2010 .

the senate did not accept the provisions to add additional drug forms to the definition of amp that was included in the july 1 house amended version .

a similar provision to the amp changes proposed in that earlier version was included in s.amdt .

4567 which was offered in the nature of a substitute to h.r .

1586 on july 29 , 2010 .

sections 4201-4206 of the house july amended version of h.r .

4899 form the preserve access to affordable generics act that seeks to stop the practice ( known as reverse payments or pay - to - delay arrangements ) by which a pharmaceutical product patent holder pays or provides something of value to a generic manufacturer in return for that generic manufacturer's not challenging the patent and not selling a competing generic version of a prescription drug product for a specific time .

under these provisions , an agreement would be presumed to be illegal when a brand - name drug company compensates a generic drug company to delay the entry of a generic drug into the market .

although a similar provision was in h.r .

3962 , the house - passed health reform package , it was not included in the enacted health reform bills .

since the hatch - waxman act in 1984 , the food and drug administration has been able to approve a generic version of a drug after the patent period on a new drug ended .

because the generic manufacturer does not have to repeat all of the expensive and time - consuming clinical testing by which the original sponsor - manufacturer had to demonstrate the drug's safety and effectiveness , generic prices generally are much lower than the brand - name product's price .

delays in the availability of generic versions of drugs , therefore , increase the cost to consumers , including the federal government , which both purchases ( through programs in the departments of defense , veterans affairs , and health and human services ) and pays for ( through medicare , medicaid , and other programs ) drugs .

these provisions would , by adding a new section 28 to the ftc act , make unlawful any agreement involving compensation for delay of research , development , marketing , manufacturing , or sales of a generic drug .

this presumption could be overcome according to specified criteria .

the provision would give ftc rulemaking authority and would provide for judicial review and civil penalties .

cbo estimated that implementing the provision in the july house amended version would , over the 2010-2020 period , reduce spending by $2.42 billion and increase federal revenues by $0.26 billion , in aggregate reducing federal budget deficits by $2.68 billion .

the senate did not accept the preserving access to generic drugs provisions included in the july house amended version nor were they included in the enrolled bill sent to the president .

the enacted version did not include the $538 million for initiatives to reduce waste , fraud , and abuse ( wfa ) in federal programs that was included in the earlier house july amended version .

these funds were to go to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the internal revenue service ( irs ) , the department of labor ( dol ) , and the social security administration ( ssa ) .

the wfa funding included efforts to reduce improper payments , as well as activities to prevent , detect , investigate , and prosecute individuals suspected of illegal activity .

federal agencies are responsible for conducting wfa activities to help ensure that federal expenditures are appropriate and that beneficiaries are entitled to the benefits provided .

the $538 million in wfa funding in the house july amended version was to be allocated as follows: $245 million for enhanced tax enforcement by irs ; $250 million for the hhs health care fraud and abuse control account .

approximately half of these funds would be used by the centers for medicare & medicaid services to conduct wfa activities for medicare advantage ( part c ) , medicare drug benefits ( part d ) , medicaid , and the state children's health insurance program .

about one quarter of the funds ( $65 million ) would be for the hhs office of the inspector general .

the balance ( $60 million ) would be transferred to the department of justice to support hhs fraud and abuse investigations ; $38 million would be for the ssa to conduct continuing disability reviews of social security disability insurance beneficiaries and eligibility redeterminations for supplemental security income recipients ; and $5 million would be for the dol to conduct in - person reemployment reviews , eligibility assessments , and unemployment insurance improper payment reviews .

these funds were not designated as emergency funding , the funding for the dol , ssa , and irs would be available until september 2011 , while the hhs funds would be available until september 30 , 2012 .

cbo estimated that the additional pi funding would increase the federal deficit by $538 million in 2010 but did not estimate any savings so the federal budget deficits would be increased by the same amount over the period 2010-2020 .

in addition to discretionary supplemental appropriations to respond to the deepwater horizon oil spill discussed earlier in this report , the administration proposed to expand the funds that the coast guard can draw from the oil spill liability trust fund to finance its response activities , and to set up a new unemployment assistance program for individuals who are not entitled to other unemployment benefits ( such as the self - employed ) .

the oil spill liability trust fund permits the coast guard to withdraw up to $150 million per year to finance its response activities and is supported by an excise tax on domestic petroleum and petroleum imported for use in the united states .

the administration also proposed a 1 cent increase in the tax per barrel of oil that replenishes the trust fund and a new unemployment benefit program for those affected by the spill , but these proposals are outside the responsibility of the appropriations committees .

although the administration proposal would appropriate "such sums as would be necessary," for the new unemployment benefit program , the parties responsible for the oil spill under the oil pollution act would be liable for reimbursing the u.s. treasury for all costs of the benefit and its administration .

the administration's proposal authorized mandatory appropriations as "advances" from the trust fund .

later withdrawals from the trust fund would not require appropriations .

these funds could later be recouped by the federal government from the responsible parties under the liability provisions of the oil pollution act of 1990 .

cbo estimated that the administration's proposal would result in $125 million in mandatory appropriations including $150 million in spending offset by $25 million that would be recovered from the responsible parties .

the administration's proposal would authorize the coast guard to make one or more advances of $100 million each from the oil spill liability trust fund to respond to the deepwater horizon oil spill compared to the $150 million annual limitation on the advance of monies from the trust fund .

although the coast guard may continue to draw this amount each fiscal year if needed , the total expenditure to respond to an individual incident is limited to a cap of $1 billion in current law .

the administration proposed to increase this cap to $1.5 billion to make more funds available if necessary to respond to the deepwater horizon oil spill .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) has estimated that a total of $1.575 billion in the trust fund would be available for obligation by the end of fy2010 .

the proposed increase in the limitation on annual advances of monies from the oil spill liability trust fund would apply exclusively to the deepwater horizon oil spill to enhance federal emergency response capabilities .

the limitation on annual advances in existing law would continue to apply to other spills .

the coast guard would be required to notify congress of any advanced funds for the deepwater horizon oil spill within 7 days , whereas the advance of funds for other spills would continue to require 30 days notice , as in existing law .

the final version of h.r .

4899 included provisions for the oil spill liability trust fund that were the same as those in legislation , p.l .

111-191 ( s. 3473 ) that congress passed separately on june 15 , 2010 , in response to concerns raised by admiral thad allen , national incident commander for the deepwater horizon oil spill , and department of homeland security secretary janet napolitano that the coast guard would hit the $150 million cap by late june .

that legislation , p.l .

111-191 ( s. 3473 ) raises the cap to $1 billion for the deepwater horizon spill , and allows $100 million withdrawals with 7-day notifications to congress , was enacted on june 15 th , 2010 .

cbo estimated that this legislation would require $50 million in fy2010 that would be offset by $50 million in reimbursements in fy2012 , thus not violating paygo rules .

the actual amount made available to the coast guard under section 2001 would depend on the number of $100 million advances drawn from the trust fund , up to the $1 billion per - incident cap .

the reimbursements would depend on the enforcement of liability under the oil pollution act .

the final version of h.r .

4899 did not include the administration's proposed new mandatory unemployment compensation program for those who would not qualify for other programs , which cbo estimated would cost $33 million though the actual amount would have depended on the number eligible who apply .

congress addressed the administration's $64.3 billion request for supplemental spending for fy2010 five times between march 24 , 2010 , and july 27 , 2010 ( see table 1 ) .

congressional action included: the house passed h.r .

4899 by a vote of 239-174 of h.r .

4899 on march 24 , 2010 ( no house report ) with $5.7 billion in spending for the disaster relief fund in federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , and $600 million for the department of labor's summer jobs program , and $5.1 billion in new budget authority ( ba ) including $600 million in offsetting rescissions ; the senate passed h.r .

4899 by a vote of 67 to 28 h.r .

4899 on may 27 , 2010 ( s.rept .

111-188 ) with $59.3 billion in spending , for disaster relief , war funding , war - related foreign assistance , haiti relief and reconstruction , additional benefits for vietnam veterans exposed to agent orange , other disaster relief , other foreign assistance , and oil spill recovery funding , and $58.9 billion in new ba including $600 million in offsetting rescissions ; house adopted the senate may 25 , 2010 , version of h.r .

4899 and added funds for the education jobs fund , pell grants , summer youth employment , funding for the cobell and pigford ii court cases on july 1 , 2010 , with a total of $81.8 billion in spending , and $65.1 billion in new ba including $16.7 billion in rescissions and mandatory savings ; senate failed to invoke cloture on house july amended version , and sent a message of disagreement with that version to the house on july 22 , 2010 ; house receded from ( withdrew its support of ) the july 1 , 2010 , version of h.r .

4899 it had passed and adopted the senate may 25 version by a vote of 308-114 ( two - thirds required under suspension of the rules ) on july 27 , 2010 ; and president signed the bill on july 29 , 2010 , p.l .

111-212 .

previous congressional action , including floor debate , is described below .

in passing h.r .

4899 on march 24 , 2010 , the house bill totaled $5.7 billion in spending , and focused on disaster relief , and did not include the war - related , haiti relief or other administration requests .

senate passed h.r .

4899 on may 25 , 2010 the senate may 25 , 2010 , version of h.r .

4899 ( which was ultimately adopted by the house in the final version ) addressed most of the elements in the administration request except for the funding for the cobell and pigford ii court settlements .

at that point , funding for these court cases has been included in h.r .

4212 , the tax extenders bill .

the senate version included $5.1 billion for fema's disaster relief fund , $36.6 .

billion for dod's and state department / usaid war - related activities , $2.9 billion for haiti relief and reconstruction activities , and about $200 million to respond to the deepwater horizon oil spill , and $13.4 billion in mandatory spending for additional benefits for vietnam veterans exposed to agent orange ( see table 1 ) .

the senate version added $386 million for other u.s. disaster relief programs to respond to recent floods in tennessee and rhode island , and other natural disasters and $592 million for other foreign aid and humanitarian assistance programs , bringing the total spending to $59.3 billion , which is offset by $300 million in rescissions for a total of $58.9 billion .

the senate total was $4.1 billion below the administration's request , largely because the sac did not address the administration's requests for $4.6 billion to two recently settled court cases ( see table 1 ) .

the administration supported passage of the senate version .

senate debate on h.r .

4899 the senate debated h.r .

4899 from may 25-may 27 , 2010 , focusing primarily on proposed amendments to address border security concerns , responding to the gulf oil spill , paying for supplemental spending , ensuring funding for recent national disasters , and setting a timeline to withdraw from afghanistan .

based on a proposal by majority leader senator reid and adopted by unanimous consent on may 26 , 2010 , the senate agreed to consider and vote on six amendments within strict time limits , to be followed by a vote on a cloture motion filed on may 25 , 2010 .

if points of order were raised and sustained , the amendments would be withdrawn .

the senate rejected the six amendments .

senators kyl and mccain proposed additional funding for 6,000 national guard and other personnel to reverse a deteriorating security situation on the border .

while the white house announced that the president has authorized the deployment of an additional 1,200 national guard and would be requesting $500 million for border security , that amendment has not yet been submitted .

senators landrieu and cochran proposed various measures to respond to the deepwater horizon oil spill including providing relief to small businesses by delaying loan or principal payments or providing technical assistance .

senator menendez proposed a amendment requiring oil polluters to pay the full cost of oil spills .

senators mccain and coburn proposed amendments to cut $59 billion other federal funding to finance the additional spending in the deficit , arguing the spending did not qualify as an emergency and hence should be offset .

senator inouye questioned whether these proposals to rescind unobligated balances , cap federal salaries and other measures were realistic .

the six amendments receiving individual votes were rejected as follows: mccain amendment to provide $250 million for 6,000 national guards to secure the southern land border of the united states offset by rescinding unobligated funds in the american recovery and reinvestment act , p.l .

111-5 ) ( s.amdt .

4214 withdrawn after failure to receive the 60 votes necessary to waive the budget point of order raised ; the vote was 51 to 46 ) ; kyl amendment to appropriate $200 million to prevent illegal crossings at the southwest border with an offset from unobligated funds in the american recovery and reinvestment act ( s.amdt .

4228 , withdrawn after failure to receive the 60 votes necessary to waive the budget point of order raised ; the vote was 54-44 ) ; cornyn amendment provides funds from unobligated balances to deploy national guards on the border ( s.amdt .

4202 , withdrawn after failure to receive the 60 votes necessary to waive the budget point of order raised ; the vote was 54 to 43 ) ; feingold amendment requiring the president to set a timetable to redeploy troops from afghanistan ( s.amdt .

4204 rejected by a vote of 18 yeas to 80 nays ) ; coburn amendment cutting $59 billion in the supplemental bill over 10 years to offset the cost of the supplemental by: a one - year freeze on federal civilian salaries , capping the number of federal employees , reducing "nonessential government travel" and other proposed cuts ( s.amdt .

4231 as modified , tabled by a vote of 53-45 ) ; coburn amendment to offset the $59 billion in h.r .

4899 by reducing congress' own budget and disposing of "unneeded federal property and equipment ; and rescinding unspent federal funds ( $45 billion ) ( s.amdt .

4232 , tabled by a vote of 50 to 47 ) ; after these amendments were considered , the senate invoked cloture by a vote of 69 to 20 on may 27 , 2010 .

other pending amendments were withdrawn .

later that day , by unanimous consent , the senate voted to adopt 16 amendments in a managers' amendment .

h.r .

4899 as amended was then passed by a vote of 67 to 28 , conferees were appointed , and the bill was be sent to the house .

earlier , on may 13 , 2010 , the senate appropriations committee ( sac ) marked up and reported h.r .

4899 , the disaster relief and summer jobs act of fy2010 including $58.9 billion in funding .

house amended version of h.r .

4899 on july 1 , 2010 on july 1 , 2010 , the house passed an amended version of h.r .

4899 which added $22.5 billion in funding for domestic programs to the senate's may 25 , 2010 , bill , as well as $16.3 billion in rescissions and mandatory savings .

in h.res .

1500 , adopted by the house rule to govern floor consideration of h.r .

4899 , members voted separately first on the rule itself and then on whether to adopt four separate amendments described in h.rept .

111-522 .

if the rule and at least one of the amendments were passed , then the entire bill , as amended , was enrolled and sent to the senate .

on july 1 , 2010 , the house adopted the rule by a vote of 215 to 210 .

adoption of the rule entailed not only set the procedures governing consideration but also adopted the senate may version of the bill .

in addition , adoption of the rule authorized and funded the two settlement costs of the two court cases ( pigford ii and cobell ) , provided $1 billion for the summer jobs program , set fy2011 total discretionary and mandatory funding levels in the house through a "deeming" resolution , and changed certain transportation grant formulas and tax eligibility rules for cellulosic biofuel producers .

after adopting the rule , the house passed house amendment no .

2 by 239 to 182 .

that amendment included the additional funding for domestic programs that was not in the senate bill ( see above ) .

during the debate on july 1 , 2010 , republican members argued that the house should pass the senate version of the bill , confining spending to the administration's request for fema disaster assistance , war funding , new va benefits , and settling the court cases , and that the additional domestic spending was not justifiable in light of current and prospective high deficits .

democratic members argued that the additional domestic spending was justified as a way to prevent layoffs during the current recession and provide additional government - sponsored credit for farmers and energy projects , and for students facing difficulties because of the current tightened lending environment .

in considering the three war - related amendments ( amendments 4 , 5 , and 6 in h.rept .

111-522 ) , debate focused on the wisdom of the current administration policy in afghanistan , the need for dod to get its war funding , and the president's policy announced december 1 , 2009 , to begin withdrawal of troops from afghanistan in july 2011 .

additional funding the house amended july 1 , 2010 , version included the following additional spending: $10.0 billion for the education job funds to prevent teacher layoffs ; $5.0 billion for pell grants ; $701 million for enhanced border security activities ; $538 million for program integrity initiatives targeting waste , fraud , and abuse in medicare and medicaid ; $180 million for loans for nuclear and alternative energy ; $159 million vs. $94 million for oil spill recovery relief and recovery activities ; $82 million vs. $32 million for agricultural and farm loans and emergency food assistance ; and $67 million vs. $20 million for other activities including mine safety efforts ( see table 1 ) .

in addition , the house july - amended version included $2.5 billion compared to $2.0 billion in the senate may version for non - defense dod spending , primarily for increased fuel costs for dod's base budget .

the house version also added $300 million for base closure related transportation improvements , and $16.5 million for a soldier readiness center at fort hood , site of the recent fatal shootings .

additional offsets and savings the house july - amended version also included substantially larger offsets from both rescissions and savings in mandatory programs including $12.2 billion in rescissions , compared to $381 million in the senate may 25 , 2010 , version and $4.5 billion in savings from mandatory programs , that are not addressed by the senate .

rescissions of unobligated authority can be used to offset new spending .

budget authority ( ba ) is available for obligation from one to five years depending on the type of authority ; for example , military construction authority can be obligated over five years whereas military personnel spending must be obligated within one fiscal year .

if budget authority remains unobligated at the end of its useful life , then the funds expire and reduce the deficit by that amount .

while some rescissions are controversial , others , particularly where the ba is unlikely to be obligated before the end of its fiscal life , are not controversial .

the $12.2 billion in rescissions in the house july - amended version of h.r .

4899 included the following: $3.2 billion in dod funding primarily funds due to expire by september 30 , 2010 , and $500 million in dod's military construction funding from contract savings ; $2.2 billion in unused highway contract authority ; $2 .

billion in unused funds for pandemic flu ; $1.3 billion in american recovery act funding ; $800 million in unobligated education department funding for the administration's "race to the top" initiative and teacher incentive awards that triggered a veto threat from the administration ; $748 million in unused or frozen disaster assistance funding ; $220 million in state department funding ; and $1.8 billion from a variety of other programs .

in a statement of administration policy issued july 1 , 2010 , the office of management and budget stated that the president would veto any version of the bill that "undermined his abilities as commander - in - chief" to conduct operations in afghanistan or included the $800 million in rescissions to the administration's education initiative .

in addition to the spending proposals , the house also considered and rejected three amendments that would have restricted funding or required additional votes on war funding in afghanistan on july 1 , 2010 .

the first war - related amendment would have deleted all dod war funding and failed by a vote 25 to 376 .

the second amendment requiring that war funding in the bill be restricted to paying for providing protection to military , civilian , and contractor personnel and beginning the "safe and orderly" withdrawal of these personnel failed by a vote of 100 to 321 .

the third war - related amendment would have required that funds in the act could not be obligated or expended "in a manner that is inconsistent" with the president's policy to begin the withdrawal of troops by july 1 , 2011 , unless the congress votes to explicitly approve such a change under expedited procedures .

the amendment also required that the president submit a withdrawal plan by april 4 , 2011 , conduct a new national intelligence estimate for afghanistan and pakistan , and report within 90 days of enactment on recommendations to increase oversight of contractors in afghanistan .

this amendment failed by a vote of 162 to 260 .

before floor action , the house leadership deleted proposals to add $1.2 billion for the community oriented policing services ( cops ) program and $500 million for firefighter assistance grants that were included in a majority leadership draft circulated earlier .

