congress is concerned about widespread u.s. unemployment in the wake of the recent economic recession .

as of june 2010 , the nation's jobless rate stood at 9.5% .

particularly hard hit have been workers in the residential contracting industry , which , by some estimates , faces unemployment on the order of 25% .

at the same time , policy makers have been concerned about volatility in global energy prices , and the environmental and economic impacts of climate change .

both congress and federal agencies have been promoting policies to improve the energy - efficiency of the u.s. buildings stock as a means to substantially reduce u.s. energy costs and associated co 2 emissions .

according to the department of state's 2006 climate action report , "by using commercially available , energy - efficient products , technologies , and best practices , many commercial buildings and homes could save up to 30 percent on energy bills. .

the proposed home star energy retrofit program is intended to promote both greater residential energy - efficiency and increased employment in the home remodeling , energy services , and related manufacturing industries .

two very similar home star programs are detailed in legislation proposed in the house and senate .

the house of representatives version , the home star energy retrofit act of 2010 ( h.r .

5019 ) , was introduced on april 14 , 2010 , by representative peter welch and 44 cosponsors .

h.r .

5019 passed the house with amendments on may 7 , 2010 , and was referred to the senate finance committee .

the senate proposal was initially introduced under the home star energy retrofit act of 2010 ( s. 3177 ) , which was introduced by senator jeff bingaman and two cosponsors on march 25 , 2010 .

this proposal was superseded by the home star energy retrofit act of 2010 ( s. 3434 ) , which was introduced by senator bingaman and 15 cosponsors on may 27 , 2010 , and also referred to the finance committee .

a third senate version , the home star retrofit act of 2010 , was included as division c title xxx of the clean energy jobs and oil company accountability act of 2010 ( s. 3663 ) introduced by senator harry reid on july 28 , 2010 .

h.r .

5019 authorizes $6 billion in funding for the program .

s. 3663 authorizes $5 billion .

the program would be administered by the department of energy ( doe ) in both cases .

this report focuses primarily on operational and market aspects of the proposed home star program .

in particular , it addresses only limited aspects of job creation and economic stimulus potential of the program .

for the sake of brevity and clarity , the report does not cite specific sections in the house or senate bills related to home star ; the provisions discussed below are found in both bills .

accordingly , the report refers to one home star program , even though the program appears in slightly different forms in the house and senate bills .

some significant differences between the house and senate versions are noted .

other differences between h.r .

5019 and s. 3663 may be significant in other policy contexts that are beyond the scope of this report .

home star would employ a two - tiered structure for energy - efficiency rebates .

its silver star program tier would provide up to $3,000 per home in prescriptive rebates for straightforward home upgrades , including insulation ; efficient heating , ventilation , and air conditioning units ; new windows ; and other measures .

the senate version would also offer rebates for water - saving products or services certified under the u.s. environmental protection agency's watersense program .

under silver star , contractors are guaranteed a fixed rebate amount for installing qualified measures , as long as they complete the necessary rebate applications and agree to post - installation quality assurance inspections .

silver star rebates would be paid automatically to contractors upon job completion and submission of a rebate request .

quality assurance inspectors would visit 10% to 20% of silver star participating homes ( depending upon the certification of the contractor ) to ensure measures were properly installed .

the gold star program tier , by contrast , would offer $3,000 rebates for more comprehensive energy retrofits achieving at least 20% energy savings , with rebates increasing to as much as $8,000 per home for retrofits achieving 45% energy savings .

the senate version would also offer up to $1,200 per home for comprehensive water efficiency retrofits .

under gold star , contractors would use specialized software to model a home's baseline energy / water use , then propose a set of retrofit measures to improve that baseline , based on the modeling software calculations .

retrofit measures could include those covered under silver star , or additional measures that could yield significant savings .

before paying rebates , gold star would require "testing out" to document actual energy / water savings once installation had been completed .

quality assurance inspectors would visit 10% to 15% of gold star participating homes .

the proposed home star program may present a significant opportunity for both efficiency improvements and employment in the united states .

the program targets the residential sector , which numerous studies have shown to be among the largest sources of cost - effective energy - efficiency ( and water - efficiency ) opportunities in the united states .

it also targets a wide base of currently unemployed or under - employed residential contractors .

structurally , the home star program seeks speedy implementation by building upon prior experience with both federal and state energy - efficiency programs to provide operating models that may be replicated nationwide .

nonetheless , several operational aspects of the program would be new to a federal program , or have not been tried for a program of home star's scale .

crs has identified a number of key considerations which may warrant further attention as congress reviews the home star program's operational details .

in addition to the specific operational issues discussed above , three overarching market issues may also warrant further congressional consideration — a "do - it - yourself" option , expectations for program participation , and anticipated growth in the weatherization industry .

the proposed home star program may present an opportunity to improve residential energy - efficiency and increase related employment , but it contains a number of operational elements that have yet to be tested — and may be challenging to implement — on a national scale .

key market aspects of home star are also unpredictable .

in particular , achieving the program's high expectations for homeowner participation would appear to be unprecedented for the types of contractor - installed measures it includes .

taken together , home star's key operational requirements may appear more challenging than many may anticipate , and may present unanticipated obstacles to speedy and consistent program implementation across the country .

as congress examines details of the home star proposal , focusing on tradeoffs between rapid implementation , operational complexity , and energy - efficiency impacts may be important .

balancing the twin goals of short - term job creation and long - term investment in cost - effective energy savings could also be an ongoing challenge .

