on may 24 , 2010 , the supreme court issued its decision in lewis v. city of chicago , a case involving questions regarding the timeliness of disparate impact discrimination claims filed under title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , which prohibits employment discrimination on the basis of race , color , national origin , sex , or religion .

in lewis , a group of aspiring black firefighters sued the city of chicago over its repeated use of an employment test with racially disproportionate results to hire several new groups of firefighters over a six - year period .

the city argued that the applicants , who filed their claim almost two years after the employment examination was administered , had exceeded the statutory deadline for filing claims under title vii , while the applicants claimed that the city committed a fresh act of discrimination each time it relied upon the test to hire a new class of firefighters , thus repeatedly restarting the clock on the filing deadline .

in a unanimous decision , the supreme court ruled in favor of the applicants for the firefighting positions , holding that such disparate impact claims may be brought each time an employer uses the results of a discriminatory test to hire .

in 1995 , over 26,000 applicants seeking to join the chicago fire department took an employment examination administered by the city .

based on the scores of the examination , the city established three groups of applicants: those who were "well - qualified," "qualified," or "not qualified. .

on nine occasions , the city selected new hires from the pool of well - qualified candidates , although on the last occasion the city also hired applicants from the qualified group once it had exhausted the pool of well - qualified candidates .

these nine hirings occurred over a six - year period .

in 1997 , a group of black applicants who scored in the qualified range filed a charge of discrimination with the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) claiming that the city's practice of initially hiring only from the well - qualified group , which was 75.8% white and only 11.5% black , had an unlawful disparate impact on the basis of race .

subsequently , they filed a title vii suit in federal court , and the district court certified a class of more than 6,000 black applicants who had scored in the qualified range but had not been hired .

although the city stipulated that its classification of applicants as either well - qualified or qualified had had a disparate racial impact , it sought summary judgment on the ground that the applicants had failed to file their eeoc claim within the statutorily mandated deadline .

the district court rejected this argument and later ruled in favor of the applicants , ordering the city to hire 132 members of the class and awarding back pay to the rest .

the u.s. court of appeals for the seventh circuit reversed the district court's decision , holding that the applicants had failed to meet the statutory filing deadline because "[t]he hiring only of applicants classified 'well qualified' was the automatic consequence of the test scores rather than the product of a fresh act of discrimination. .

the supreme court granted review in order to determine "whether a plaintiff who does not file a timely charge challenging the adoption of a practice — here , an employer's decision to exclude employment applicants who did not achieve a certain score on an examination — may assert a disparate - impact claim in a timely charge challenging the employer's later application of that practice. .

under title vii , two different types of discrimination are prohibited .

the first is disparate treatment , which involves intentional discrimination , such as treating an individual differently because of his or her race .

the second type of prohibited discrimination — at issue in lewis — is disparate impact , which involves a neutral employment practice that is not intended to discriminate but that nonetheless has a disproportionate effect on protected individuals .

an employer may defend against a disparate impact claim by showing that the challenged practice is "job related for the position in question and consistent with business necessity," although a plaintiff may still succeed by demonstrating that the employer refused to adopt an available alternative employment practice that has less disparate impact and serves the employer's legitimate needs .

regardless of whether they allege disparate impact or disparate treatment , individuals who want to challenge an employment practice as unlawful are required to file a charge with the eeoc within a specified period — either 180 days or 300 days , depending on the state — "after the alleged unlawful employment practice occurred. .

the question that arose for the supreme court in lewis was whether the city's subsequent use , rather than its initial adoption , of a discriminatorily tiered hiring system constituted an unlawful employment practice for purposes of starting the clock on the filing deadline .

ultimately , the court ruled unanimously in favor of the applicants , holding that such disparate impact claims may be brought when a plaintiff challenges an employer's subsequent application of an earlier - adopted discriminatory practice .

in its brief opinion , the court relied on the text of title vii to determine that the city's refusal to hire those applicants whose scores fell below the well - qualified range constituted an "employment practice," and thus concluded that the applicants could proceed with their suit because they had established a prima facie disparate impact claim by showing , as title vii requires , that the employer "uses a particular employment practice that causes a disparate impact. .

in rejecting the city's contention that the only actionable discrimination occurred when it first established cutoff scores for the well - qualified and qualified groups of applicants , the court distinguished its rulings in several earlier cases , including ledbetter v. goodyear tire & rubber co. , a 2007 case in which the court held that a plaintiff's title vii claim was untimely , rejecting her argument that each paycheck she received reflected a lower salary due to past discrimination and thus constituted a new violation of the statute .

according to the court , its previous cases "establish only that a title vii plaintiff must show a 'present violation' within the limitations period. .

in ledbetter , which involved a disparate treatment claim and therefore required a showing of discriminatory intent , the plaintiff failed to demonstrate that such intentional discrimination had occurred within the filing period .

in a disparate impact case such as lewis , however , no such showing of discriminatory intent is required , and the court therefore concluded that the applicants' claim was cognizable .

finally , the court addressed the practical implications of its decision .

according to the city , the court's decision will cause numerous problems for employers , including new disparate impact lawsuits that challenge employment practices that have been used for years and difficulty defending against such suits after many years have passed .

the court noted , however , that a different reading of the statute would produce equally puzzling results: under the city's interpretation , "if an employer adopts an unlawful practice and no timely charge is brought , it can continue using the practice indefinitely , with impunity , despite ongoing disparate impact. .

likewise , litigation could increase if employees who are afraid of missing the filing deadline decide to challenge new employment practices before it is clear whether such practices have a disparate impact .

ultimately , the court noted that its task is not to address the practical implications of its decision but rather to give effect to the statute .

in enacting title vii , "congress allowed claims to be brought against an employer who uses a practice that causes disparate impact , whatever the employer's motives and whether or not he has employed the same practice in the past .

if the effect was unintended , it is a problem for congress , not one that the federal courts can fix. .

