congress has passed a series of continuing resolutions ( crs ) to fund government programs since fy2011 began on october 1 , 2010 .

in the meantime , the house and senate majority leadership each proposed comprehensive legislation , h.r .

1 and senate amendment #149 to h.r .

1 , respectively , to fund the government for the remainder of fy2011 .

both proposals were rejected by the senate on march 9 , 2011 .

ensuing negotiations between the administration and house and senate leaders resulted in an agreement that was introduced in the house on april 11 as h.r .

1473 .

the legislation became p.l .

112-10 , approved by the house and senate on april 14 and signed by the president on april 15 .

p.l .

112-10 establishes fy2011 funding levels for state department and foreign operations accounts at a total annual rate of $48.98 billion .

this represents a 14% decrease from the administration's fy2011 request , and an 11% decrease from the total fy2010-enacted appropriation , including supplementals .

the legislation had no accompanying report and provides limited details about country - level funding .

the legislation directs the administration to report back to congress in 30 days on how it proposes to allocate the appropriated funds at the program , project , and activity level .

state department and foreign operations highlights of p.l .

112-10 include the following: the state department appropriation for administration of foreign affairs , at $11.41 billion , is a 9% cut from the fy2010 total enacted level , but slightly higher than the pre - supplemental funding level .

within this title , diplomatic and consular programs are cut 8% from the total fy2010-enacted level , including supplementals , the embassy security , construction and maintenance account is cut by 10% , and educational and cultural exchange programs are cut 6% .

the legislation also terminates overseas comparability pay adjustment for foreign service officers .

the legislation provides $747 million for international broadcasting , including $10 million provided specifically to fight internet access restrictions .

u.s. institute of peace funding is cut 20% from the total enacted fy2010 level , to $39.4 million .

usaid receives $1.66 billion for administrative accounts , an 8% reduction from fy2010 .

bilateral economic assistance is funded at $25.03 billion , a 15% reduction from the total fy2010-enacted level .

the global health & child survival and development assistance accounts remain level with the fy2010-enacted total , at $7.83 billion and $2.52 billion , respectively .

cuts in this title come primarily from strategic assistance accounts: economic support fund is cut by 33% from fy2010 total enacted to $5.95 billion , while the assistance to europe , eurasia and central asia account is cut 6% , to $696 million .

international disaster and famine assistance , at $863 million , is 34% less than the total enacted fy2010 level , but slightly higher than the pre - supplemental funding level .

among independent agencies , the millennium challenge corporation receives just under $900 million , a 19% cut from the fy2010-enacted level , while peace corps funding , at just under $375 million , is cut 6% from the prior - year level .

security assistance is reduced 2% overall from the total fy2010-enacted level , including supplemental funding .

the international narcotics control and law enforcement account is cut by 43% from the fy2010 total , to $1.60 billion ( consistent with fy2010 pre - supplemental funding ) , while the foreign military finance account increases by 25% to $5.37 billion .

no foreign operations funding is provided for the pakistan counterinsurgency capability fund , though $800 million for a similar fund is included under the department of defense section of the legislation .

multilateral assistance is reduced 13% from fy2010 total enacted levels , including supplementals .

u.s. contributions to environmental funds are particularly hard hit , including a 38% cut to the international clean technology fund , to $185 million , and a 33% cut to the strategic climate fund , at $50 million .

the asian development bank receives no funding in the legislation , and funds for the african development fund are reduced 29% , to about $110 million .

the legislation provides not less that $575 million for family planning / reproductive health programs , a major point of contention during negotiations , and further states that $40 million should be made available for the u.n. population fund ( unfpa ) under the international organizations and programs ( io&p ) account .

on february 1 , 2010 , the obama administration submitted its fy2011 budget request to congress , together with a request for supplemental fy2010 funding for foreign operations activities .

later that month , secretary of state hillary clinton testified before the house foreign affairs committee and senate foreign relations committee , and before each chamber's state - foreign operations appropriations subcommittee .

hearings on aspects of the international affairs budget request were held throughout march and april 2010 .

on april 22 , 2010 , the senate budget committee passed a budget resolution recommending $4 billion less than the administration requested for the international affairs account , prompting strong objections by foreign aid advocates , including a letter signed by all living former secretaries of state urging congress to fully fund the administration's request .

on july 15 and july 20 , 2010 , respectively , the senate and house approved fy2011 discretionary funding allocations for each appropriations subcommittee , enabling work on appropriations legislation to move forward in the absence of a budget resolution .

for state and foreign operations , the house allocation is $53.9 billion and the senate allocation is $54.0 billion .

on july 29 , 2010 , the president signed into law ( p.l .

111-212 ) the fy2010 supplemental , which provides about $6.1 billion to the department of state and foreign operations funding , largely for state department operations and foreign aid to afghanistan , pakistan , iraq , and haiti .

the state - foreign operations appropriations bill funds most programs and activities within the international affairs budget account , known as function 150 , including foreign economic and military assistance , contributions to international organizations and multilateral financial institutions , state department and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) operations , public diplomacy , and international broadcasting programs .

however , the bill does not align perfectly with the international affairs budget .

food aid , which is appropriated through the agriculture appropriations bill , and the international trade commission and foreign claims settlement commission , both funded through the commerce - science - justice appropriation , are international affairs ( function 150 ) programs not funded through the state - foreign operations appropriations bill .

furthermore , a number of international commissions that are not part of the function 150 , such as the international boundary and water commission , are funded through the state - foreign operations bill .

a chart illustrating the organizational structure of the state - foreign operations appropriations bill is provided in appendix a .

this report focuses only on accounts funded through the state - foreign operations appropriations bill , but provides appropriations figures for the entire international affairs ( function 150 ) budget in appendix e .

table 2 and figure 1 show state - foreign operations appropriations for the past decade in both current and constant dollars .

on february 1 , 2010 , the obama administration sent its fy2011 international affairs ( function 150 account ) budget request to congress , corresponding to a total of $56.81 billion requested for the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs .

this represented a 3% increase from enacted fy2010 funding , and 4.5% of the total discretionary budget authority requested by the administration for fy2011 .

figure 3 provides a breakout of the request by assistance type .

figure 4 shows the major accounts in the bill in proportion to the whole request , and indicates for each account whether the requested funding level represented an increase or decrease over the fy2010-enacted appropriation level .

just five accounts — diplomatic and consular programs , economic support fund , global health and child survival , foreign military financing , and development assistance — make up more than 60% of the total funding requested .

while the request for several of these accounts is less than the enacted fy2010 level , such apparent decreases are the result of significant fy2010 supplemental appropriations being enacted after the fy2011 request was submitted , and do not necessarily reflect an intention to reduce spending in those accounts .

for example , the economic support fund request was 23% above the enacted fy2010 level at the time it was submitted , but is 12% below the current enacted level , after congress approved $2.5 billion in supplemental funds for that account .

for a full listing of funds requested for state , foreign operations and related agency accounts , see appendix c and appendix d .

the administration's fy2011 budget request for the department of state , international broadcasting , and related programs was $17.41 billion , a 1.2% decrease from the fy2010-enacted level of $17.62 billion , including the mandatory foreign service retirement fund and $1.52 billion in supplemental funds .

related programs funded in the state portion of the bill include the broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) , contributions to international organizations ( cio ) , including the united nations ( u.n. ) , u.n. peacekeeping ( cipa ) , and funding for several international commissions and the u.s. institute for peace .

also included are funding for the asia foundation , the national endowment for democracy , and several other independent non - profit educational and exchange organizations which help advance u.s. interests .

 ( for a description of all the accounts within the state department segment of the bill , see crs report r40482 , state , foreign operations appropriations: a guide to component accounts , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

table 3 and figure 5 show appropriations for the state department and related programs over the past decade in both current and constant dollars .

within the fy2011 state department budget request , the following issues stood out as being administration priorities or representing significant changes from existing policy or funding levels .

the fy2011 request included significant funding to support u.s. missions in iraq , afghanistan , and pakistan , where additional logistics support , security , and information technology are needed to keep up with increasing staff levels and program responsibilities .

the administration requested $1.79 billion to support the u.s. mission in iraq , for the abovementioned purposes as well as support for provincial reconstruction teams transitioning from military to state management , exchange programs , and the special inspector general for iraq reconstruction .

the administration also requested $754 million to support 1,500 civilian staff from various agencies in afghanistan , and $102 million for operational support of public diplomacy activities in pakistan .

the administration requested $9.55 billion for diplomatic & consular programs ( d&cp ) in fy2011 , which would have maintained the high funding level reached in fy2010 through a $1.33 billion supplemental appropriation for the account .

d&cp funds most state department salaries and expenses , and growth in fy2010 and the fy2011 request reflected the administration's strategic plan to increase foreign service capacity by 25% over fy2008 levels by fy2014 .

secretary of state clinton described the strategy as a means to reduce the state department's reliance on contractors , which she believed would improve accountability and save money in the long term .

the fy2011 request would have funded 599 new positions , including 410 foreign service officers and 189 civil service personnel , and expanded and improved training in critical languages .

the state department sought authority in the fy2011 request to retain all passport and consular fees , some of which are currently retained by the treasury .

the administration viewed this as a mechanism to cover the full cost of consular services more efficiently .

congress , however , expressed concern about this new funding mechanism , which would operate outside of the regular appropriations process and could no longer be used to off - set expenditures in the budgeting process .

if the request had been granted , state anticipated an additional $2.59 billion in available fees , a 45% increase over the fy2010 estimate .

the administration proposed reductions in funding for voluntary contributions to international organizations and foundations , among others .

the request for international organizations was $1.6 billion , a 5% decrease from fy2010 , reflecting reduced or eliminated contributions to several u.n. organizations , including the u.n. high commission on refugees , u.n. development fund for women , u.n. development program , u.n. children's fund ( unicef ) , and the u.n. population fund ( unfpa ) .

contributions to several foundations supported by the bill would have been reduced from fy2010 levels as well .

the asia foundation request was 17% lower than the fy2010 level , at $15.7 million ; the east - west center faced a 50% reduction , to $11.4 million ; and the national endowment for democracy would have seen an 11% cut , to $105 million .

the foreign operations budget comprises the majority of u.s. foreign assistance programs , both bilateral and multilateral .

 ( see appendix d for foreign operations accounts and funding levels. ) .

the annual state - foreign operations appropriations bill funds most u.s. bilateral development assistance programs , with the main exception being food assistance appropriated through the agriculture appropriations bill ( for which $1.89 billion was appropriated in fy2010 and the same amount requested for fy2011 ) .

these funds are managed primarily by usaid and the state department , together with several smaller independent foreign assistance agencies such as the millennium challenge corporation , the peace corps , and the inter - american and african development foundations .

the legislation also supports u.s. contributions to major multilateral financial institutions , such as the world bank and u.n. entities , and includes funds for the export - import bank and overseas private investment corporation , whose activities are regarded more as trade promotion than foreign aid .

on occasion , the bill replenishes u.s. financial commitments to international financial institutions , such as the world bank and the international monetary fund .

the foreign operations budget request for fy2011 totaled $39.40 billion , representing a 5% increase from the enacted fy2010 level of $37.49 billion , excluding forward funding from the supplemental appropriations act of 2009 .

table 4 and figure 6 provide funding levels for foreign operations over the past decade , including enacted supplemental appropriations , in both current and constant dollars .

if the fy2011 request is had been enacted , foreign operations funding would have increased by 142% in current dollars , and by 91% in constant dollars , from fy2001 to fy2011 .

prior to the wars in afghanistan and iraq , israel and egypt typically received the largest amounts of u.s. foreign aid every year since the camp david peace accords in 1978 .

the reconstruction efforts in iraq and afghanistan moved those countries into the top five , though assistance to iraq has declined significantly in the past couple of years , with the completion of many reconstruction activities .

meanwhile , a combination of security assistance and economic aid designed to limit the appeal of islamic extremist organizations has moved pakistan up the list in recent years .

in the fy2011 request , afghanistan topped the list at nearly $4 billion , followed by pakistan at $3 billion .

israel and egypt would have continued to receive significant funds , primarily for foreign military financing , at $3 billion and $1.56 billion , respectively .

jordan would also have ranked high on the list , with $682.7 million requested .

iraq would have been the fifth - largest recipient of aid in fy2011 , under the administration request .

assistance to the other top recipients — kenya , nigeria , ethiopia , and south africa — was targeted primarily at hiv / aids and other health programs .

haiti , which was a top recipient in fy2010 as a result of supplemental funds for post - earthquake relief and reconstruction , would not have been a lead recipient in fy2011 under the administration's proposal .

as shown in figure 7 , under the fy2011 proposal , africa and south central asia would have received the most u.s. foreign assistance , with about $7.6 billion requested for each .

the aid to africa primarily supports hiv / aids and other health - related programs while nearly $7 billion of the $7.6 billion in aid to south central asia was requested for afghanistan and pakistan .

almost as high was aid to the near east region , which continued to be dominated by assistance to israel , iraq , egypt , and jordan .

the sharp increase in western hemisphere totals in fy2010 could largely be attributed to nearly $1.4 billion in supplemental funds for haiti .

assistance to europe and eurasia , and to east asia and pacific , remained relatively low and consistent , reflecting the economic gains in these regions as well as strategic priorities .

over the years , congress has expressed interest in various discrete aid sectors , such as education , trade , maternal and child health , and biodiversity , that are funded across multiple accounts and / or agencies .

administrations have begun presenting their respective budget requests with a section showing what portion of the request would address some of these "key interest areas. .

unlike the account funding tables in the budget request , however , the key interest area breakout does not show prior year allocations , limiting year - to - year comparison to requested funds rather than actual funding .

this provides an indication of the administration's interests and priorities , but not necessarily those of congressional appropriators .

table 6 compares the fy2010 and fy2011 budget requests for key interest areas identified by the administration .

in keeping with the administration's major initiatives , the fy2011 request for several non - hiv / aids health activities increased significantly over the fy2010 request , as did the request for global climate change , food security , and microfinance programs .

the administration also emphasized two new focus areas , adding neglected tropical diseases and nutrition to the key interests list .

meanwhile , pandemic flu appears to have been a lower administration priority than in the prior year , along with basic education , biodiversity , and trans - saharan counter terrorism ( an initiative from the obama administration's first budget request ) .

within the fy2011 foreign operations budget request , the following issues stood out as being administration priorities or representing significant changes from existing policy or funding levels .

usaid continues to expand its foreign service staff through the development leadership initiative ( dli ) , established in 2008 to double the number of foreign service officers at usaid in order to more effectively implement assistance programs that have expanded significantly in recent years .

as with personnel increases at state , the administration views this plan as an investment that will lead to reduced reliance on contractors and greater accountability and cost savings over time .

the administration requested $1.48 billion for usaid operating expenses for fy2011 , a 6% increase over the enacted fy2010 level .

of that amount , $354.8 million was designated for recruiting and hiring 200 new foreign service officers at usaid , as well as supporting the annualized recurring costs of dli positions filled since fy2008 .

the department of defense ( dod ) greatly expanded its foreign aid activities in the wake of the iraq and afghanistan invasions , when high levels of security and economic aid flowed into those countries even while instability and relatively low personnel capacity limited the role of civilian aid agencies .

as conditions on the ground have stabilized and both state and usaid have begun building their capacity , both the secretary of state and secretary of defense have expressed support for stronger civilian control of these activities .

the fy2011 foreign operations request addressed this issue by including the following funding for activities that were previously funded through the defense appropriations bill: the complex crisis fund , for which $100 million was requested for fy2011 , would replace funding for reconstruction , security , and stabilization activities previously provided through dod's section 1207 authority .

the pakistan counterinsurgency capability fund , for which $1.2 billion was requested for fy2011 , would move ongoing activities to improve the capabilities of pakistan's security forces from dod control to the purview of the secretary of state .

for iraq , $314.6 million was included in the international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) account request for fy2011 ( along with $650 million provided for this purpose in fy2010 supplemental funds ) to enable state to take control of iraqi police training programs now funded through the dod .

secretary of state clinton has claimed that this shift from military to civilian control would allow the defense budget for iraq to decrease by $16 billion .

as demonstrated in table 5 , proposed funding for fy2011 would have largely continued the fy2010 flow of assistance to countries of strategic interest in the fight against terrorism .

the request included $12.22 billion , or 34% of the total bilateral aid requested , for "front - line" states .

for afghanistan , $3.92 billion was requested for fy2011 , primarily to increase u.s. civilian resources to balance the recent troop surge .

for pakistan , $3.05 billion was requested for fy2011 , primarily to build the capacity of the government of pakistan and support infrastructure and economic development projects that provide tangible benefits to communities and reduce the appeal of extremism .

for iraq , $729 million was requested for fy2011 , on top of $650 million provided in fy2010 supplemental funds , to support the aforementioned civilian takeover of security training programs .

the administration requested $8.5 billion in the global health and child survival account for global health initiative ( ghi ) activities in fy2011 .

the request represented an 8.8% increase over the fy2010-enacted level , or 8.1% if $50 million the administration considered forward funding from the fy2009 supplemental was counted toward the fy2010 total .

the six - year , $63 billion ghi is intended to be a comprehensive approach to global health problems that builds on the previous administration's focus on global hiv / aids , tuberculosis and malaria , but prioritizes building strong and sustainable health systems through an emphasis on maternal and pediatric programs , as well as strategic coordination .

some advocates for hiv / aids programs have expressed concern about the shift in focus , noting that funding requested for hiv / aids programs in fy2011 , while slightly above the fy2010 level , was less than amounts authorized by congress and , some argue , inadequate to sustain u.s. global commitments .

however , ambassador eric goosby , the u.s .

global aids coordinator , has stated that ghi maternal health programs will include significant activities addressing hiv / aids , which is the leading cause of death worldwide for women of child bearing age .

food security , first addressed as a key issue in the fy2010 budget request , continues to be a priority for the obama administration , which requested $1.64 billion for related programs in the fy2011 budget .

this amount did not include p.l .

480 food assistance funds , provided through the agriculture appropriation .

the administration's new global hunger and food security initiative is intended to address root causes of food insecurity and proposes to target funding to countries with widespread hunger , an agriculture - based economy , and comprehensive strategies for food security already in place .

the request also emphasized the benefits of working multilaterally and in partnership with other stakeholders to leverage resources .

the request included $408.4 million for the new multi - donor global food security trust fund , managed by the world bank , which would have supported large - scale transportation and irrigation infrastructure , commercial financing , and research .

the administration requested $1.39 billion in fy2011 to support activities relating to climate change , with an emphasis on adaptation , deployment of clean energy technologies , and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions through sustainable landscapes .

a significant portion of this climate change funding would have been channeled through international financial institutions .

the $400 million requested for contribution to the international clean technology fund represented a 33% increase over the fy2010-enacted level .

the request also included $235 million for the international strategic climate fund , a 213.3% increase over the estimated fy2010 contribution .

secretary of the treasury timothy geithner explained this emphasis on multilateral funding , both for climate change and food security , as a fiscally responsible approach intended to leverage commitments from other donors and increase the impact of u.s. funds .

appendix a .

structure of state - foreign operations appropriations appendix b. abbreviations appendix c. state department and related programs appropriations appendix d. foreign operations appropriations appendix e. international affairs ( 150 ) budget accoun .

