increasing dependence on foreign sources of crude oil , concerns over global climate change , and the desire to promote domestic rural economies have raised interest in renewable biofuels as an alternative to petroleum in the u.s. transportation sector .

however , energy from renewable sources has historically been more expensive to produce and use than fossil - fuel - based energy .

u.s. policymakers have attempted to overcome this economic impediment by enacting an increasing number of policies since the late 1970s , at both the state and federal levels , to directly support u.s. biofuels production and use .

policy measures have included blending and production tax credits to lower the cost of biofuels to end users , an import tariff to protect domestic ethanol from cheaper foreign - produced ethanol , research grants to stimulate the development of new technologies , loans and loan guarantees to facilitate the development of biofuels production and distribution infrastructure , and , perhaps most importantly , minimum usage requirements to guarantee a market for biofuels irrespective of their cost .

this report describes agriculture - based biofuels and the evolution of the u.s. biofuels sector with a focus on the role that federal policy has played in shaping its development .

in addition , it highlights emerging issues that are critical to the biofuels sector and of relevance to congress .

any fuel produced from biological materials — whether burned for heat or processed into alcohol — qualifies as a "biofuel. .

the term is most often used to refer to liquid transportation fuels produced from some type of biomass .

the two principal biofuels are ethanol and biodiesel ; however , other fuels such as methanol and butanol could also qualify when produced from a qualifying biomass .

biomass is organic matter that can be converted into energy .

common examples of biomass include food crops , energy crops ( eg , switchgrass or prairie perennials ) , crop residues , wood waste and byproducts , and animal manure .

the term biomass has been a part of legislation enacted by congress for various programs over the past 30 years ; however , its explicit definition has evolved with shifting policy objectives .

over the last few years , the concept of biomass has grown to include such diverse sources as algae , construction debris , municipal solid waste , yard waste , and food waste .

the exact definition of biomass is critical , since it determines which feedstocks and resultant biofuels qualify for the different federal biofuels programs .

for example , the principal biofuels program in effect as of this report is the renewable fuels standard ( rfs ) , which mandates annual usage rates for four nested categories of biofuels — ( 1 )  total renewable fuels , ( 2 ) advanced renewable fuels , ( 3 ) cellulosic biofuel , and ( 4 ) biomass - based diesel .

qualifying biofuels under each category are differentiated by their type of feedstock , the land on which the feedstock is produced ( eg , federal versus private , virgin versus previously cultivated soil , etc .

 ) , the production process used both to grow the feedstock and to process it into a biofuel ( certain technologies are favored based primarily on environmental considerations ) , and the estimated amount of greenhouse gas emissions that result from the entire production pathway .

the idea of formally defining biomass has evoked criticism .

some argue that by explicitly enunciating qualifying feedstocks , the definition may be excluding new or as - yet - undiscovered feedstocks that may emerge in the future .

also , there appears to be some inconsistency across programs .

for example , algae - based biofuels presently do not qualify for inclusion under the rfs cellulosic biofuels mandate , but do qualify for the "advanced other" biofuels mandate , as well as for the cellulosic biofuels tax credit and the depreciation allowance for qualifying cellulosic biofuels plants .

these differentiations tend to confuse and may slow or inhibit investments in algae - based biofuels .

biodiesel can be produced from any animal fat or vegetable oil ( such as soybean oil or recycled cooking oil ) .

historically , most u.s. biodiesel was made from soybean oil .

as a result , u.s. soybean producers and the american soybean association ( asa ) are strong advocates for greater government support for biodiesel production .

however , with the rise in soybean prices since 2007 ( figure 6 ) , biodiesel producers have aggressively shifted to cheaper vegetable oils and animal fats ( especially poultry fat ) , such that by 2011 nearly 44% of u.s. biodiesel production was estimated to be based on sources other than soybean oil .

in recent years , many ethanol production facilities have added technology to remove corn oil from distillers grains and solubles , thus generating an additional income stream to help offset depressed profit margins .

the corn oil produced by this "end - stream" technology is typically not suitable for the food industry .

instead , the main uses of this added corn oil has been as an energy supplement in livestock and poultry rations , and for biodiesel production .

according to the national biodiesel board ( nbb ) , biodiesel is nontoxic , biodegradable , and essentially free of sulfur and aromatics .

in addition , it works in any diesel engine with few or no modifications and offers similar fuel economy , horsepower , and torque , but with superior lubricity and important emission improvements over petroleum diesel .

to date , biodiesel is used almost uniquely as a substitute for petroleum diesel transport fuel .

biodiesel delivers slightly less energy than petroleum diesel ( about 92% ) ; however , u.s. biodiesel consumption remains small relative to national diesel consumption levels .

in 2012 ( figure 1 ) , u.s. biodiesel consumption represented about 1.5% ( in diesel - equivalent units ) of national diesel transportation fuel use of about 46.8 billion gallons .

biodiesel is compatible with existing petroleum - based diesel vehicles and infrastructure ( fuel tanks , retail pumps , delivery infrastructure etc. ) .

such that biodiesel does not face a blend wall similar to ethanol .

as a result , the potential blending pool for biodiesel is significantly larger than just the transportation diesel fuel market .

because biodiesel and diesel fuel are so similar , biodiesel can also be used for the same non - transportation activities — the two largest of which are home heating and power generation .

in 2012 , 53.2 billion gallons of diesel fuel were used for heating and power generation by residential , commercial , and industry , and by railroad and vessel traffic , bringing total u.s. diesel fuel use to nearly 106.7 billion gallons ( including 46.8 billion gallons of transportation fuel use and 6.8 billion gallons of residual fuel oil ) .

fuel blenders and consumers are very sensitive to price differences between biodiesel and petroleum - based diesel .

the price relationship between vegetable oils and petroleum diesel is the key determinant of profitability in the biodiesel industry — about 7.5 pounds of vegetable oil are used in each gallon of biodiesel .

since late 2010 , soybean oil prices have averaged over $0.50 / lb .

such that the vegetable oil feedstock component of biodiesel has cost over $3.75 / gal .

additional processing and marketing costs likely push wholesale biodiesel prices into the $4.50 / gal .

to $5.00 / gal .

range compared with petroleum diesel wholesale prices of $3.05 / gallon during that period .

as a result , the biodiesel industry has depended on federal support — especially the production tax credit and the rfs for biomass - based diesel — for its economic survival .

a key determinant of the demand for biofuels as a transportation fuel is the size and fuel economy of the u.s. vehicle fleet , and the adequacy of the infrastructure ( eg , pipelines , storage tanks , service pumps ) that delivers transportation fuel to consumers at the retail level .

according to the department of energy ( doe ) , 73% of u.s. transportation fuel is consumed as gasoline or gasoline blends ( figure 1 ) , with the remainder consumed as diesel fuel .

gasoline blends and diesel fuel , for the most part , require different infrastructure for delivery to the retail market .

in addition , vehicle motors are designed to operate with either gasoline or diesel , but not both .

most of the federal biofuels tax credit provisions , as well as the import tariff on foreign - produced ethanol , have short legislative lives and require frequent extension .

the primary energy - related issue for the next farm bill is the expiration of program authority at the end of fy2013 and the current lack of mandatory funding going forward for all major energy - related provisions of title ix .

in addition , the appearance of substantial redundancy across renewable energy programs at usda and doe , the slow development of the u.s. cellulosic biofuels sector , and concerns about the emerging spillover effects of increasing corn use for ethanol production are issues that are likely to emerge during the next farm bill debate .

many provisions of the 2008 farm bill expired at the end of fy2012 , but were extended through fy2013 by the american taxpayer relief act ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) .

authority for title ix biofuels policy provisions contained in the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) also were extended through fy2013 , and are expected to be reviewed as part of the next farm bill debate .

however , all major bioenergy provisions of title ix — with the exception of the feedstock flexibility program for bioenergy producers — have no new mandatory funding in fy2013 under the atra farm bill extension .

although most of the bioenergy programs are reauthorized for fy2013 , their mandatory funding expired at the end of fy2012 .

if policymakers want to continue these programs under either the 2008 farm bill extension or in the next farm bill , they will need to pay for the program with offsets .

the 2008 farm bill authorized $1.1 billion in mandatory funding for energy programs , including $320 million for the biorefinery assistance program , $300 million for the bioenergy program for advanced biofuels , and $255 million for the rural energy for america program ( reap ) .

the biomass crop assistance program ( bcap ) was authorized to receive such sums as necessary ( i.e. , funding is open - ended and depends on program participation ) , although congress eventually put limits on mandatory funding of $552 million in fy2010 , $112 million in fy2011 , and $17 million in fy2012 .

none of the major farm - bill energy programs have baseline funding after fy2012 .

as a result , the federal budget rules require new revenues or offsetting cuts in order to extend them beyond fy2012 .

while most ethanol tax credits and the import duty on foreign fuel ethanol expired on december 31 , 2011 , the cellulosic biofuel tax credit and the various biodiesel tax credits do not expire until december 31 , 2013 .

both the cellulosic biofuels and biodiesel industries can be expected to lobby actively for extension of their tax credits .

however , a tight federal budget combined with lack of progress in developing commercial production of cellulosic biofuels are likely to work against an extension .

at $1.00 per gallon , the biodiesel tax credit is projected to cost at least $1.28 billion in tax expenditures in 2012 , whereas the cellulosic biofuels tax credit is projected to cost about $14 million .

investors have been slow to invest in what so far is a commercially unproven technology — the conversion of cellulosic biomass to biofuels .

development of the cellulosic biofuels industry hinges on the effective use of new feedstocks .

the biomass crop assistance program ( bcap ) was created under the 2008 farm bill to facilitate the development of those new feedstocks and kick - start the cellulosic biofuels industry .

bcap ( via usda's ccc ) provides financial assistance in two forms: ( 1 ) to support the establishment and production of eligible crops for conversion to bioenergy in selected areas , and ( 2 ) to assist agricultural and forest land owners and operators with collection , harvest , storage , and transportation ( chst ) of eligible material for use in a biomass conversion facility .

while bcap is in the early stages of implementation , concerns regarding eligibility , funding , and sustainability continue to be discussed .

these issues could shape future congressional action on the program in the context of budgetary measures and possible reauthorization in the next farm bill .

in particular , bcap does not include "baseline" budget spending beyond fy2012 .

based on current budgetary requirements , the authorizing committees could potentially need to secure offset funding if bcap were to be reauthorized in the next farm bill .

this could prove difficult given tight budgetary constraints and the more recent and higher projections of the program's cost compared to its initial cost estimates .

the current federal biofuels programs continue to inspire strong sentiments from both advocates and detractors .

several members of congress have introduced bills that would either strengthen or reduce ( and even eliminate ) certain features of current programs .

as administrator of the rfs program , the epa is responsible for identifying renewable fuel production pathways and pathway components that can be used in producing qualifying renewable fuel under the rfs program .

the epa is also responsible for announcing the rfs mandate levels for each year based on an evaluation and determination of the estimated production capacity ( both domestic and international ) of the various biofuels types .

if it appears that the production capacity will be insufficient for a particular biofuel category — eg , cellulosic biofuels — then epa may announce a waiver of the original statutory rfs mandate for that category ( and possibly other nested categories ) to a reduced level .

in addition , epa may entertain rfs waiver petitions regarding potential economic hardship related to meeting a particular rfs mandate category .

the rfs mandates the use of over 16.55 bgals of biofuels in 2013 .

the mandate grows to 20.5 bgals of biofuels use by 2015 .

by 2022 , 36 bgals of biofuels must be consumed under the rfs .

each year epa must review the likelihood of outyear biofuel production meeting or failing to meet required rfs usage levels , and adjust the mandates accordingly .

epa's biofuels standards for each upcoming year are announced on a preliminary basis in the spring of the preceding year , when epa issues a notice of proposed rulemaking , and on a final basis by november 30 of the preceding year , when epa issues a final rule .

the epa has already waived the original rfs2 mandate for cellulosic biofuels for each of the first three years ( 2010 , 2011 , and 2012 ) and has proposed waiving it for a fourth year ( 2013 ) .

the likelihood of future epa waivers could deter capital investments in the sector and make future waivers become a self - fulfilling prophecy .

the likelihood of meeting rfs mandates for traditional biofuels hinges both on the "blend wall" and on the slow emergence of a national infrastructure needed to facilitate the distribution and use of the growing mandated biofuel volumes .

even if the expansion of the blending ratio to 15% for model year 2001 and newer passenger vehicles were to actually occur ( presently an unlikely prospect due to infrastructure limitations mentioned earlier ) , the higher blend wall of approximately 20 to 21 bgals would become a real barrier to expanded biofuels use by 2015 .

under eisa , epa is responsible for evaluating whether a renewable fuel meets the specific ghg reduction threshold assigned to its rfs category .

determining compliance with the thresholds requires a comprehensive evaluation of renewable fuels on the basis of their lifecycle emissions .

the concept of "lifecycle emissions" encompasses an evaluation of ghg emissions along the entire pathway of a biofuel from the production , harvesting , and marketing of its feedstocks to the processing and distribution of the biofuel , including any significant indirect emissions such as emissions from land uses changes that might result from changes in crop patterns due to the various biofuels incentives ( as explicitly required in section 201 , p.l .

110-140 ) .

more specifically , some have expressed a concern that expanded field crop production in the united states for ethanol production has led to commodity price increases that , in turn , have induced increased land cultivation in other countries , and as a result , have increased net global ghg emissions .

the measurement of indirect land use changes ( iluc ) is necessarily inexact because so many potential activities and countervailing forces are involved .

as a result , inclusion of iluc as part of the epa's lifecycle ghg reduction analysis has been controversial .

initially , epa's lifecycle ghg reduction models proved very sensitive to assumptions regarding the extent of indirect land use changes , and suggested that some standard biofuels may not be eligible for inclusion under the rfs .

epa models were updated prior to the final rfs rule ( february 2009 ) using newer data and produced more inclusive results .

for example , corn - starch ethanol was determined to achieve a 21% reduction in ghg emissions compared to the gasoline 2005 baseline , thus just surpassing the 20% reduction threshold .

epa models for estimating land use changes and other life - cycle factors involved in ghg emissions are continually re - evaluated as new or better data , methods , or analytical techniques become available .

the nature of the future changes to epa models , and their potential to include or exclude certain biofuels , remains a critical aspect of the rfs mandates and the u.s. biofuels industry's ability to meet the mandates .

on april 2 , 2007 , in massachusetts v. epa ( 549 u.s. 497 ( 2007 ) ) , the u.s. supreme court determined that ghgs are air pollutants covered under section 202 ( a ) of the clean air act .

the court held that epa must determine whether or not emissions of ghgs from new motor vehicles cause or contribute to air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare , or whether the science is too uncertain to make a reasoned decision .

this court ruling allows epa to regulate ghgs without further congressional action , and could bring into play the issue of indirect land use changes , given their alleged ghg emissions effects , which may put all ethanol production in question .

on june 11 , 2010 , a senate resolution ( s.j.res .

26 ) that would have blocked epa from using the clean air act to regulate ghgs was defeated ( 53-47 ) .

prior to the vote , on june 8 , 2010 , the white house had issued a statement saying that if s.j.res .

26 reached the president's desk ( i.e. , passed both chambers of congress ) , president obama would veto it .

in january 2007 , then - governor schwarzenegger established a low carbon fuels standard ( lcfs ) by executive order for california .

the executive order directed the state's secretary for environmental protection to coordinate the actions of the california energy commission , the california air resources board ( carb ) , the university of california , and other agencies to develop protocols for measuring the "life - cycle carbon intensity" of transportation fuels .

under the lcfs , carb proposed reducing emissions of ghgs by lowering the carbon content of transportation fuels used in california .

the lcfs established performance standards that fuel producers and importers must meet each year starting in 2011 .

unlike the rfs , which groups biofuels into four categories , the lcfs evaluates each fuel on its own demonstrated level of lifecycle ghg emissions .

the lcfs requires that biofuels demonstrate lower lifecycle ghg than the fossil fuels that they replace .

for corn ethanol , carbon intensity is lowered by using natural gas instead of coal as a processing fuel , substituting biomass for natural gas or coal , and selling ddgs wet instead of dry .

for biodiesel and renewable diesel , carbon intensities can be lowered dramatically by using tallow or recycled cooking oils instead of soybean oil .

as part of its lcfs modeling effort , carb includes an estimate of the indirect land use changes ( iluc ) impact of grain - based ethanol .

largely because of the iluc value assigned to corn - starch ethanol , most midwestern ethanol production did not qualify for use as a transportation fuel under california's lcfs .

this result has important implications for how or whether the federal rfs mandates can be met for the nation as a whole , since california is the largest state ( 39 million people ) , the largest consumer of gasoline ( over 11% of national highway fuel use ) , and a major ethanol consumer of approximately 1.5 billion gallons annually .

the iluc inclusion sparked considerable reaction from biofuel proponents because the measurement of indirect cross - country effects can be highly ambiguous .

in late 2010 , carb adopted a resolution to integrate the latest iluc research into the lcfs regulation .

on november 9 , 2011 , carb published an updated list of carb - approved biofuel production facilities that included 22 ethanol plants in iowa , 21 plants in nebraska , 12 plants in south dakota , and 11 plants in minnesota among the 111 newly added biofuel - plant pathways .

on november 26 , 2012 , carb published a "final regulation order" describing the lcfs compliance schedule and carbon intensity lookup table for various fuel pathways .

on december 24 , 2009 , several ethanol groups ( including rfa and growth energy ) filed a lawsuit asserting that the california lcfs violated the u.s. constitution by seeking to regulate farming and ethanol production practices in the united states under the "commerce clause," which leaves regulation of interstate commerce to the federal government .

on december 29 , 2011 , a u.s. district judge ruled that california's lcfs law did violate the u.s. constitution's commerce clause and issued an injunction halting enforcement of california's lcfs .

the judge ruled that carb had failed to establish that there are no alternative methods to advance its goals of reducing ghg emissions to combat global warming .

after an initial request for a stay of injunction by carb was denied , a second request for a stay of injunction , while carb appeals the original ruling , was filed with the ninth district court of appeals and was granted as of april 23 , 2012 , allowing carb to continue enforcement of the lcfs until a ruling on the appeal is made .

u.s. ethanol exports surged to a record 1.2 billion gallons in 2011 ( figure 7 ) , driven in part by blending wall limits , but also motivated in part by a sharp fall - off in brazil's ethanol exports due to high international sugar prices and a below - average sugarcane harvest .

the top three destinations for u.s. ethanol exports in 2011 were brazil ( 33% ) , canada ( 25% ) , and the european union ( eu ) ( 24% ) — all three of which had their own national biofuels usage mandates .

large u.s. ethanol exports are problematic for two reasons — first , they run counter to the often - cited policy goal of national energy security , and second , they may conflict with biofuels policy goals in other countries , leading to trade disputes .

eu policy has promoted renewable energy use , along with ghg reductions and energy conservation , for much of the past decade .

as a result , eu policy support has engendered a substantial domestic renewable energy industry .

as part of a "renewable energy directive" adopted by the european parliament on december 17 , 2008 , the eu established a 20-20-20 plan that calls for a 20% reduction in ghg emissions compared to 1990 levels , a 20% increase in renewable energy use ( with a 10% share specifically in the transport sector ) , and a 20% reduction in overall energy consumption .

as part of the 20-20-20 plan , the eu also adopted a mandate for renewable content in transportation fuels of 5.75% in 2010 , rising to 10% by 2020 .

on october 17 , 2012 , the eu revised its policy proposal to state that the use of food - based biofuels to meet the 10% renewable energy target in transportation fuels of the renewable energy directive will be limited to 5% .

after the surge of ethanol imports from the united states in 2011 , an association of european ethanol producers , epure , claimed that the blending tax credit — the $0.45 per gallon incentive known as veetc — then available to u.s. biofuels blenders represented a subsidy , and that the importation of "subsidized" u.s. ethanol was hurting eu biofuel producers .

as a result epure requested an anti - dumping ( ad ) and countervailing duty ( cvd ) investigation .

on november 25 , 2011 , the eu initiated an investigation into whether u.s. exporters sold ethanol at unfair prices and were backed by subsidies in violation of international trade rules to the detriment of eu biofuels producers .

at issue is a european allegation that international ethanol traders were exporting e90 ( 90% ethanol blends ) to europe to take advantage of the eu's lower tariff on such blends as well as the tax incentive for ethanol blending in the united states .

in response to the eu anti - dumping investigation , the renewable fuels association ( rfa ) pointed out that the ethanol tax credits ( most of which expired on december 31 , 2011 ) were not made available to u.s. ethanol producers , but "to gasoline blenders , marketers , and other end users. .

after a 15-month investigation into a number of u.s. ethanol producers , the eu concluded that u.s. domestic policies aiming to encourage clean energy constitute an illegal subsidy and lead to artificially low - priced imports being "dumped" on the eu market .

on february 28 , 2013 , the european commission announced that it will impose a five - year anti - dumping duty of 9.5% on all imports of bioethanol from the united states into the 27-nation bloc .

in 2009 , when similar complaints were lodged against u.s. biodiesel exports , the eu imposed duties of 40% for a five - year period on biodiesel imports originating from the united states .

in response , on april 29 , 2013 , a bipartisan group of u.s. senators asked the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) , demetrios marantis , to investigate the eu decision and consider the possibility of filing a world trade organization ( wto ) challenge to the european commission's decision .

the potential implications of an ethanol trade dispute between united states and the eu are unclear .

however , the imposition of an import tariff will likely limit u.s. ethanol exports to the eu .

given the emergence of the blend wall as a constraint on u.s. ethanol consumption , combined with relatively tight ethanol supplies on the world market ( following two years of successive poor brazilian sugar crops — 2011 and 2012 ) and biofuels usage mandates in several major fuel consuming nations , the united states may seek international markets for surplus domestic supplies , thus keeping the issue in front of policymakers .

