the united states and russia signed a new start treaty , officially known as the treaty between the united states of america and the russian federation on measures to further reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms , on april 8 , 2010 .

this treaty is , in part , designed to replace the 1991 strategic offensive reductions treaty ( start ) , which expired , after 15 years of implementation , on december 5 , 2009 .

the senate foreign relations committee , armed services committee , and intelligence committee all held hearings and briefings on the treaty .

the foreign relations committee approved a resolution of ratification for the treaty on september 16 , 2010 .

the full senate debated the treaty in mid - december 2010 and gave its advice and consent to ratification , by a vote of 71-26 , on december 22 , 2010 .

the russian parliament approved the treaty on january 25 and 26 , 2011 .

new start entered into force on february 5 , 2011 , after the united states and russia exchanged the instruments of ratification .

during the latter years of the george w. bush administration , as the calendar moved closer to the expiration of start , the united states and russia began to identify steps they might take to preserve parts of the start legacy while charting a new direction for arms control .

throughout this time , russia sought to replace start with a new treaty that would maintain the general structure of start , with limits on deployed warheads and delivery vehicles and detailed definitions and counting rules that would capture the full range of strategic capabilities within the treaty limits .

the bush administration did not want to replace start with a formal treaty , but proposed that the parties replace start with a modified version of the 2002 moscow treaty , counting only the declared number of deployed strategic warheads , and an annex that would permit the continuation of some of the monitoring and verification provisions in start .

there was widespread agreement , both within the u.s. policy community and between the united states and russia , that there would be value in continuing some parts of the complex start monitoring and verification regime .

the provisions were designed to build confidence in compliance with the specific limits and restrictions in the treaty , but they also provided a level of detail in information that contributed to each nation's general understanding of the other's forces and activities and helped build cooperation between them .

both nations wanted to modify the regime to ease some of its complexity , reduce the costs associated with its notifications and inspections , and minimize its interference with ongoing military operations .

both also recognized the value of continuing some level of transparency and cooperation .

several members of congress also spoke in support of proposals to extend the monitoring and verification regime in start .

for example , a mid - 2007 "dear colleague" letter called for the core elements of the start verification regime to be extended , explaining that "the transparency required by the start verification regime has bred confidence in both russia and the u.s. , enabling cooperation on a range of nuclear arms control issues .

moreover , verification directly supports u.s. national security interests by giving insight into russia's arsenal of nuclear weapons. .

senator richard lugar has also stated that "the current u.s. - russian relationship is complicated enough without introducing more elements of uncertainty .

failure to preserve the start treaty would increase the potential for distrust between the two sides. .

similarly , senator jon kyl expressed his support for start's verification regime , noting in november 2009 that , after start expires , "the u.s. will lose a significant source of information that has allowed it to have confidence in its ability to understand russian strategic nuclear forces ; likewise , the russian federation will lose information about the u.s. nuclear forces. .

the obama administration altered the u.s. approach toward arms control and the pending expiration of start .

in april 2009 , he and president medvedev agreed that the united states and russia would negotiate a formal agreement to replace start .

in a joint statement released at their meeting , the presidents indicated that the new treaty would not only reduce strategic offensive arms below the levels in the moscow treaty , but would also "include effective verification measures drawn from the experience of the parties in implementing the start treaty. .

the negotiating teams from both parties included participants who had worked as inspectors under the original start treaty ; their experience and expertise helped the nations modify the monitoring and verification regime for the new start treaty .

when the two sides completed the negotiations in march 2010 , the obama administration noted that "the treaty has a verification regime that combines the appropriate elements of the 1991 start treaty with new elements tailored to the limitations of the treaty. .

the administration also indicated that "the inspections and other verification procedures in this treaty will be simpler and less costly to implement than the old start treaty .

in part , this is possible due to the experience and knowledge gained from 15 years of start implementation. .

the regime will include "on - site inspections and exhibitions , data exchanges and notifications related to strategic offensive arms and facilities covered by the treaty , and provisions to facilitate the use of national technical means for treaty monitoring. .

it would also mandate the exchange of some telemetry generated during missile flight tests .

admiral mullen emphasized during a press conference announcing the treaty's completion that the new treaty "features a much more effective , transparent verification method that demands quicker data exchanges and notifications" than did start .

during its first 11 months in force , the united states and russia have conducted over 1,700 exchanges of notifications and several exhibitions , as mandated by the treaty .

the united states has conducted 16 inspections at russian facilities , while russia has conducted 17 inspections at u.s. facilities .

these inspections occurred at icbm , slbm , and heavy bomber bases , storage facilities , conversion and elimination facilities , and test ranges .

the parties have held two sessions of the bilateral consultative commission ( bcc ) , which was established by the treaty to address implementation and compliance issues .

verification was one of the central concerns addressed in the senate and in the public literature , during the debate over the substance and implications of the new start treaty .

some questioned whether the monitoring provisions in the new treaty are sufficient to provide the united states with enough information to either confirm russian compliance with the treaty or detect efforts to violate its terms ; others questioned whether the provisions will provide russia with too much access to and information about u.s. nuclear forces and activities .

the cooperative monitoring measures in the treaty , and , particularly , the inspection process , received special scrutiny , as many observers of the arms control process specifically measured the value of the monitoring and verification regime by its widespread use of notifications , on - site inspections , and other cooperative measures .

however , these measures are only a part of the elaborate process that allowed the united states and russia to maintain confidence in each other's compliance with the original start treaty .

an evaluation of the monitoring and verification regime in the new treaty would , therefore , assess the full range of treaty terms , monitoring systems , and analysis tools that constitute a verification regime .

this report provides background information about the role that these terms and tools play in the verification process .

it highlights , more generally , the way that monitoring and verification provisions interact with the limits and restrictions in a treaty to provide confidence in compliance .

it does not evaluate whether the provisions in the new start treaty are sufficient to judge that the treaty is "effectively verifiable," but , instead , identifies some of the differences between the verification provisions in start and new start , then describes how these changes derive from differences in the limits in the two treaties .

the new start treaty contains a monitoring and verification regime that resembles the regime in start , in that its text contains detailed definitions of items limited by the treaty ; provisions governing the use of ntm to gather data on each side's forces and activities ; an extensive database that identifies the numbers , types , and locations of items limited by the treaty ; provisions requiring notifications about items limited by the treaty ; and inspections allowing the parties to confirm information shared during data exchanges .

because the treaty does not , however , contain limits and restrictions that are identical to those in start , its monitoring and verification regime are not identical to the one in start .

the verification regime in new start also differs from the start regime because the u.s. - russia relationship has changed and the assumptions about violations and compliance have changed .

as noted above , many of the verification provisions in the original start treaty were designed to detect and deter soviet efforts to hide or deploy extra missiles and warheads .

the united states assumed that the soviet union might want to "break out" of the treaty in this way to maintain or gain a strategic advantage over the united states .

some of the verification provisions also sought to reduce the level of uncertainty in the two sides' estimates of each others' forces .

for example , because the united states was not certain of the number of mobile missiles that the soviet union had produced before start entered into force , it was concerned that some uncounted missiles could be hidden away and left out of the treaty limits .

but times have changed , and the verification regime in new start reflects these changes .

the united states would still want to detect and deter russian efforts to deploy extra missiles and warheads under new start .

however , the united states now has a much greater understanding of the number of missiles that russia has in its stockpile than it did in the late 1980s .

it has counted and monitored these missiles for 15 years .

it is now far less concerned about the possibility that russia has hidden extra missiles away in undeclared or unknown facilities .

even if it had done so before start entered into force , these missiles would now be aging and probably lacking appropriate maintenance .

further , the united states may now be less concerned about russia's incentives to violate the treaty .

as secretary rumsfeld said of the 2002 moscow treaty , russia had little incentive to exceed the treaty's limits because it planned to reduce its forces to the treaty levels with or without an agreement .

the same can be said for russia in 2010 .

most analysts agree that russia will reduce its forces in coming years , as aging systems retire , with or without an arms control treaty in place .

as a result , the verification regime in the new start treaty has been streamlined , to make it less costly and complex than the regime in start , and adjusted to reflect the limits in new start and the current circumstances in the relationship between the united states in russia .

in particular , it focuses as much on maintaining transparency , cooperation , and openness as it does on deterring and detecting potential violations .

the discussion that follows reviews some of the limits and restrictions and some of the monitoring and verification provisions in start , and compares them with provisions in new start , to highlight both similarities and differences between the two treaties .

participants in the debate about the new start treaty , both in the senate and in the public at large , sought to compare the verification regimes in the two treaties to determine whether the regime in the new start treaty can provide the united states with the information it needs to effectively verify russian compliance .

but this comparison could not , by itself , provide useful answers about the verifiability of the new start treaty if it simply compared the lists of inspections , notifications , data exchanges , and cooperative activities mandated by the two treaties .

even though more transparency and cooperation may be preferred in the abstract , the monitoring measures in the new treaty "should be determined by the treaty's specific limits and the need to verify those limits. .

as noted earlier , no verification regime can provide the united states with absolute confidence that russia will comply with all the limits in the treaty , or absolute assurances that the united states will be able to detect any russian effort to evade the limits .

even if the united states is confident that it could detect militarily significant violations in time to respond and offset any threats to its security , there will be some risk that noncompliant activity may go undetected for some time .

depending on the weight one places on this risk , the possibility that russia might pursue undetected violations might be argued as grounds to reject the treaty .

alternatively , some might conclude that , even with some uncertainties in the verification regime , the treaty serves u.s. interests because the united states would have far less access to and knowledge about russian forces without any treaty - mandated monitoring provisions in place .

the new start treaty will contain an extensive database , listing the number and location of every deployed and non - deployed delivery vehicle and every deployed and non - deployed missile in the russian arsenal .

the database will also list the precise number of warheads deployed on each missile .

this information would be unavailable if the united states and russia had not signed the new start treaty .

moreover , the obama administration , and others outside government , have concluded that the cooperation and transparency afforded by the new verification regime can serve to ease tensions and foster a better relationship between the united states and russia .

specifically , some see the verification regime in the new start treaty as an effort to build "a foundation of trust with moscow. .

the sufficiency of new start's verification regime is just one factor that might be weighed in a broader net assessment of the contribution that the new treaty might make to u.s. national security .

some have argued that the new treaty will do little to strengthen u.s. security because russia , even in the absence of a treaty , may reduce its aging forces in the coming years , and because russia no longer poses enough of a threat to u.s. security for the united states to warrant an agreement limiting moscow's nuclear forces .

others , however , see the treaty as "tangible evidence of a new partnership between the united states and russia" and argue that creates momentum "towards a revamped nuclear security regime. .

they further argue that the new start treaty , and renewed cooperation between the united states and russia , can contribute to u.s. nonproliferation goals .

progress on u.s. - russian arms control may convince other nations that the united states is serious about meeting its obligations under the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) and may convince more nations to join with the united states in both trying to strengthen the npt regime and trying to isolate iran and north korea in the international community .

these benefits may be difficult to measure and hard to factor into a net assessment of the value of the new start treaty .

nevertheless , some argue that , when combined with the fact that the treaty will provide the united states with unprecedented access to information about russian nuclear forces and a measure of predictability about the future direction of those forces , the benefits of the treaty to u.s. national security interests far outweigh any uncertainties that may arise due to the changes in the verification regime .

