on march 23 , 2010 , president obama signed into law a comprehensive health reform law , the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) .

the following week , on march 30 , 2010 , the president signed the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( hcera ) , which amended numerous health care and revenue provisions in aca .

among its many provisions , aca restructures the private health insurance market , sets minimum standards for health coverage , and , beginning in 2014 , will require most u.s. residents to obtain health insurance coverage or pay a penalty .

the law provides for the establishment by 2014 of state - based health insurance exchanges for the purchase of private health insurance .

qualifying individuals and families will be able to receive federal subsidies to reduce the cost of purchasing coverage through the exchanges .

in addition to expanding private health insurance coverage , aca requires state medicaid programs to expand coverage to all eligible nonelderly , non - pregnant individuals under age 65 with incomes up to 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) .

under aca , the federal government will initially cover 100% of the expansion costs , phasing down to 90% of the costs by 2020 .

medicaid law allows the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) to withhold existing federal medicaid matching funds if states refuse to comply with the expansion .

however , in national federation of independent business v. sebelius , the u.s. supreme court found that the medicaid expansion violated the constitution by threatening states with the loss of their existing federal medicaid matching funds .

the court precluded the hhs secretary from penalizing states that choose not to participate in the medicaid expansion ( see text box ) .

aca also amends the medicare program in an effort to reduce the rate of its projected growth ; imposes an excise tax on insurance plans found to have high premiums ; and makes many other changes to the tax code , medicare , medicaid , and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) .

in addition to changes to private insurance and these federal health programs , aca includes numerous provisions intended to increase the primary care and public health workforce , promote preventive services , and strengthen quality measurement , among other things .

aca is projected to have a significant impact on federal direct spending and revenues .

the law includes direct spending to subsidize the purchase of health insurance coverage through the exchanges , as well as increased outlays for the expansion of state medicaid programs .

aca also includes numerous mandatory appropriations that provide billions of dollars to fund temporary programs to increase access and funding for targeted groups , provide funding to states to plan and establish exchanges , and support many other research and demonstration programs and activities .

the costs of expanding public and private health insurance coverage and other spending are offset by revenues from new taxes and fees , and by savings from payment and health care delivery system reforms designed to slow the growth in spending on medicare and other federal health care programs .

implementing aca also is likely to affect discretionary spending , which is provided in and controlled by annual appropriations acts .

the law established numerous new discretionary grant programs and provided for each an authorization of appropriations .

it also reauthorized funding for many existing discretionary grant programs .

while the authorizations of appropriations for most of these existing programs expired prior to aca's enactment , typically they continued to receive an annual appropriation .

funding for all these discretionary programs , both new and existing , is subject to action by congressional appropriators .

this report — one in a series of crs products summarizing aca that were issued after the law's enactment — describes the law's workforce , public health , quality , and related provisions .

aca is composed of 10 titles ( see table 1 ) .

the provisions summarized in this report are for the most part found in title ii ( medicaid , maternal and child health ) ; title iii ( medicare , quality of care ) ; title iv ( prevention and wellness ) ; title v ( health workforce ) ; title vi ( comparative effectiveness research , elder justice ) ; title vii ( drugs and biologics ) ; and title ix ( revenues ) .

title x , which was added as a manager's amendment to the underlying bill , amended ( and in some cases repealed ) numerous existing provisions in titles i through ix and added several new provisions .

as already noted , aca was further amended by the companion reconciliation legislation , hcera .

table a - 1 in appendix a at the end of the report , shows which of the aca sections discussed in this report were amended by title x and / or hcera .

the summaries of the aca provisions are grouped and discussed under the following section headings: ( 1 ) health centers and clinics ; ( 2 ) health workforce ; ( 3 ) prevention and wellness ; ( 4 ) maternal and child health ; ( 5 ) teen pregnancy prevention and adoption support ; ( 6 ) quality ; ( 7 ) nursing homes and other long - term care facilities and providers ; ( 8 ) comparative effectiveness research ; ( 9 ) health data collection ; ( 10 ) health information technology ; ( 11 ) emergency care ; ( 12 ) pain care management ; ( 13 ) elder justice ; ( 14 ) biomedical research and medical products ; ( 15 ) biosimilars ; ( 16 ) nutrition labeling ; ( 17 ) 340b drug pricing ; and ( 18 ) medical malpractice and liability reform .

each section of the report begins with a brief overview of the aca provisions to be summarized and includes some discussion of relevant policies in place at the time of aca's enactment as well as the intent , and , where available , projected impact , of the law .

aca specifies numerous dates for new or expiring legal authorities , for the initiation or completion of key administrative and regulatory activities , and for the establishment or termination of commissions and other statutory bodies .

table a - 1 in appendix a provides a detailed timeline of all such dates .

unless otherwise stated , all references in this report to "the secretary" refer to the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) .

a list of all the acronyms used in the report is provided in appendix b .

although medical malpractice liability reform has attracted congressional attention over the years , aca is the first law enacted with provisions on the topic .

one provision expresses the sense of the senate that congress should consider establishing a state demonstration program to evaluate alternatives to tort litigation .

the second establishes such an initiative that will be in effect for five years .

since before aca was enacted , various states have regulated and implemented tort reform for medical malpractice lawsuits .

in states that have done so , tort reform laws include statutes of limitation and caps on non - economic damages or punitive damages , for example .

it is unclear whether , or by how much , such reforms have reduced costs on the health care system .

aca does not create a federal medical liability reform law as prior congressional bills have sought to do , but rather gives states a financial incentive to develop their own alternatives to tort litigation aimed at meeting specific goals .

furthermore , aca extends federal tort claims act liability protection to members , employees , and contractors of free clinics .

sec .

6801 expresses the sense of the senate that ( 1 ) health care reform presents an opportunity to address issues related to medical malpractice and medical liability insurance ; ( 2 ) states are encouraged to develop and test litigation alternatives while preserving an individual's right to seek redress in court ; and ( 3 ) congress should consider establishing a state demonstration program to evaluate alternatives to the existing civil litigation system with respect to medical malpractice claims .

sec .

10607 creates a new phsa sec .

933v - 4 , that authorizes the appropriation of $50 million for a five - year period beginning in fy2011 for the secretary to award demonstration grants to states for the development , implementation , and evaluation of alternatives to current tort litigation for resolving disputes over injuries allegedly caused by health care providers or organizations .

these grants will exist for no more than five years .

states that receive a grant are required to develop an alternative that ( 1 ) allows for the resolution of disputes caused by health care providers or organizations ; and ( 2 ) promotes a reduction of health care errors by encouraging the collection and analysis of patient safety data related to the resolved disputes .

prior to receiving a grant , a state will have to demonstrate that its alternative: ( 1 ) increases the availability of prompt and fair resolutions of disputes ; ( 2 ) encourages the efficient resolution of disputes ; ( 3 ) encourages the disclosure of health care errors ; ( 4 ) enhances patient safety by reducing medical errors and adverse events , ( 5 ) improves access to liability ; ( 6 ) informs the patient about the differences between the alternative and tort litigation ; ( 7 ) allows the patient to opt out of the alternative at any time ; ( 8 ) does not conflict with state law regarding tort litigation ; ( 9 ) does not abridge a patient's ability to file a medical malpractice claim .

each state will be required to identify the sources from and methods by which compensation will be paid , which can include public and private funding sources .

in addition , each state will be required to establish a scope of jurisdiction to whom the alternative will apply so that it is sufficient to evaluate the effects of the alternative .

the secretary will provide to the states that are applying for the grants technical assistance , including guidance on common definitions , non - economic damages , avoidable injuries , and disclosure to patients of health care errors and adverse events .

when reviewing states' grant applications , the secretary will consult with a newly established review panel that will be composed of relevant experts appointed by the comptroller general .

there are various reporting requirements that must be completed .

first , states that receive a grant must submit a report to the secretary covering the impact of the activities funded on patient safety and on the availability and price of medical liability insurance .

second , the secretary must submit an annual compendium to congress that examines any differences that may result in the areas of quality of care , number and nature of medical errors , medical resources used , length of time for dispute resolution , and the availability and price of liability insurance .

third , the secretary , in consultation with the review panel , must contract with a research organization to conduct an overall evaluation of the effectiveness of grants awarded .

this evaluation must be submitted to congress no later than 18 months following the date of implementation of the first funded program .

fourth , medpac and the medicaid and chip payment and access commission ( macpac ) must each conduct an independent review of the impact of state - implemented alternatives on their programs and beneficiaries .

these reports must be submitted no later than december 31 , 2016 .

the section would not limit any prior , current , or future efforts of any state to establish any alternative to tort litigation .

the federal tort claims act ( ftca ) waives sovereign immunity to make the united states liable , in accordance with the law of the state where a tort occurs , for "injury or loss of property , or personal injury or death caused by the negligent or wrongful act or omission of any employee of the government while acting within the scope of his office or employment. .

congress can choose to immunize a private organization , or its employees or volunteers , from tort liability by enacting a statute that specifically deems them federal employees for purposes of the ftca .

in 1996 , congress granted ftca liability protection to volunteer health professionals at free clinics .

in other words , such individuals have been deemed federal employees such that they are immunized from liability under the ftca if medical malpractice claims are brought against them .

aca sec .

10608 amends phsa sec .

224 ( o ) ( 1 ) to extend ftca liability protection to officers , governing board members , employees , and contractors of free clinics .

under this , free clinics that qualify for such protection have the option of not purchasing medical malpractice insurance to cover the organization , members , employees , or contractors .

appendix a. aca provisions amended or struck by aca title x and / or hcera appendix b. timeline of public health , workforce , quality , and related aca provisions in some instances , aca , as amended by hcera , specifies dates for key administrative or programmatic activities or requirements .

the following timeline ( see table b - 1 ) lists provisions summarized in this report that include dates for the following: final report deadlines , including reports to congress ; implementation or termination of new or existing grant programs ; rulemaking or guidance ; new or expiring authorities , activities , or requirements ; and establishment or termination of entities .

other activities or requirements that have no date specified in aca and are implicitly effective upon enactment ( march 23 , 2010 ) are not included in this timeline .

table b - 1 lists the aca dates which are grouped alphabetically under headings that correspond to section headings in the report .

within each heading , table entries are organized alphabetically by title with key dates in chronological order within each title .

effective dates stated in terms of days , months , or years after enactment have been converted to calendar dates ( eg , 180 days is 9 / 19 / 2010 ; six months is 9 / 23 / 2010 , etc. ) .

table entries for specific implementation requirements or deadlines that are not tied to a specific calendar date are presented at the end of each title .

each table entry includes the aca section number ( as amended ) ; a descriptive title for each activity or requirement ; a brief description of the activity or requirement ; and the associated start date , effective date , or deadline .

where applicable , the end date , frequency or duration associated with specific activities or requirements is noted .

for additional information on provisions that appear in the timeline , refer to the more detailed section summaries in the report .

for definitions of acronyms used in the timeline , refer to appendix c .

unless otherwise stated , references in the table to "the secretary" refer to the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) .

appendix c. acronyms used in the repor .

