since the 1970s , energy tax policy in the united states has attempted to achieve two broad objectives .

first , policymakers have sought to reduce oil import dependence and enhance national security through a variety of domestic energy investment and production tax subsidies .

second , environmental concerns have led to subsidization of a variety of renewable and energy efficiency technologies via the tax code .

while these two broad goals continue to guide policy , enacted policies that solely focus on achieving only one of the goals are often inconsistent with policies solely designed to achieve the other goal .

for example , subsidies to oil and gas producers , while enhancing domestic oil and gas production and ultimately increasing the burning of fossil fuels , encourage an activity which may have negative environmental consequences .

by providing a longitudinal perspective on energy tax policy and expenditures , this report examines how current revenue losses resulting from energy tax provisions compare to historical losses and provides a foundation for understanding how current energy tax policy evolved .

further , this report compares the relative value of tax incentives given to fossil fuels , renewables , and energy efficiency .

recent legislation has introduced , reintroduced , expanded , and extended a number of energy tax provisions .

while a number of the current energy provisions have a long historical standing in the tax code , a wider variety of tax incentives , to promote a range of energy sources , are presently available than have been available in the past .

after reviewing the history of energy tax policy , this report examines the economic rationale for government interventions in energy markets .

understanding when and how government intervention can improve market outcomes assists in evaluating the potential effects of various tax policy proposals .

in the case of energy markets , externalities , other market barriers , and national security concerns raise the possibility that government intervention via tax policy may lead to a more economically efficient distribution of energy resources .

trends in energy tax expenditures have changed substantially over the past 30 years .

in the early 1980s , revenue losses associated with energy tax provisions were approximately 3% of total revenue losses from all tax expenditures .

in the mid - 1980s , energy tax expenditures and total tax expenditures were scaled back .

while total tax expenditures relative to gdp have trended up since the mid - 1980s , energy tax expenditures relative to total tax expenditures have remained below early 1980s levels .

relatively low levels of tax expenditures do not necessarily suggest that the government is devoting fewer resources towards achieving energy policy goals , as federal grants , loans and loan guarantees , and mandates are also important energy policy tools .

examining trends in revenue losses associated with energy tax provisions provides insight into the actual direction of energy tax policy .

in inflation - adjusted terms , revenue losses associated with energy tax provisions in the late 1970s and early 1980s are similar in total cost to revenue losses in the late 2000s .

the composition of these revenue losses , however , has changed significantly .

in the late 1970s nearly all revenue losses associated with energy tax provisions were the result of two tax preferences given to the oil and gas industry .

in the early 1980s , revenue losses associated with special treatment for the oil and gas industry accounted for more than three quarters of all federal revenue losses associated with energy tax expenditures .

changes in policy , coupled with declining oil prices in the late 1980s , dramatically reduced revenue losses associated with oil and gas tax policy .

throughout the 1990s , the bulk of revenue losses associated with energy tax provisions were attributable to the tax credit for unconventional fuels .

in the 2000s , revenue losses associated with renewable energy production incentives began to make up a larger portion of energy tax expenditure revenue losses , reaching an estimated 21% in 2006 .

revenue losses associated with tax provisions benefitting fossil fuels also remained important into the 2000s , with a large proportion of revenue losses in the mid - to - late 2000s associated with the unconventional fuel production credit , benefitting synthetic coal producers .

in the late 2000s , the majority of revenue losses have been associated with incentives designed to promote biofuels .

the federal government also loses significant revenue from excise tax credits given to alcohol fuel blenders ( specifically , the volumetric ethanol excise tax credit ( veetc ) ) .

while excise tax credits are not technically a tax expenditure ( technically , tax expenditures are only revenue losses associated with income tax provisions ) , these excise tax credits have played an important role in shaping energy tax policy .

in 2010 , tax credits for alcohol fuels reduced excise tax receipts by $5.7 billion .

in 2009 , congress enacted the section 1603 grant in lieu of tax credit program as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

the section 1603 grant program allows taxpayers eligible for the renewable energy production tax credit ( ptc ) and investment tax credit ( itc ) to elect to receive a one - time cash payment from the treasury instead of tax payments .

in 2010 , outlays under this program were $4.2 billion .

the history of energy tax policy can be divided into five eras: the oil and gas period from 1916 through 1970 , the energy crisis period of the 1970s , the 1980s free - market era of the reagan administration , the post - reagan era of the 1990s , and the 2000s , which is characterized by a renewed interest in promoting renewable energy .

the primary economic justification for intervening in energy markets via the tax code is to address market failures .

when market failures are present , resources are not efficiently allocated .

market failures can result from the presence of externalities , the existence of principal - agent problems or informational inefficiencies , or from a failure to adequately address national security concerns .

the following paragraphs elaborate on these concepts in the context of energy taxation .

both the production and consumption of energy often generate negative externalities .

for example , burning fossil fuels contributes to air pollution and generates greenhouse gasses .

when an activity generates a negative externality , imposing a tax on the activity can improve economic efficiency .

for example , driving gasoline powered motor vehicles may impose negative externalities due to polluting emissions as well as increased highway congestion .

imposing a tax equal in value to the monetary value of the driving - induced environmental and congestion damages reduces the equilibrium quantity of driving .

by imposing a tax , potential drivers face a price of driving that is equal to the social marginal cost associated with driving .

with a tax , an individual's choices regarding driving are based on their own costs as well as the external costs driving imposes on society .

as an alternative , policymakers often subsidize a substitute activity , one that is associated with fewer negative externalities .

following the example above , policymakers may choose to subsidize public transportation , reducing the price of public transportation relative to driving .

currently , there are a number of subsidies available for renewable energy production and technologies .

while taxing activities associated with negative externalities may enhance economic efficiency , subsidizing the alternative activity is not necessarily economically efficient .

subsidizing renewable energy , in this context , reduces the average price of energy , which increases demand and ultimately consumption .

subsidies for renewable energy , by decreasing the average price of energy , work against initiatives for energy efficiency .

further , the government must raise revenue to finance these subsidies .

such revenues may be raised using distortionary taxes .

intervention in energy markets has also been justified in the presence of principal - agent problems .

principal - agent problems occur when the ultimate consumer of energy does not make equipment purchasing decisions .

for example , with rental property , landlords choose what appliances to install while tenants are often responsible for paying utility bills .

landlords may be unwilling to pay higher prices for energy - efficient appliances when the savings will ultimately accrue to tenants .

tax policies that reduce the cost of energy - efficient appliances tend to increase energy - efficient installations .

existing tax policies , however , do not directly aim to ameliorate the under - installation of energy - efficient property in markets that likely suffer from principal - agent problems ( current energy tax incentives are not targeted toward markets susceptible to principal - agent problems , such as rental housing ) .

informational problems and a variety of other market barriers may also be used to justify government intervention in energy markets .

for example , homeowners may not know the precise payback or rate of return of a specific energy - efficient device .

this may explain the so - called "energy paradox" — the empirical observation that consumers require an abnormally high rate of return to undertake energy - efficiency investments .

high initial first costs of energy - efficiency investments are also often cited as a barrier to investment in energy efficiency .

when externalities lead to an inefficient use of energy resources , tax policy may effectively address the inefficiency .

it is less clear that tax policy will effectively address the inefficiency when informational problems or other barriers prevent an efficient allocation of energy resources .

while tax subsidies can be used to reduce the cost of investing in energy - efficient property , informational programs or consumer lending programs may also be effective at encouraging investments in energy - efficiency .

preserving national security is another often - cited rationale for intervention in energy markets .

presently , much of the petroleum consumed in the united states is derived from foreign sources .

there are potentially a number of external costs associated with petroleum importation , especially when imported from unstable countries and regions .

first , a high level of reliance on imported oil may contribute to a weakened system of national defense or contribute to military vulnerability in the event of an oil embargo or other supply disruption .

second , there are costs to allocating more resources to national defense than otherwise necessary when relying on high levels of imported oil .

specifically , there is an opportunity cost associated with resources allocated to national defense , as such resources are not available for other domestic policy initiatives and programs .

to the extent that petroleum importers fail to take these external costs into account , there is market failure .

while imposing a tax on imported oil would theoretically correct for this externality , in practice such a tax would likely violate trade agreements .

instead , policymakers have historically subsidized domestic oil and gas production .

the economic well - being and economic security of the nation depends on having stable energy sources .

there are national economic costs associated with unstable energy supplies , such as increasing unemployment and inflation that may follow oil price spikes .

while domestic production subsidies for oil and gas may reduce the cost of producing , such subsidies are unlikely to materially change consumer prices .

oil as a commodity is priced on world markets , and so long as the united states remains an open economy it will be affected by world oil price fluctuations .

even if the united states produces all the energy consumed domestically , world oil price fluctuations will impact the prices of other imported goods .

the congressional budget and impoundment act of 1974 ( the budget act ; p.l .

93-344 ) defines tax expenditures as "revenue losses attributable to provisions of the federal tax laws which allow a special exclusion , exemption , or deduction from gross income or which provide a special credit , a preferential rate of tax , or a deferral of tax liability. .

both the treasury department and the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) provide annual tax expenditure estimates .

the treasury's list is included in the president's annual budget submission .

the jct issues annual tax expenditure estimates as a stand - alone product .

tax provisions that reduce excise tax revenues are technically not considered tax expenditures under the budget act .

tax provisions are only considered to have tax expenditure impacts if they lead to a reduction in corporate or personal income tax receipts .

consequently , excise tax credits are not considered tax expenditures .

even though excise tax credits or rate reductions are not technically considered tax expenditures , provisions that provide exemptions from , or credits against , excise taxes still reduce taxpayers' aggregate tax liability and lead to federal revenue losses .

grants paid by the treasury are also not tax expenditures , as grants involve direct federal outlays rather than revenue losses attributable to reduced tax receipts .

figure 1 illustrates the broader trend in tax expenditures from 1977 through 2010 as well as the trend in energy tax expenditures .

the solid line depicts revenue losses arising from tax expenditures as a percentage of gdp .

between 1977 and 1987 revenue losses associated with tax expenditures increased from less than 6% of gdp to nearly 10% of gdp .

by reducing tax rates , eliminating and scaling back various tax expenditures , and generally broadening the tax base , the tax reform act of 1986 ( tra86 ; p.l .

99-514 ) reduced revenue losses associated with tax expenditures .

by 1989 revenue losses associated with tax expenditures were again less than 6% of gdp .

since the end of the 1980s , revenue losses associated with tax expenditures as a percentage of gdp have trended upward .

the increase in revenue losses associated with tax expenditures partially reflects rising incomes during periods of economic expansion , but it is also the result of the introduction of new tax expenditures or the expansion of existing tax expenditure provisions .

the dashed line in figure 1 depicts revenue losses associated with energy - related tax expenditures as a percentage of total tax expenditures .

while tax expenditures as a percentage of gdp were high in relative terms in the late 1970s into the early 1980s , energy tax expenditures relative to total tax expenditures were also relatively high .

in 1982 , revenue losses from energy tax expenditures as a percentage of total tax expenditures exceeded 3% .

by the end of the 1980s , revenue losses from energy tax expenditures as a percentage of total tax expenditures dropped to less than one - third of one percent ( 0.3% ) .

energy tax expenditures as a percentage of total tax expenditures have remained below 1% in all years except 2009 ( energy tax expenditures as a percentage of total tax expenditures were estimated to be 1.1% in 2009 ) .

the reduced importance of energy tax expenditures may be reflective of a policy preference in which tax policy is not the preferred mechanism for achieving energy policy goals .

in addition to tax incentives , there are a number of federal grants and energy - related mandates designed to achieve federal energy goals .

for example , arra's section 1603 grant in lieu of tax credit program converted some of the federal support for renewable energy into a grant program not delivered directly through the tax code .

as noted above , excise tax credits and various other tax - related revenue losses are not considered tax expenditures .

consequently , the excise tax credit for alcohol fuel mixtures — also known as the "blenders credit" — does not appear in conventional estimates of energy tax expenditures .

the biodiesel producer tax credit , which results in a reduction in excise tax receipts , is also not included in the tax expenditure estimates above .

finally , treasury grants in lieu of the renewable energy investment tax credit ( itc ) or production tax credit ( ptc ) , enacted under section 1603 of the recovery act ( arra ) , are not directly included in the tax expenditure estimates above .

figure 5 illustrates the magnitude of revenue losses due to tax expenditures as defined above relative to revenue losses from reduced excise tax receipts and outlays associated with the treasury grants in lieu of tax credits in inflation - adjusted dollars .

since the 1970s , energy tax policy has attempted to achieve two broad objectives .

first , policymakers have sought to reduce oil import dependence by subsidizing domestic sources of energy .

second , environmental concerns have motivated tax preferences for various renewable energy sources and energy efficiency .

using estimated federal revenue losses associated with energy tax provisions , it is not clear that energy tax policy in practice has followed a stable course consistent with these objectives .

the low levels of energy tax subsidization in the late 1980s and throughout the 1990s , coupled with periods of relatively low oil prices , did little to promote the development of domestic energy resources , renewable or otherwise .

the overall level of tax subsidization of domestic energy resources in the mid - to - late 2000s was similar to early 1980s levels ( in inflation - adjusted terms ) .

during the late 1980s , throughout the 1990s , and into the 2000s , revenue losses associated with energy tax provisions were low , both relative to total tax expenditures and relative to current energy tax expenditure levels .

since 2005 , revenue losses associated with the renewable energy production tax credit have been increasing , suggesting an increase in renewable energy production and domestic renewable energy capacity .

by 2010 , revenue losses associated with tax incentives for renewables exceeded those available for fossil energy resources .

while environmental concerns have led to an increasing number of tax incentives for renewables and efficiency being made available , energy tax expenditures still suggest that , even in recent years , fossil fuels remain subsidized in practice .

since the late 1970s , tax subsidies for oil and gas have been scaled back and made less generous , but revenue losses attributable to fossil fuel subsidies persisted through 2007 .

overall , the number of energy tax provisions has increased since the 1970s , providing tax incentives to a broader spectrum of energy - related activities .

in 2007 , even with an increasing number of tax provisions designed to promote renewables and efficiency in place , the majority of energy tax expenditure revenue losses still served to benefit fossil fuels .

in 2007 , nearly half of the energy tax expenditure revenue losses were attributable to the unconventional fuel production credit being claimed by coal - based synfuel producers .

following the expiration of the unconventional fuel credit in 2007 , energy tax policy , as evaluated according to revenue losses , appears to have shifted towards favoring renewables .

while revenue losses associated with the excise tax credit for alcohol fuels ( ethanol ) and the renewable energy production tax credit have increased in relative importance , most of the revenue losses categorized as being associated with renewables are attributable to "black liquor. .

the fact that the tax provisions associated with the largest estimated revenue losses in the 2000s — the unconventional fuel tax credit claimed by synfuel producers and the alcohol fuels and cellulosic biofuels income tax credit claimed by those using "black liquor" — had high revenue loss stemming from claims that were inconsistent with policymakers' intent , raises concerns about using the tax code to achieve energy policy objectives .

designing tax policy that is more consistent with economic objectives could help address these concerns .

energy tax policy , particularly in the 2000s , has focused on subsidizing a variety of clean - energy alternatives , an approach that is unlikely to maximize economic efficiency .

taxing energy - related activities that generate negative externalities ( such as the burning of fossil fuels ) , as opposed to subsidizing clean - energy alternatives , would likely enhance the efficiency of energy tax policy .

taxing an activity that imposes negative externalities reduces the amount of the activity in equilibrium , as a corrective tax leads market participants to consider the full internal and external costs of the activity when making consumption or production choices .

taxing activities that generate negative externalities also allows the government to avoid "picking winners," which is often the result when selective subsidies are given to certain sectors within the complete set of alternatives .

to provide subsidies , the government must generate revenue .

if that revenue is generated by levying distortionary taxes in other sectors of the economy , such as income taxes that lead individuals to reduce work hours , such a policy is unlikely to be economically efficient .

the government may be creating inefficiencies in the labor market via income taxes to finance subsidies for clean - energy alternatives .

taxing energy - related activities that generate negative externalities , increasing the price of activities associated with negative externalities relative to the clean - energy alternatives , would also create incentives for increased investment in and utilization of the clean - energy alternative without creating distortions in other markets .

finally , limiting selective subsidies would reduce the scope for taxpayers to find loopholes allowing them to exploit energy tax incentives .

both coal - based synfuel producers and "black liquor" claimants were able to make small modifications in what were currently utilized production techniques , modifications which resulted in billions of dollars of tax incentives .

clean - energy tax subsidies do create incentives for alternative and innovative energy resources .

congress , in drafting tax policy , however , faces significant challenges .

creating narrowly defined clean - energy tax policy may stifle innovation , while providing broader incentives leaves open the possibility of tax loopholes and potential abuse .

appendix a .

data tables table a - 1 provides data from a sample of cross sections used to create figure 2 .

additional data regarding revenue losses associated with a specific tax provisions are available from the author upon request .

table a - 2 presents the estimated revenue losses associated with various tax provisions presented in table a - 1 , adjusted for inflation .

this information was used in creating figure 3 and figure 5 .

again , additional data regarding revenue losses associated with a specific tax provisions are available from the author upon request .

table a - 3 presents estimated revenue losses associated with various energy tax provisions .

the provisions are categorized as those that benefit fossil fuels , those that benefit renewables ( both electricity and fuels ) , and those that promote efficiency .

fuels excise tax preferences include excise tax provisions for alcohol fuels , biodiesel , and renewable diesel .

appendix b .

cumulative revenue losses associated with various tax preferences this appendix presents data on the revenue losses over time associated with various energy tax preferences .

specifically , the sections below present historical revenue losses associated with tax provisions that benefit the oil and gas sector , those that benefit renewable energy , and revenue losses associated with the excise tax credits for alcohol fuels .

cumulative revenue losses: oil and gas tax preferences over time , the primary tax incentives for oil and gas were the percentage depletion allowance and the ability to expense intangible drilling costs ( idcs ) .

before the 1980s , these were the only tax incentives designed specifically to promote investment in oil and gas .

tax preferences for oil and gas introduced in the 1980s and 1990s , such as expensing allowance for tertiary injectants and the tax credit for enhanced oil recovery , sought to encourage domestic production by providing tax incentives for difficult to extract domestic oil resources .

table b - 1 provides an estimate of the cumulative revenue losses associated with these tax provisions , through the year 2000 , in constant 2000 dollars .

table b - 2 presents historical revenue losses over the 2000 through 2010 period .

as was the case in the earlier time period referenced above , the percentage depletion allowance and ability to expense idcs continues to make up the majority of oil and gas related federal revenue losses .

cumulative revenue losses , combining the data from table b - 1 and table b - 2 , are presented in table b - 3 .

since 1968 , the percentage depletion allowance has resulted in an estimated $111 billion in federal revenue loss .

the ability to expense idcs has resulted in an estimated $78 billion over the same time period .

the majority of historical revenue losses associated with targeted tax incentives for oil and gas are attributable to these two provisions .

from 1968 through 2010 , estimated revenue losses associated with targeted tax incentives for the oil and gas sector sum to $193.4 billion .

cumulative revenue losses: renewables historically , the primary tax incentives for renewable energy have been the investment tax credit ( itc ) and production tax credit ( ptc ) .

the ability to forgo these tax credits and instead receive a one - time grant from the treasury under section 1603 of arra substantially increased the cost of these provisions during recent years .

table b - 4 and table b - 5 present historical data on tax expenditures for renewable energy .

since tax incentives for renewable energy were first introduced in the late 1970s , the estimated cumulative cost has been $24.6 billion .

of this , $5.3 billion is due to outlay payments under the section 1603 grants in lieu of tax credits program .

an estimated $12.2 billion , roughly half of the total support through tax - related incentives , is attributable to the renewable energy itc and ptc .

cumulative revenue losses: excise tax credits for alcohol fuels table b - 6 presents estimated revenue losses associated with the excise tax exemption for alcohol fuels from 1980 through 2010 .

the first row presents revenue losses in current dollars .

the second row presents revenue losses in 2010 inflation - adjusted dollars .

the third row presents estimated revenue losses adjusting for income tax offsets ( discussed below ) , in 2010 inflation adjusted - dollars .

over time , federal revenue losses increased , reflecting increased use of alcohol fuels , particularly ethanol .

beginning in 2005 , the volumetric ethanol excise tax credit ( veetc ) was introduced to replace the previously available excise tax exemption for ethanol .

since excise tax credits are deductible , replacing the excise tax exemption with an excise tax credit has additional federal revenue consequences , above and beyond payouts for the excise tax credit .

specifically , income tax receipts decrease due to the higher excise tax deduction .

assuming an average tax rate of 25% , excise tax credits resulting in $5.7 billion in lost excise tax receipts in 2010 also reduce income tax receipts by an estimated $1.4 billion ( $5.7 * 0.25 ) .

between 2005 and 2010 , income tax offsets ( foregone income tax receipts ) associated with the alcohol fuels excise tax credit can be approximated at $5.7 billion ( $22.6 * 0.25 ) .

including estimated income tax offsets , and adjusting for inflation , total federal losses associated with alcohol fuels excise tax credits between 2005 and 2010 were approximately $29.3 billion dollars .

since the introduction of excise tax preferences for alcohol fuels , these excise incentives have resulted in $43.8 billion in revenue losses .

when including estimated revenue losses associated with income tax offsets , total revenue losses associated with excise tax preferences for alcohol fuels between 1980 and 2010 total an estimated $49.7 billion .

