the united states and russia signed a new strategic arms reduction treaty — known as new start — on april 8 , 2010 .

this treaty replaced the 1991 strategic arms reductions treaty ( start ) , which expired , after 15 years of implementation , on december 5 , 2009 .

the u.s. senate provided its advice and consent to ratification of new start on december 22 , 2010 , by a vote of 71-26 .

the russian parliament , with both the duma and federation council voting , did so on january 25 and january 26 , 2011 .

the treaty entered into force on february 5 , 2011 , after secretary of state clinton and foreign minister lavrov exchanged the instruments of ratification .

new start superseded the 2002 strategic offensive reductions treaty ( known as the moscow treaty ) , which then lapsed in 2012 .

new start provided the parties with 7 years to reduce their forces , and it will remain in force for a total of 10 years , unless the parties agree to extend it for no more than five additional years .

both parties completed their required reductions by february 5 , 2018 .

with the reductions now complete , questions about whether the two nations will extend the treaty have begun to dominate public discussions .

the obama administration briefly considered pursuing an extension of new start before it left office in 2016 , but did not raise the issue with russia .

press reports indicate that the president trump rejected a proposal from russian president putin to extend the treaty during their first phone call in february 2017 .

the presidents reportedly discussed the treaty during their summit in helsinki in july 2018 , with president putin presenting president trump with a document suggesting that they extend the treaty after resolving "existing problems related to the treaty implementation," but the two reportedly did not reach an agreement on the issue .

the administration's nuclear posture review ( npr ) , completed in february 2018 , confirmed that the united states would continue to implement the treaty , at least through 2021 , but was silent on the prospects for extension through 2026 .

trump administration officials have indicated that they are reviewing the treaty and assessing whether it continues to serve u.s. national security interests before deciding whether the united states would propose or accept a five - year extension .

they noted , in testimony before the senate foreign relations committee in may 2019 , that an interagency review was continuing , but they refused to elaborate on the substance of that review or speculate on the implications of a decision to allow new start to lapse in 2021 .

during this hearing , under secretary of state andrea thompson and deputy under secretary of defense david trachtenberg emphasized that the new start treaty might not be sufficient to address emerging threats to u.s. national security .

they noted that russia was developing new kinds of strategic offensive arms that would not count under the treaty , that russia was expanding its stockpile of shorter - range nonstrategic nuclear weapons that were outside the scope of the treaty , and that china was modernizing and expanding its nuclear arsenal but was not a part of the treaty at all .

these comments were consistent with press reports indicating that president trump would like to pursue a new arms control agreement that captured all types of nuclear weapons and included china's forces under the limits .

the witnesses were unable , however , to articulate a reason for why china would be willing to participate in such negotiations when its nuclear arsenal of around 300 warheads was far smaller than the arsenals of several thousand warheads held by the united states and russia .

instead , when asked , under secretary thompson provided a rationale for why the united states would want china to participate in the talks , noting that china wants "to be a responsible player on the world stage .

they want to be part of this great power competition .

and with that comes responsibilities. .

some u.s. officials , including general john hyten , the commander of u.s. strategic command ( stratcom ) , have noted that new start serves u.s. national security interests because its monitoring regime provides transparency and visibility existing into russian nuclear forces and because its limits provide predictability about the future size and structure of those forces .

however , in testimony before the senate armed services committee in february 2019 , general hyten also expressed concern about new kinds of nuclear forces that russia may develop in the coming years .

he noted that these weapons could eventually pose a threat to the united states and said he thought the united states and russia should expand new start so they would count them under the treaty limits .

as is noted below , article v , paragraph 2 of the treaty provides a mechanism for the parties to address concerns about the emergence of new kinds of strategic offensive arms .

it states that the parties should raise their concerns about such weapons in the bilateral consultative commission ( bcc ) established by the treaty , and seek to reach a resolution there .

in may 2019 , undersecretary of state andrea thompson stated that the united states had begun to have discussions with russia about these systems at the technical expert level , but she did not specify whether these discussions were occurring in the bcc .

russian officials have stated that some of its new systems should not count under new start because they do not meet the treaty's definition of deployed missile launchers or heavy bombers .

nevertheless , the public debate about the possible extension of new start has begun to incorporate views about how to address these weapons .

for example , some experts believe the united states and russia should extend the treaty before 2021 , then use the time during the extension to discuss how to include these new systems under the treaty limits .

some , however , have suggested the opposite , arguing that the united states should not agree to extend new start unless russia agrees , before the extension takes effect , to count its new systems under the treaty limits .

others believe that the united states should agree to extend new start only if russia agrees , before the extension takes effect , to use the time during the extension to negotiate a new treaty that not only captures the new kinds of weapons , but also imposes limits on russia's nonstrategic nuclear forces .

russian officials have also questioned whether the united states and russia are in a position to extend new start before it expires in 2021 .

at a conference in washington in march 2019 , anatoly antonov , russia's ambassador to the united states , noted that russia is not interested in expanding new start so that it would count new kinds of strategic systems and that russia would be unwilling to discuss an extension of new start until the united states addresses russia's concerns with u.s. implementation of the treaty's conversion and elimination procedures .

moreover , he noted that , if the two sides negotiated a new treaty to capture the systems of concern to the united states , russia would insist on addressing u.s. systems — like ballistic missile defenses and strategic conventional weapons — that are of concern to russia .

president obama and and russia's president medvedev outlined their goals for the negotiations on a new start treaty in early april 2009 .

in a joint statement issued after they met in london , they indicated that the subject of the new agreement "will be the reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms. .

this statement indicated that the new treaty would not address missile defenses , nonstrategic nuclear weapons , or nondeployed stockpiles of nuclear weapons .

the presidents also agreed that they would seek to reduce their forces to levels below those in the 2002 moscow treaty , and that the new agreement would "mutually enhance the security of the parties and predictability and stability in strategic offensive forces , and will include effective verification measures drawn from the experience of the parties in implementing the start treaty. .

the presidents further refined their goals for new start , and gave the first indications of the range they were considering for the limits in the treaty , in a joint understanding signed at their summit meeting in moscow in july 2009 .

they agreed that the new treaty would restrict each party to between 500 and 1,100 strategic delivery vehicles and between 1,500 and 1,675 associated warheads .

they also agreed that the new treaty would contain "provisions on definitions , data exchanges , notifications , eliminations , inspections and verification procedures , as well as confidence building and transparency measures , as adapted , simplified , and made less costly , as appropriate , in comparison to the start treaty. .

the new start treaty follows many of the same conventions as the 1991 start treaty .

it contains detailed definitions and counting rules that the parties use to identify the forces limited by the treaty .

it also mandates that the parties maintain an extensive database that describes the locations , numbers , and technical characteristics of weapons limited by the treaty .

it allows the parties to use several types of exhibitions and on - site inspections to confirm information in the database and to monitor forces and activities limited by the treaty .

but the new treaty is not simply an extension of start .

the united states and soviet union negotiated the original start treaty during the 1980s , during the latter years of the cold war , when the two nations were still adversaries and each was still wary of the capabilities and intentions of the other .

many of the provisions in the original treaty reflect the uncertainty and suspicion that were evident at that time .

the new start treaty is a product of a different era and a different relationship between the united states and russia .

in some ways , its goals remain the same — the parties still sought provisions that would allow for predictability and transparency in their current forces and future intentions .

but , the united states and russia have streamlined and simplified the central limits and the monitoring and verification provisions .

the new treaty does not contain layers of limits and sublimits ; each side can determine its own mix of land - based intercontinental ballistic missiles ( icbms ) , submarine - launched ballistic missiles ( slbms ) , and heavy bombers .

moreover , in the current environment , the parties were far less concerned with choking off avenues for potential evasion schemes than they were with fostering continued cooperation and openness between the two sides .

when the obama administration released the 2010 nuclear posture review , it indicated that the united states would retain a triad of icbms , slbms , and heavy bombers under the new start treaty .

the npr indicates that this force structure supports strategic stability because it allows the united states to maintain an "assured second - strike capability" with warheads on survivable ballistic missile submarines and allows the united states to retain "sufficient force structure in each leg to ... hedge effectively ... if necessary due to unexpected technological problems or operational vulnerabilities. .

the trump administration , in the 2018 npr , also reaffirmed the support for the nuclear triad .

although it offered a more detailed rationale for the maintenance of a triad , the underlying themes of strengthening deterrence and supporting stability were part of the discussion .

obama administration officials also indicated that new start promoted strategic stability by "discounting" the weapons on heavy bombers .

as president reagan argued during his commencement address at eureka college in 1982 , ballistic missiles are the "most destabilizing nuclear systems. .

as a result , in his start proposals , president reagan sought deep reductions in ballistic missile warheads , but lesser reductions in the weapons on heavy bombers .

the counting rules in new start reflect this logic .

because bomber weapons would take hours or days to reach their targets , and because they could be recalled after they were launched , they pose less of a threat to strategic stability than do ballistic missiles .

as a result , some argue that , even if the united states and russia retain hundreds of bomber weapons that do not count against the treaty limits , the reductions required in ballistic missile warheads will enhance strategic stability .

some have also noted that new start may strengthen strategic stability from the russian perspective by removing the specific limits and restrictions on mobile icbms .

russia does not deploy many submarines at sea , and , therefore , lacks an assured second - strike capability on that leg of its triad .

instead , it has sought to improve the survivability of its forces by deploying icbms on mobile launchers .

under start , the united states sought to restrict these systems because it feared it would not be able to count them in peacetime and target them in wartime .

in the current environment , concerns about wartime targeting played less of a role in the negotiations .

consequently , instead of limiting their numbers and restricting their operations , new start seeks to provide transparency and openness , so the united states can be confident in its ability to count these weapons in peacetime even though it might not be able to attack them during a conflict .

critics of the new start treaty have questioned whether it serves u.s. security interests even if it did promote strategic stability .

some argued , during the negotiations , that the united states did not need to negotiate a new treaty to maintain its own triad , as this was possible with or without arms control .

they also argued that the united states did not need to reduce its forces to bring about reductions in russia's forces , as russia would reduce its forces over the next decade as it retired aging systems , even in the absence of a new arms control agreement .

moreover , they questioned whether arms control should even be a part of the u.s. - russian relationship , as arms control is a symbol of a cold war , antagonistic relationship between the two nations .

they believe that the united states and russia should not measure their relationship with each other using cold war - era measures like strategic stability and survivable warheads .

this last argument has faded as the u.s. - russian relationship has changed over the past decade .

few now argue that arms control is irrelevant in the absence of an antagonistic relationship .

instead , they dispute the value of arms control precisely because the major - power rivalry has returned and the united states and russia now have a more antagonistic relationship .

they note that this change has occurred in spite of the presence of new start , and , therefore , is evidence of the failure of arms control to either support or strengthen strategic stability .

moreover , they note that new start did not include any limits on russian shorter - range nonstrategic nuclear weapons , and , therefore , failed to capture the full scope of threats that russia presents to the united states and its allies .

monitoring and verification were among the central concerns addressed in the senate committees during their review of the new start treaty .

the cooperative monitoring measures in the treaty received special scrutiny , as many observers of the arms control process specifically measured the value of the monitoring and verification regime in the original start treaty by its widespread use of notifications , on - site inspections , and other cooperative measures .

some critics of new start questioned whether the monitoring provisions in the new treaty were sufficient to provide the united states with enough information to either confirm russian compliance with the treaty or to detect efforts to violate its terms .

they pointed to differences between the verification regime in the original start treaty and those in new start to argue that the new verification regime is less robust than the old regime .

they noted that the united states would no longer maintain a monitoring presence outside the votkinsk facility where russia assembles its mobile icbms , which , they argued , could weaken the u.s. ability to count these missiles as they entered russia's forces .

they also noted that the united states and russia would no longer exchange telemetry data on all their ballistic missile flight tests , which , over time , could lessen the u.s. ability to understand and evaluate the capabilities of russian ballistic missiles .

the obama administration and others who supported the new treaty argued that the verification regime in new start would be more than sufficient to provide the united states with confidence in russia's compliance with the treaty .

they acknowledged that the regime is different from the regime in the original start treaty , but noted that this was , in part , due to improvements in the relationship between russia and the united states and differences between the limits and restrictions in the two treaties .

they argued that the monitoring regime in new start was streamlined , both to reduce its costs and to ease the disruptions caused by monitoring for u.s. and russian military forces .

they also noted that it relied on as much or more cooperation between the two parties , which would continue to build confidence and reduce suspicions .

moreover , many in the obama administration noted that the united states had not had any opportunity to monitor russian forces on russian territory since the original treaty expired in december 2009 .

they argued that continuing delays in senate consideration of new start could further reduce u.s. and russian confidence in their knowledge of each other's forces , leading to worst - case assessments and possible instabilities .

they further reminded those who contend that the verification regime in new start is less robust than the regime in old start that the absence of a treaty would have meant the absence of any monitoring and verification regime .

the united states did not have the option of returning the regime of the original start treaty ; nor should it have wanted to do so since the new treaty has different limits and restrictions than the old treaty .

many u.s. officials , including admiral mullen and general chilton , included their concerns about the absence of monitoring in their appeals for the prompt ratification of the new start treaty .

questions about the monitoring and verification regime in new start go beyond concerns about the specific monitoring mechanisms and the u.s. ability to confirm russian compliance with individual limits in the treaty .

most experts agree that neither party can be absolutely certain that the other is in perfect compliance with all the limits and restrictions in the treaty .

this is due , in some cases , to ambiguities in the treaty language and varying interpretations of the treaty requirements .

it is also due to the fact that both sides may have gaps in their knowledge about the details of the other side's forces and activities .

these uncertainties do not , by themselves , indicate that the parties should not ratify and implement the treaty .

the broader question often asked by experts on treaty monitoring and verification is whether the parties , in general , and the united states , in particular , will have high confidence in russia's compliance with the treaty , and , in those cases when compliance concerns may come up , whether the united states will be able to detect evidence of potential violations that might undermine u.s. security with enough warning to respond and adjust u.s. forces to offset those security concerns .

the obama administration indicated , in documents submitted to the senate in july 2010 , that the new start treaty met this standard .

the administration concluded that the benefits to russia of cheating would be minimal , as the united states , by maintaining a triad of icbms , slbms , and bombers , would be able to respond to any attempt to shift the strategic balance by adding significant numbers of warheads to its own forces .

moreover , if russia were to cheat to any significant degree , it would undermine its relationship with the united states and interfere with any possible future arms control agreements .

therefore , in a letter sent to the senate foreign relations committee in september 2010 , secretary of defense gates concluded that russia would not be able to achieve "militarily significant cheating" under the new start treaty .

a review of the verification regime in new start , and summary of some of the differences between the verification regime in the original start treaty and the regime in new start can be found in crs report r41201 , monitoring and verification in arms control .

as was noted above , during the debate over new start the obama administration testified repeatedly that the new start treaty imposes no limits on current or planned ballistic missile defense programs in the united states .

some critics have claimed , however , that the united states might impose those limits itself , to ensure that russia does not withdraw from new start , as it said it might do in the unilateral statement it released when it signed the treaty .

officials from the obama administration argued that this concern was unfounded .

they noted that the soviet union issued a similar statement when it signed the original start treaty , threatening to withdraw if the united states withdrew from the 1972 anti - ballistic missile ( abm treaty ) .

yet , when the united states withdrew from the abm treaty in 2002 , russia not only did not withdraw from start , it continued to participate in negotiations on the 2002 strategic offensive reductions treaty .

moreover , in the 1990s , when the united states might have altered its missile defense plans in response to the soviet letter , the united states actually expanded its missile defense activities and increased spending on missile defense programs .

as a result , there is little reason , based on historical data , to expect the united states to restrain its missile defense programs .

moreover , officials from the obama administration have highlighted that the ballistic missile defense review , the nuclear posture review , and the 2011 budget all offer strong support for continuing u.s. missile defense programs .

some critics have also claimed that russia might seek , and the united states might agree to , new limits on u.s. missile defense capabilities in the bilateral consultative commission established by the treaty .

according to the protocol to new start , this commission is designed "to promote the implementation of the provisions of the treaty. .

the protocol indicates that the united states and russia will meet in the commission to "resolve questions relating to compliance with the obligations assumed by the parties," agree on "additional measures as may be necessary to improve the viability and effectiveness of the treaty," and "discuss other issues raised by either party. .

some have claimed that because this agenda is somewhat open - ended , russia may raise its concerns about u.s. missile defenses in the commission and propose limits on those systems .

the obama administration insisted that the parties could not , and would not use the bcc to negotiate new limits on ballistic missile defenses or any other elements of the u.s. strategic arsenal .

in a fact sheet that accompanies the treaty , the state department has indicated that the parties would use the bcc "to reach agreement on changes in the protocol to the treaty , including its annexes , that do not affect substantive rights or obligations .

the bcc may in no way make changes that would affect the substantive rights and obligations contained in the new start treaty. .

the parties may use the bcc to "agree upon such additional measures as may be necessary to improve the viability and effectiveness of the treaty" but these measures would address concerns that came up while implementing the existing limits and restrictions in the treaty .

they would not be able to impose new limits or restrictions without amending the treaty , and any amendment to the treaty would be subject to the same ratification process as the treaty itself .

the senate would have to offer its advice and consent .

although the obama administration pursued discussions with russia on missile defense issues for several years , it never accepted any limitations on u.s. missile defense programs and insisted , repeatedly , that u.s. missile defense programs were not designed or capable of undermining russia's ballistic missile defenses .

russia , however , continued to question u.s. intentions and press for limits on ballistic missile defenses .

it has insisted that any negotiations on further reductions in nuclear weapons include discussions about limits on ballistic missile defenses .

congress remains concerned about the possibility that the united states might accept limits on missile defenses in exchange for limits on offensive nuclear forces .

senator barrasso raised this issue in a hearing before the senate foreign relations committee on september 18 , 2018 .

he asked officials from the state department and defense department to assure him that "in any arms control discussions with russia for which you're responsible that the united states will not agree to limiting our own missile defense programs. .

both under secretary of state andrea thompson and under secretary of defense david trachtenberg provided those assurances .

the new start treaty does not limit or restrict the ability of the united states or russia to modernize strategic offensive nuclear forces .

it specifically states , in article v , paragraph 1 , that , "subject to the provisions of this treaty , modernization and replacement of strategic offensive arms may be carried out. .

both nations are currently modernizing their forces and replacing aging missiles , submarines , and bombers .

moreover , while some members of the senate insisted that the obama administration commit to modernizing the u.s. nuclear arsenal before voting in support of the treaty , many have also indicated that their continuing support for the modernization programs is linked to ongoing implementation of new start .

several senators emphasized this linkage during a hearing in the senate foreign relations committee in september 2018 .

senator menendez noted that "bipartisan support for nuclear modernization is tied to maintaining an arms - control process that controls and seeks to reduce russian nuclear forces. .

senator corker pointed out that , when the senate gave its consent to the ratification of new start , "there was no doubt" about the "tie between the two. .

he stated that "the essence of this is that the modernization piece , and the reduction in warheads piece go hand in hand. .

the united states is currently recapitalizing all three legs of its nuclear triad , with replacements planned for its bombers , air - delivered cruise missiles , land - based ballistic missiles , and ballistic missile submarines over the next 20 years .

it is also pursuing life extension programs for many of the warheads in the u.s. stockpile , to ensure that the weapons remain safe , secure , and effective .

the obama administration outlined much of this modernization program in a report , known as the 1251 report , mandated by congress in the fy2010 defense authorization act ( p.l .

111-84 , §1251 ) .

this provision required the administration to submit a report to congress when it submitted the new start treaty to the senate that described how it planned to "enhance the safety , security , and reliability of the nuclear weapons stockpile of the united states ; modernize the nuclear weapons complex ; and maintain the delivery platforms for nuclear weapons. .

in this 1251 report , the administration stated that the united states planned to spend $180 billion over the next 10 years to meet these objectives , with $80 billion allocated to the u.s. nuclear weapons complex and nuclear warheads and $100 billion allocated to the navy and air force for the maintenance and modernization of their delivery systems .

the program has expanded over the years , and , although cost estimates vary , the congressional budget office has estimated that the united states is likely to spend around $350 billion over 10 years and $1.2 trillion over 30 years to modernize its nuclear arsenal .

in the 2018 nuclear posture review , the trump administration reaffirmed its support for the continuing modernization of the u.s. nuclear triad , advocating for the completion of all the programs initiated under the obama administration , while adding two new systems to the plan .

during the debate over new start's ratification , some members of congress and analysts outside government questioned whether the obama administration was sufficiently committed to modernizing and maintaining its strategic nuclear forces , nuclear weapons complex , and nuclear warheads .

some also questioned whether the funding in the program would be sufficient to maintain and sustain the u.s. nuclear arsenal .

some argued that the totals did not add enough above the previously planned program to go far in expanding the u.s. capability to maintain and modernize its forces .

others questioned whether the administration would sustain its commitment for more than a year or two , particularly in an era of tight defense budgets .

these concerns grew as the fiscal constraints imposed through the budget control act in 2011 reduced the resources available for modernization in the nuclear enterprise and have led to delays in some programs .

others , however , argued that the administration's budget for the nuclear weapons complex in fy2011 and the added funding outlined in the 1251 report demonstrated a strong commitment to recapitalizing the u.s. nuclear weapons complex , maintaining nuclear warheads , and maintaining and modernizing the delivery vehicles .

the administration added nearly 10% , or over $700 million , to the doe budget for nuclear weapons in fy2011 .

ambassador linton brooks , who had served as the director of the national nuclear security administration during the bush administration , indicated that he would have "killed" for a budget of that magnitude when he was managing the nuclear weapons complex for doe .

while the 2011 budget control act required some delays in planned spending on nuclear weapons modernization , the obama and trump administrations' budget proposals have continued to show increases above the levels expected before the ratification of new start .

russia is also deploying new missiles , submarines , and bombers to replace aging systems within the limits of new start .

at the same time , it may be developing new types of strategic offensive arms that might not be captured by the limits in the treaty .

in his annual address on march 1 , 2018 , russian president putin announced that russia was developing several new nuclear delivery vehicles that could evade or penetrate u.s. ballistic missile defenses .

one of the new weapons mentioned in the speech , the large , multiple - warhead icbm known as the sarmat , would by most estimates clearly count under the new start treaty .

however , other systems — including a long - range nuclear - powered cruise missile , a long - range nuclear - armed underwater drone , and an air - delivered hypersonic cruise missile — may not be covered by the treaty's definitions of existing types of strategic offensive systems .

as was noted above , the treaty addresses the possible emergence of new types of strategic offensive arms in paragraph 2 of article v , where it states that the parties should raise their concerns about such weapons in the bcc .

it does not , however , indicate how the parties will resolve such questions or whether they must agree before a weapon is included or excluded from the treaty limits .

according to under secretary of state thompson , in september 2018 , the united states had not yet questioned russia about these systems .

however , these weapons would only raise concerns under new start if they were deployed before the treaty expired .

many analysts doubt that this will happen since most of the weapons mentioned in the speech seem to be in the early stages of development .

presidents obama and medvedev agreed , in april 2009 , when they initiated the negotiations on the new start treaty , that this agreement would address only strategic nuclear forces , the long - range weapons that each side could use to reach the territory of the other side .

it would not seek to limit or restrict the shorter - range nonstrategic nuclear weapons in either side's arsenal .

this agreement derived not only from the fact that the existing start treaty , and nearly all past bilateral arms control treaties , had addressed only strategic nuclear weapons , but also from the fact that many of the issues that would need to be addressed in a treaty that limited nonstrategic nuclear weapons would likely prove too complex to resolve in the near term , when both sides sought to replace the existing start treaty .

there was widespread agreement in congress , in the obama administration , and within the arms control community , that the united states and russia should seek to negotiate a treaty that increases transparency and possibly imposes limits on nonstrategic strategic nuclear weapons .

however , there is also widespread agreement that negotiating such a treaty would prove extremely difficult , as russia maintains a far larger stock of these weapons than the united states , in part to compensate for perceived weaknesses in its conventional forces , and because u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons are a part of the u.s. commitment to nato , and the united states believes that any changes in their deployment should be addressed by the alliance before they are addressed in an arms control negotiation .

some analysts and senators questioned whether the united states should agree to further reductions in its strategic nuclear weapons in the absence of any limits on russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

they noted that russia retains more than 2,000 operational nonstrategic nuclear weapons while the united states has around 200 in europe , and that the value of these weapons could grow as the numbers of u.s. and russian strategic nuclear weapons decline .

they also noted that these weapons could seem particularly threatening to some of the new nato states that are located near the periphery of russia .

others however , argued that russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons do not pose a threat to the united states or nato , as russia has indicated that these weapons would only be used in response to an attack on russian territory .

so , these analysts noted , as long as nato does not initiate such an attack , nato members would not be threatened by these weapons .

moreover , as senator lugar noted in his response to former massachusetts governor mitt romney's critique of new start , most of russia's nonstrategic nuclear weapons do not pose a missile threat to europe .

senator lugar stated that "most of russia's tactical nuclear weapons either have very short ranges , are used for homeland air defense , are devoted to the chinese border , or are in storage. .

many of the experts who testified in support of the new start treaty agreed that the united states and russia should pursue negotiations on a treaty on nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

however , most agreed that russia would be unwilling to participate in such discussions , and the united states and russia would be unlikely to find common ground on such an agreement , unless both sides ratified and implemented the new start treaty first .

for example , in testimony before the senate foreign relations committee on april 29 , 2010 , former secretaries of defense james schlesinger and william perry both indicated that nonstrategic nuclear weapons should be an issue for the next treaty , and that the united states should ratify new start as a step on the path to get to reduction in nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

the trump administration , in the nuclear posture review released on february 2 , 2018 , also expressed concerns about russia's stockpile of nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

while it did not advocate for the negotiation of a treaty specifically limiting these weapons , it did indicate that russia would have to address these concerns before the united states would be willing to negotiate further reductions in strategic nuclear weapons .

the obama administration argued that u.s. - russian cooperation on arms control , in general , and the new start treaty , specifically , could help move forward the u.s. and international nuclear nonproliferation agenda .

no one has argued that the treaty will convince nations who are seeking their own nuclear weapon that they should follow the u.s. and russian lead and reduce those weapons or roll back those programs .

however , some have argued that u.s. - russian cooperation on arms control could strengthen the u.s. - russian cooperation on a broader array of issues and that , "cooperation is a prerequisite for moving forward with tough , internationally binding sanctions on iran. .

moreover , some have noted that u.s. - russian cooperation on arms control would also demonstrate that these nations are living up to their obligations under the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) .

most nations that are parties to the npt believe that reductions in the number of deployed nuclear weapons are a clear indicator of u.s. and russian compliance with their obligations under article vi of the npt .

during the preparatory committee meetings ( prepcoms ) leading up to the 2010 review conference of the npt , many of the participants called on the united states and russia to complete negotiations on a new start treaty .

while the completion of this treaty may not assure the united states of widespread agreement on u.s. goals and priorities at the npt review conference , many argue that the absence of an agreement would have certainly complicated u.s. efforts and reduced the chances for a successful conference .

in contrast , some have argued that the new start treaty will do little to advance u.s. nonproliferation goals .

they noted that the parties at the npt review conference may express their approval of the new start , but their positions on substantive issues would reflect their own national security interests and goals .

moreover , some critics argue that new start might undermine u.s. nonproliferation goals by calling into question u.s. security commitments and the continuing salience of u.s. nuclear weapons .

the state department , in its press releasing announcing that the united states had met its obligation to reduce to the new start limits , noted that "the united states continues to demonstrate its commitment to fulfilling its arms control obligations , including under the treaty on the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons" through its adherence to the new start limits .

in 2010 , when it signed the new start treaty , the obama administration indicated that it hoped this would be the first step in a renewed arms control process with russia .

in his statement on april 8 , 2010 , president obama indicated that "this treaty will set the stage for further cuts .

and going forward , we hope to pursue discussions with russia on reducing both our strategic and tactical weapons , including nondeployed weapons. .

in his state of the union address on february 12 , 2013 , the president stated that , as a part of the "effort to prevent the spread of the world's most dangerous weapons," the united states would "engage russia to seek further reductions in our nuclear arsenals. .

then , on june 19 , 2013 , in a speech in berlin , president obama stated that , after a comprehensive review , he had "determined that we can ensure the security of america and our allies , and maintain a strong and credible strategic deterrent , while reducing our deployed strategic nuclear weapons by up to one - third. .

he stated that he intended "to seek negotiated cuts with russia to move beyond cold war nuclear postures. .

many analysts outside government supported the idea of further reductions beyond new start .

they had hoped new start would cut more deeply into u.s. and russian forces , reducing them to perhaps 1,000 warheads on each side .

others focused their concern on the absence of limits on nonstrategic nuclear weapons and nondeployed nuclear warheads .

they expected a second treaty to address some of these concerns .

some have suggested that the two sides pursue a single , comprehensive treaty that would limit strategic , nonstrategic , and nondeployed warheads .

this is similar to the approach that the obama administration appeared willing to pursue in 2013 .

others suggested that the united states and russia accelerate their reductions under new start , amend the treaty to reduce the numbers of permitted weapons , or agree informally to reduce their forces below new start levels .

they argued that these steps , if the nations took them together , could enhance stability and reduce nuclear dangers , without waiting for the completion a new , lengthy treaty negotiation process .

some have also suggested that the united states and russia work to increase transparency on their nonstrategic nuclear weapons , even if they are not yet ready to agree to limits or reductions in these systems .

others , however , disputed the notion that new start should be the first step in an ongoing process of further reductions in nuclear weapons .

while some were willing to support the modest reductions of new start , they would not have supported a treaty that imposed deeper reductions on deployed nuclear weapons or limits on nondeployed nuclear weapons .

they also objected to the broader arms control agenda that president obama had outlined in his speech in prague on april 5 , 2009 , including his call for the ratification of the comprehensive test ban treaty and his vision of a world free of nuclear weapons .

hence , some who concluded that the new start treaty would not harm u.s. security by itself objected to its ratification because they believed its defeat would close the door on the rest of the president's arms control agenda .

the prospects of additional reductions below the new start levels were further dimmed by the fact that russia has been uninterested in negotiating another treaty .

shortly after new start entered into force , russian foreign minister sergei lavrov stated that russia would not want to pursue further negotiations until new start had been implemented .

russian officials have stated , repeatedly , that a treaty mandating further reductions would not only have to include limits on u.s. ballistic missile defenses and nonnuclear strategic strike systems , but would also have to limit the forces of the other major nuclear powers .

most experts agree that a new treaty that addressed each of these issues raised by both parties would likely be extremely difficult to complete .

russia has been unwilling to negotiate reductions in its nonstrategic nuclear weapons , and neither side may be willing to adopt the amount of transparency necessary to negotiate verifiable limits on nondeployed warheads in storage .

the united states has firmly rejected russia's proposals for limits on ballistic missile defense and is unwilling to include conventional - armed cruise missiles or other long - range missiles in nuclear arms control negotiations .

moreover , britain , france , and china — the other declared nuclear weapons states under the npt — have not shown any willingness to participate in the u.s. - russian arms control process .

prospects for the negotiation of a follow - on treaty dimmed further in 2014 , following russia's annexation of crimea and incursion into ukraine .

in addition , in july 2014 , the obama administration — in its annual report on adherence to and compliance with arms control , nonproliferation , and disarmament agreements and commitments — stated that the united states "has determined that the russian federation is in violation of its obligations under the [1987] intermediate range nuclear forces ( inf ) treaty not to possess , produce , or flight - test a ground - launched cruise missile ( glcm ) with a range capability of 500 km to 5,500 km , or to possess or produce launchers of such missiles. .

while russia appeared to be complying with new start , most agreed that further negotiations would be unwise ; some also suggested that the united states suspend its implementation of new start until russia returned to compliance with the inf treaty .

others , however , have argued that the united states should continue to implement new start , as the limits on the size of russia's strategic forces and the transparency provided by its verification regime continue to serve u.s. national security interests .

absent an agreement between the united states and russia to extend new start for a period of no more than five years , the treaty will lapse in 2021 .

as was noted above , president trump and president putin reportedly discussed the treaty during their summit in helsinki in july 2018 , with president putin presenting president trump with a document suggesting that they extend the treaty after resolving "existing problems related to the treaty implementation," but the two did not reach an agreement on the issue .

in the 2018 nuclear posture review , the trump administration noted that the united states had met the treaty's central limits , and that it would "continue to implement the new start treaty and verify russian compliance. .

it did not , however , indicate whether it might seek an extension of the treaty and made it clear that it was unlikely to negotiate a new treaty before new start's expiration in 2021 .

it noted that the united states is committed to "arms control efforts that advance u.s. , allied , and partner security ; are verifiable and enforceable ; and include partners that comply responsibly with their obligations. .

but it also noted that russian actions , including its noncompliance with the inf treaty and other arms control agreements , and its actions in crimea and ukraine made further progress difficult .

the trump administration is reportedly conducting an interagency review of new start to determine whether it continues to serve u.s. national security interests , and that this review will inform the u.s. approach to the treaty's extension .

among the issues that might be under consideration are whether the united states should be willing to extend new start following russia's violation of the inf treaty , whether the limits in the treaty continue to serve u.s. national security interests , whether the insights and data that the monitoring regime provides about russian nuclear forces remain of value for u.s. national security , and whether an extension of the treaty should be linked to russia's development of new kinds of strategic offensive arms .

administration officials addressed this review during testimony before the senate foreign relations committee on september 18 , 2018 .

both under secretary of state andrea thompson and deputy under secretary of defense david trachtenberg emphasized how russia's violation of the inf treaty and its more general approach to arms control undermined u.s. confidence in the arms control process .

under secretary thomson noted that "the value of any arms control agreement is derived from our treaty partners maintaining compliance with their obligations and avoiding actions that result in mistrust and the potential for miscalculation. .

she also said that russia's noncompliance "has created a trust deficit that leads the united states to question russia's commitment to arms control as a way to manage and stabilize our strategic relationship and promote greater transparency and predictability. .

deputy under secretary trachtenberg also emphasized that "arms control with russia is troubled because the russian federation apparently believes it need only abide by the agreements that suit it .

as a result , the credibility of all international agreements with russia is at risk. .

he went on to state that "it is that overall kind of behavior that i think from a national security perspective we at least need to consider. .

several senators questioned whether the administration's review would include a broader assessment of whether the provisions in new start contributed to u.s. national security .

they focused on both the benefits of the limits on u.s. and russian nuclear forces and the value of the transparency provided by the monitoring and verification regime .

deputy under secretary trachtenberg acknowledged that "the verification and monitoring and on - site inspection provisions provide a level of openness and transparency that is useful and beneficial not just to the united states but to our allies as well. .

but he reiterated that "any decision on extending the treaty will , and should be , based on a realistic assessment of whether the new start treaty remains in our national security interests in light of overall russian arms control behavior. .

senators held a similar conversation with under secretary thompson and deputy under secretary trachtenberg during a hearing before the senate foreign relations committee on may 15 , 2019 .

while the two witnesses repeated many of the same concerns about russian compliance with its arms control obligations and the need for an atmosphere of trust between the treaty parties , they also addressed concerns about russia's development of new kinds of strategic offensive arms that would fall outside the new start limits , russia's nonstrategic nuclear weapons that are not covered by the treaty , and china's nuclear modernization programs .

they were unwilling to offer insights into the progress of the review — under secretary thompson refused to speculate about possible changes in russian forces if the treaty were to expire , and deputy under secretary trachtenberg declined to offer insights into how the united states might alter its nuclear forces or how it might recover the data and information provided by new start's verification regime if the treaty were to expire .

analysts outside government have offered several reasons why the united states should support the extension of new start .

they note that extension would not only maintain limits on the number of deployed strategic nuclear weapons in russia , but would also retain the predictability offered by the treaty's limits , maintain the monitoring and verification regime that provides the united states with insights into russian nuclear forces and nuclear modernization programs , and avoid misperceptions that could upset strategic stability , exacerbate a crisis , or lead to a costly arms race .

they also note that such an extension would provide the united states and russia with an additional five years to resume negotiations and possibly reach new agreements on further reductions or transparency measures .

others , however , believe the united states and russia should allow the new start treaty to lapse , both to relieve the united states of its obligations and because they believe that russia's interest in retaining limits on u.s. forces would provide the united states with leverage when negotiating a treaty to replace new start .

some also argue that the treaty better serves russian than u.s. interests because , as was noted above , russia is pursuing the development of weapons that may not be captured by the treaty limits .

some have questioned whether the treaty's extension will eventually constrain the ongoing u.s. nuclear modernization program .

while the united states plans to recapitalize all three legs of its nuclear triad , each program is sized to fit within the limits of new start .

but , with growing concerns about the challenges the united states might face from russia and china , along with growing concerns about the scope of their nuclear modernization programs , the united states might eventually seek to expand its forces beyond the limits in new start .

the 2018 nuclear posture review hints at this possibility by noting that the plan for rebuilding the sea - based leg of the nuclear triad will include at least 12 columbia - class submarines , thus leaving open the possibility of a larger program .

nevertheless , based on the pace of modernization , new start may not interfere with the u.s. modernization program , even if the treaty were extended for five years .

most of the new u.s. systems are not scheduled to enter the force until the late 2020s , after new start's 2026 expiration .

moreover , the new systems are to replace existing , older systems , which would keep the u.s. force within the new start limits for many years .

any expansion beyond those limits would not occur until later in the 2030s .

on the other hand , if new start were to expire in 2021 , the united states might feel compelled to both accelerate and expand its modernization programs if russia were to expand its nuclear programs when released from the constraints of the treaty .

president trump's national security advisor , ambassador john bolton , addressed the question of new start extension in a press conference following his meeting with president putin's national security advisor , nikolai patrushev , in august 2018 .

he noted that , instead of simply extending new start , the united states and russia could either renegotiate the treaty or replace it with something more like the 2002 moscow treaty signed during the george w. bush administration .

president trump has also proposed that the united states and russia replace new start with a new , broader treaty that would capture all types of nuclear weapons and include china's forces under the limits .

those who favor renegotiating new start believe it would provide the united states with the opportunity to press russia to include limits on its new types of long - range nuclear delivery systems and to accept limits on shorter - range , nonstrategic delivery vehicles .

but this approach envisions a more complicated treaty and could take years to complete the negotiations .

a return to the moscow treaty envisions a more simple approach .

the moscow treaty did not contain any detailed definitions or restrictions on deployed forces , and , instead , included a simple pledge by each side to reduce the number of deployed warheads within a 10-year period .

bolton both supported this approach and participated in the negotiations when he served as an under secretary of state in the bush administration .

these options , however , may not provide a capable or timely response to the impending expiration of new start .

as noted above , russia has been unwilling to accept limits on its nonstrategic nuclear delivery vehicles in the past , and any attempt to convince them to do so in the future may require the united states to agree to the elimination of its nuclear weapons deployed in europe .

moreover , while limits on nonstrategic nuclear weapons have long been a u.s. priority for the next arms control agreement , russia has stated that the next agreement should include limits on u.s. ballistic missile defense programs , limits on nonnuclear strategic - range delivery systems ( specifically , u.s. sea - launched cruise missiles ) , and limits on other nations' ( specifically british and french ) nuclear forces .

because neither side is likely to accept the demands of the other , an effort to renegotiate or replace new start would almost certainly fail to produce a new treaty before its 2021 expiration or a replacement treaty after its expiration .

russia has not rejected u.s. proposals to address its new kinds of long - range delivery systems , but it has refused to count them under new start .

instead , it has suggested that the two sides discuss these weapons in a separate forum that addresses concerns about strategic stability .

it has indicated that this forum could meet in the years after the parties extend new start .

russia has not yet produced any of these weapons , and may produce only a small number between 2021 and 2026 .

so , even if these weapons were not captured by new start , such discussions could occur before the weapons posed a significant threat to the united states or its allies .

the trump administration has not offered any details about how china could participate in the arms control process .

specifically , it has not indicated whether it would seek limits in a new treaty closer to the size of the chinese arsenal , or whether it would invite china to expand its forces to levels closer to the new start limits of 1,550 warheads on 700 deployed missiles and bombers .

while china has not offered any details about the size of is nuclear force , the 2019 version of the pentagon's annual report to congress on military and security developments involving the people's republic of china notes that china's force missiles with a range greater than 5,500 kilometers ( the range of missiles that count under new start ) "currently consists of approximately 90 icbms" deployed on land and 48 missiles deployed four ballistic missile submarines .

the pentagon report does not include an estimate of the number of warheads carried by these missiles .

unclassified estimates , however , indicate that the submarine - launched ballistic missiles and most of the land - based missiles carry a single warhead , while some of the land - band based missiles may carry three warheads per missile .

as a result , the chinese missiles that would count under new start likely carry around 130 warheads .

this is within a total estimated arsenal of around 280 nuclear warheads .

china , in the past , has firmly rejected suggestions that it join in the nuclear arms control process .

chinese officials have noted that they deploy far fewer nuclear forces than the united states and russia , that they do not engage in arms races with other nations , and that they support eventual nuclear disarmament .

a spokesman for the chinese foreign ministry reiterated its objections in may 2019 , after the trump administration suggested that china join the arms control process .

according to press reports , geng shuang said that the country's nuclear forces were at the "lowest level" of its national security needs , and that they could not be compared to the united states and russia .

he noted that "china believes that countries with the largest nuclear arsenals have a special responsibility when it comes to nuclear disarmament and should continue to further reduce nuclear weapons in a verifiable and irreversible manner , creating conditions for other countries to participate. .

a return to the 2002 moscow treaty raises different issues .

ambassador bolton and others who support this approach to arms control note that this treaty provided the united states with the maximum amount of flexibility in sizing and structuring its nuclear forces .

the limits in the treaty were consistent with the force levels the united states had already decided to pursue , and did not require that the united states match its force levels to those acceptable to russia .

it also was set to expire , on december 31 , 2012 , at the same time as both sides were required to reach the limits in the treaty , thereby imposing no real restrictions on u.s. force levels over the course of its implementation .

moreover , the treaty contained no specific definitions of forces covered by the limits , so each side could count and declare its force levels according to its own interpretation of the limits .

but the absence of agreed definitions and counting rules , along with the absence of any specific provisions that would allow each side to monitor the other's forces , meant that neither side could verify that the other was complying with the limits in the treaty .

while this issue was mitigated because the 1994 start treaty , with its complex verification regime , remained in force through december 2009 and was soon after replaced by new start , such a solution would not be possible if a treaty of this type were to replace new start after its expiration .

the monitoring regime under new start would also expire , leaving the united states and russia with no data exchanges , declarations , or inspections that provide transparency into each other's forces and operations .

