justice stevens has been a key figure in the supreme court's recent decisions interpreting the scope of two "companion rights": the due process right to a "beyond a reasonable doubt" determination and the right to trial by jury .

the right to a jury trial in criminal prosecutions is explicitly protected in the sixth amendment to the u.s. constitution .

the "proof beyond a reasonable doubt" standard is guaranteed by the due process clauses of the fifth amendment ( federal proceedings ) and the fourteenth amendment ( state proceedings ) .

together , those constitutional provisions require that a criminal conviction follow a jury determination of "proof beyond a reasonable doubt of every fact necessary to constitute the crime. .

those rights have a strong legal and historical foundation .

however , a question emerged regarding their application to sentencing determinations , particularly as "sentence enhancements" became a popular legislative tool: to what extent do facts taken into account during sentencing require a "beyond a reasonable doubt" determination by a jury ? .

justice stevens has had a critical role in the supreme court's resolution of that question , in several respects .

first , he asserted that the constitutional question should be addressed , describing the constitutional guarantees at issue as being of "surpassing importance. .

second , along with justice scalia , in early cases reviewing sentencing enhancements , he indicated his broad interpretation of the jury trial and due process rights .

in a concurring opinion , for example , he wrote , "i am convinced that it is unconstitutional for a legislature to remove from the jury the assessment of facts that increase the prescribed range of penalties to which a criminal defendant is exposed. .

he added that "[i]t is equally clear that such facts must be established by proof beyond a reasonable doubt. .

third , having persuaded five of the court's nine justices of his views , he authored the opinion for the court in a apprendi v. new jersey , the leading case in which the court announced a broad reading of the constitutional rights at issue .

finally , he wrote for the court in united states v. booker , a decision applying the apprendi holding to the federal sentencing guidelines .

although this line of cases has resulted in closely divided opinions , the justices were not divided along typical lines .

justice scalia has been the other justice arguing in agreement with justice stevens in many of the cases addressing a jury's role in criminal sentencing .

in apprendi , justices scalia , thomas , souter , and ginsburg joined justice stevens's majority opinion .

justice stevens's opinion in apprendi was foreshadowed in several dissenting and concurring opinions in cases decided during the 1980s and 1990s .

the first such case was mcmillan v. pennsylvania , decided in 1986 .

mcmillan involved a pennsylvania statute establishing a mandatory five - year minimum prison sentence in cases in which a judge finds , by a preponderance of the evidence ( a lower standard than "beyond a reasonable doubt" ) , that the defendant visibly possessed a firearm during the commission of the offense .

the statute expressly stated that the firearm possession "shall not be an element of the crime. .

instead , it stated that it "shall be determined at sentencing," indicating that it was to be removed from typical jury trial and "beyond a reasonable doubt" requirements .

the u.s. supreme court upheld the statute .

writing for the court , chief justice rehnquist emphasized that the state legislature expressly designated firearm possession as a "sentencing factor," rather than "an element of the crime. .

the court concluded that the state legislature had intended to create a sentencing factor which "operates solely to limit the sentencing court's discretion in selecting a penalty within the range already available to it. .

justice stevens wrote a dissenting opinion , not joined by any other justice , in which he first articulated his view of the constitutional implications of sentencing statutes of this kind .

"in my view," he wrote , "a state legislature may not dispense with the requirement of proof beyond a reasonable doubt for conduct that it targets for severe criminal penalties. .

his disagreement with the court stemmed in part from his interpretation of prior precedents .

he agreed with the statement from a prior case , also quoted by the majority , that "[the] applicability of the reasonable - doubt standard … has always been dependent on how a state defines the offense that is charged. .

however , he interpreted that holding to ensure that states have discretion regarding what conduct to criminalize , not over which conduct will be treated as a "criminal element" versus a "sentencing factor. .

"in my opinion," he concluded , "the constitutional significance of the special sanction cannot be avoided by the cavalier observation that it merely 'ups the ante' for the defendant. .

a 1998 case , almendarez - torres v. united states , involved a federal statute that makes it a crime to , among other things , return to the united states ( without express consent of the attorney general ) after having been deported .

a general provision authorizes criminal penalties of up to two years imprisonment .

a second provision authorizes greater penalties in cases in which the alien was removed after a conviction for one of several specified crimes .

in almendarez - torres , the defendant had been deported subsequent to three convictions for aggravated felonies , for which the statute increased the maximum prison sentence for reentry to 20 years .

prosecutors did not introduce the fact of the aggravated felonies at the indictment or trial phase .

nevertheless , at sentencing , the u.s. district court relied on those aggravated felony convictions to enhance the sentence .

a five - justice majority on the supreme court framed the question on appeal as "whether [the aggravated felony provision] defines a separate crime or simply authorizes an enhanced penalty. .

noting that the provision's concern is recidivism — a factor commonly weighed in sentencing decisions , it held that it is "reasonably clear" that congress intended to "set forth a sentencing factor" rather than a "separate crime. .

thus , it concluded that the statute "simply authorizes a court to increase the sentence," and thus does not require a determination by a jury .

justice stevens and two other justices joined a dissent written by justice scalia .

justice scalia asserted that the court's prior decisions made it "genuinely doubtful whether the constitution permits a judge ( rather than a jury ) to determine by a mere preponderance of the evidence ( rather than beyond a reasonable doubt ) a fact that increases the maximum penalty to which a criminal defendant is subject. .

justice stevens wrote an opinion reiterating his view on the constitutional question the following year , in jones v. united states .

the defendant in jones was convicted for violation of a federal carjacking statute , 18 u.s.c .

§ 2119 .

that statute generally caps imprisonment for violations at 15 years , but a subsection increased the maximum prison term in cases in which "serious bodily injury … results. .

the defendant , nathaniel jones , was charged with carjacking , but the specific allegation that the carjacking resulted in serious bodily injury was not raised until the sentencing phase .

at that time , the court found that serious bodily injury had occurred and increased jones's sentence accordingly .

no jury determinations were made on that question .

the court resolved the case on statutory grounds .

in an opinion by justice souter , it held that the "serious bodily injury" prong , as written in the existing statute , constituted a separate criminal offense , and thus needed to be determined by a jury "beyond a reasonable doubt. .

it indicated that a different reading of the statute might "raise serious constitutional questions," but avoided resolving such issues because the case could be resolved on statutory grounds .

in brief concurring opinions in jones , justices stevens made clear that he would have reached the constitutional issues lurking in the case .

furthermore , he expressed the view that "it is unconstitutional to remove from the jury the assessment of facts that increase the prescribed range of penalties to which a criminal defendant is exposed. .

justice stevens expressed that view on behalf of the court in apprendi v. new jersey .

in apprendi , the court reviewed a new jersey statute that authorized 10- to 20-year increases in prison sentences if a defendant's actions were found by a judge , by a preponderance of the evidence , to have been committed with a purpose to intimidate the victim because of the victim's race or other specified characteristics .

the defendant , charles apprendi , was found to have fired a gun into the home of an african american family .

the morning of his arrest , he was alleged to have stated that "because [the family is] black in color he does not want them in the neighborhood. .

he later argued that his statements had been mischaracterized .

in the state prosecution , apprendi pleaded guilty to three weapon possession charges .

in the plea agreement , the state reserved the right to request a sentencing enhancement based on the state's "hate crimes" statute .

at sentencing , evidence was presented to support and refute apprendi's alleged racial motivation in firing into the victims' home .

applying a preponderance of the evidence standard as directed by the state statute , the state trial judge concluded that apprendi had acted with racial prejudice and accordingly enhanced his sentence on that basis .

on appeal , apprendi argued that the fifth and fourteenth amendment due process clauses require that the facts justifying the sentence enhancement ( i.e. , a motivation of prejudice ) to be found by a jury using the "beyond a reasonable doubt" standard .

both a state appellate court and the new jersey supreme court rejected apprendi's argument .

relying in part on the u.s. supreme court's rulings in almendarez - torres and mcmillan v. pennsylvania , they held that the "biased purpose" determination was not an element of the underlying offense and thus did not require a jury finding of proof beyond a reasonable doubt .

the u.s. supreme court reversed .

writing for the court , justice stevens asserted that the constitutional question was "starkly presented" by the facts in the case .

he examined the history of the constitutional rights involved , noting that statutory sentence enhancements are a relatively new development in a landscape of constitutional rights with centuries - old foundations .

he acknowledged that the history supports judges' ability to exercise discretion in sentencing .

however , he argued that such discretion has generally been limited to determinations regarding an appropriate sentence within a given range ; it has not historically been extended to authorize additional penalties on the basis of a new factual determination .

after reviewing the history and relevant precedents , he articulated the court's major holding: "other than the fact of a prior conviction , any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury , and proved beyond a reasonable doubt. .

key cases decided after apprendi have addressed the decision's application to sentencing guidelines .

in a 2004 case , blakely v. washington , the defendant challenged a sentence imposed pursuant to washington state's sentencing guidelines .

he was convicted of a crime for which the guidelines designated a maximum sentence of 53 months imprisonment , but was sentenced to 90 months after the sentencing judge found that he had acted with "deliberate cruelty" — a factor for which the guidelines authorized judges to increase a sentence .

in an opinion written by justice scalia and joined by justice stevens and three other justices , the supreme court applied apprendi to strike down the sentencing scheme .

it held that the "statutory maximum" for apprendi purposes is the maximum sentence a judge may impose solely on the basis of the facts reflected in the jury verdict or admitted by the defendant .

one year later , justice stevens wrote one of two majority opinions for the court in united states v. booker , in which the court addressed the question whether the blakely holding applied to the federal sentencing guidelines .

the case involved a conviction for possession with intent to distribute crack cocaine .

at sentencing , the judge found , by a preponderance of the evidence , that the defendant had distributed additional drugs and obstructed justice , and increased the sentence on that basis .

applying apprendi and blakely , the court held that "[a]ny fact ( other than a prior conviction ) which is necessary to support a sentence exceeding the maximum authorized by the facts established by a plea of guilty or a jury verdict must be admitted by the defendant or proved to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt. .

justice stevens characterized the holding as a reaffirmation of the apprendi holding .

his opinion again emphasized the historical importance of the constitutional rights at issue .

a different majority of justices joined an opinion written by justice breyer .

in that opinion , the court interpreted the constitutional holding ( announced in the opinion by justice stevens ) as requiring the court to strike down two provisions of the federal sentencing act , including one which made the guidelines mandatory .

that holding was based on the court's determination of what congress might have intended in light of the court's constitutional holding .

it concluded that congress would not have intended the guidelines to be made mandatory in situations where a judge is constitutionally required to receive jury determinations regarding facts relevant to sentencing .

justice stevens dissented from that opinion .

he characterized the court's invalidation of the sentencing act provisions as judicial overstepping , arguing that the constitutional holding in the case "does not authorize the court's creative remedy" with regard to the federal sentencing act .

he asserted that "[b]ecause the guidelines as written possess the virtue of combining a mandatory determination of sentencing ranges and discretionary decisions within those ranges , they allow ample latitude for judicial factfinding that does not even arguably raise any sixth amendment issue. .

the impact of justice stevens's role , and of the apprendi case in particular , has been to limit the extent to which criminal penalties can be increased based on facts found by a judge rather than a jury .

although it remains permissible for judges to take relevant facts into consideration when rendering criminal sentences , they now may not increase sentences beyond the prescribed statutory maximum unless the facts supporting such an increase are found by a jury beyond a reasonable doubt .

as can be seen in the cases applying that holding to sentencing guidelines , justice stevens's interpretation of the constitutional trial - by - jury and due process rights has had practical and lasting effects on criminal sentencing .

