on december 23 , 2008 , a military junta calling itself the national council for democracy and development ( cndd ) seized power in guinea following the death of longtime president lansana conté .

a previously little - known army officer , captain moussa dadis camara , was named president .

the cndd dissolved the constitution and legislature , appointed a civilian prime minister , and promised to hold presidential and legislative elections .

however , elections were repeatedly postponed , while dadis camara's erratic leadership sparked increasing civilian unrest and concerns that military fragmentation could lead to violence .

on september 28 , 2009 , guinean security forces opened fire on civilian demonstrators in conakry who were protesting the cndd and dadis camara's implied intention to run for president , killing over 150 and injuring many more .

the crackdown , which was accompanied by reports of widespread military abuses against civilians , sparked fierce international condemnation , including from the united states .

on december 3 , 2009 , dadis camara was shot and wounded in the head by a member of his presidential guard .

he was evacuated to morocco for medical treatment .

on january 12 , 2010 , he was unexpectedly flown to ouagadougou , the capital of burkina faso , whose president , blaise compaoré , had earlier been appointed the regional mediator in guinea's political crisis by the economic community of west african states ( ecowas ) .

in dadis camara's absence , the cndd defense minister , brig .

gen. sekouba konaté , informally assumed the position of acting head of state .

however , uncertainty remained over konaté's authorities , the extent of dadis camara's injuries , and the future leadership of the country .

the power vacuum coincided with reports of rising ethnic tensions , the reported recruitment of militia groups by various factions , and instability within the cndd and wider armed forces .

fears of imminent conflict caused some guineans , human rights groups , and diplomats to call for a regional intervention force .

the key public figures in the government of national unity are konaté , jean - marie doré , and rabiatou serah diallo .

doré , the former spokesman for the forces vives coalition , was named prime minister on january 19 .

serah diallo , a prominent trade union leader , was appointed in early march to head the quasi - legislative national transition council ( cnt ) , which was inaugurated with 155 members representing political parties , trade unions , civil society groups , and other socioeconomic demographics .

the cnt is expected to revise guinea's electoral laws and the constitution , though its precise mandate and authorities have not been publicly detailed .

doré appointed a 34-person cabinet , composed of 24 civilians and 10 military officers selected by the cndd , in mid - february .

the civilians include representatives of political parties and civil society groups .

the defense ministry , security ministry , and justice ministry , however , remain under cndd leadership .

konaté separately appointed a 23-member "presidential cabinet" of advisors , including several hard - line cndd figures previously seen as loyal to dadis camara .

the trio of key leaders represents three prominent ethno - regional groups and guinea's two largest religious identities , christian and muslim .

doré and serah diallo both have roots in the opposition movement against former president lansana conté , though they were not previously seen as allies .

they also have little experience in government , which is seen by some as both a potential challenge and an asset , as many are critical of guinea's poor governance record .

serah diallo leads a trade union coalition that was instrumental in organizing watershed anti - conté demonstrations in early 2007 .

prior to his appointment , doré led a small opposition political party , the union for guinean progress ( upg , after its french acronym ) .

he ran for president in 1998 but garnered less than 2% of the vote , far less than the two leading opposition candidates at the time .

doré was later elected to the national assembly , but he declined to take up his seat after the 2002 legislative elections in a protest against electoral fraud .

while the united states has expressed support for the transitional government , restrictions on some forms of u.s. assistance to guinea remain in place , as do targeted travel restrictions against certain cndd members , other guinean officials , and key associates .

as electoral preparations advance , a number of issues will confront u.s. policy - makers .

these include the status of bilateral relations ; the monitoring of progress toward elections ; u.s. policy toward a potential international criminal court investigation of alleged cndd human rights abuses ; and potential u.s. support for security sector reform .

guinea's current outlook has improved significantly from early january 2010 , when the country was beset by deep political uncertainty and fears of imminent civil conflict .

however , the formation of a transitional government has not altered the underlying causes of guinea's recent instability , and the months leading up to planned elections could prove decisive to guinea's future trajectory and that of the sub - region .

inter - ethnic relations — historically perceived as relatively harmonious in guinea though subject to political manipulation and occasional violent confrontation — are perceived as having deteriorated under the cndd , particularly in conakry and the southeastern forest region .

any number of factors , including election delays , regional developments , continued economic hardship , military divisions , and ethnic tensions , could spark renewed insecurity and corresponding challenges to u.s. policy goals in west africa .

