russia has long been concerned with u.s. ballistic missile defense programs , arguing that the increasing capabilities of u.s. missile defenses could undermine russia's strategic offensive nuclear forces and undermine strategic stability .

during the strategic arms limitation talks ( salt ) in the 1970s , the united states and soviet union had addressed the link between offensive and defensive systems in their arms control treaty negotiations .

however , in recent years , the united states has argued that the ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) programs it is pursuing will be neither numerous enough nor capable enough to intercept russia's strategic offensive ballistic missiles or undermine russia's strategic nuclear deterrent .

the united states and russia signed the new start treaty — the treaty ... on measures for the further reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms — on april 8 , 2010 , and it awaits senate consideration .

new start is not of unlimited duration ; it would expire 10 years after it enters into force .

when president obama and president medvedev launched the negotiations on this treaty in april 2009 , they agreed that the two nations would address russia's concerns with u.s. missile defense programs in a separate forum from the negotiations on a new start treaty .

however , during their meeting in moscow in july 2009 , they agreed that the new treaty would contain a "provision on the interrelationship of strategic offensive arms and strategic defensive arms. .

this statement , which appears in the preamble to new start , states that the parties recognize the existence of the interrelationship between strategic offensive arms and strategic defensive arms , that this interrelationship will become more important as strategic nuclear arms are reduced , and that current strategic defensive arms do not undermine the viability and effectiveness of the strategic offensive arms of the parties .

russia and the united states each issued unilateral statements when they signed new start that clarified their positions on the relationship between new start and missile defenses .

russia stated that the treaty can operate and be viable only if the united states of america refrains from developing its missile defense capabilities quantitatively or qualitatively .

consequently , the exceptional circumstances referred to in article 14 of the treaty include increasing the capabilities of the united states of america's missile defense system in such a way that threatens the potential of the strategic nuclear forces of the russian federation .

in its statement , the united states stated that its missile defense systems are not intended to affect the strategic balance with russia .

the united states missile defense systems would be employed to defend the united states against limited missile launches , and to defend its deployed forces , allies and partners against regional threats .

the united states intends to continue improving and deploying its missile defense systems in order to defend itself against limited attack and as part of our collaborative approach to strengthening stability in key regions .

russia's foreign minister , sergei lavrov , indicated , in a press conference after the negotiators completed the treaty , that the language in the treaty preamble was set down in a "legally binding" form .

he stated , further , that the sides had appropriate levels of strategic offensive arms at this point , but "if there are changes to these levels , each side reserves the right to make a decision on whether to continue to take part in the process of strategic offensive arms cuts. .

some in the united states have questioned whether this statement means that the united states and russia agreed that increases in u.s. ballistic missile defenses would upset stability , and therefore that they could serve as cause to terminate the new start treaty .

moreover , they have expressed concerns that , if the united states has not accepted this interpretation , the two parties hold different interpretations of their obligations under the treaty and that these differences could disrupt the treaty's implementation .

the obama administration has agreed that the language in the treaty preamble is "legally binding," in that it is a part of the formal text of the treaty .

but the administration has insisted that the preamble contains no legal or practical limits on missile defense and imposes no obligations on the united states .

moreover , the administration has insisted , as under secretary of state ellen tauscher stated , "russia's unilateral statement on missile defenses is not an integral part of the new start treaty .

it's not legally binding .

it won't constrain u.s. missile defense programs. .

nevertheless , some have questioned whether russia's threat to withdraw from new start might have a "chilling effect" on u.s. missile defense plans and programs .

they contend that the united states might limit these programs itself to avoid a possible disruption of the arms control process or the possible increase in tensions with russia .

as senator jeff sessions noted in a speech on may 13 , 2010 , "i can't help but worry that these provisions will have a negative impact on u.s. decision - making with respect to missile defense. .

members of the senate are likely to raise this question , and explore the potentially different u.s. and russian views on the relationship between new start and u.s. ballistic missile defense programs , during the debate on the new start treaty .

when the united states and soviet union negotiated the 1991 start treaty , the soviet union also sought to link limits on offensive nuclear weapons with limits on ballistic missile defenses .

the united states did not agree to the soviet proposals , so the soviet union released a unilateral statement when it signed start , noting that the treaty would not remain in force if the united states withdrew from the 1972 abm treaty .

this statement did not serve to slow u.s. missile defense programs after start entered into force .

moreover , the united states and soviet union held discussions during the latter half of the 1990s on possible modifications to the abm treaty so that the united states could deploy more extensive ballistic missile defenses without withdrawing from the treaty .

these negotiations proved unsuccessful .

russia continued to object to u.s. ballistic missile defense plans and to caution the united states not to withdraw from the treaty .

nevertheless , when the united states withdrew from the abm treaty in 2002 , russia did not withdraw from start .

this report seeks to shed some light on the past relationship between ballistic missile defenses and negotiations on offensive arms control treaties .

it provides an historical review of the way in which the united states and soviet union addressed ballistic missile defense issues during their negotiations on the first strategic arms reduction treaty ( start ) in the 1980s and early 1990s .

it also provides a review of u.s. missile defense policy and summarizes data on missile defense spending during the 1980s , 1990s , and the past decade .

the report then reviews the recent record on the way the new start negotiations addressed ballistic missile defense issues and offers some observations about whether this historical record may provide insights into how the united states might proceed with its ballistic missile defense programs in the future .

russia's concerns about u.s. missile defense programs derive from its stated concern that missile defenses could upset strategic stability by undermining the effectiveness of russia's offensive nuclear weapons .

specifically , russia appears to be concerned that , if the united states were to increase the numbers and capabilities of its missile defense interceptors while russia was reducing its numbers of deployed offensive weapons , the time may come when the united states believed it had the ability to launch a first strike against russia's strategic forces while protecting itself from russia's retaliatory attack with its missile defenses .

in this environment , russia may believe it had to increase its offensive forces so that it would have enough surviving weapons to penetrate the u.s. missile defenses .

such a response could require a withdrawal from the new start treaty .

many analysts argue that this "cold war" view of the relationship between u.s. missile defenses and russian offensive weapons should not be relevant in the current strategic environment , in which the united states and russia are not poised on the brink of conflict .

the bush administration emphasized this point when it noted , in the 2001 nuclear posture review , that the united states would "no longer plan , size or sustain its nuclear forces as though russia presented merely a smaller version of the threat posed by the former soviet union. .

this change in the u.s. - russian relationship was also evident in u.s. ballistic missile defense plans that were intended to address concerns about emerging threats and adversaries .

as a result , this cold war offense - defense scenario is not consistent with the capabilities planned for u.s. missile defenses or the u.s. intent in deploying these systems .

specifically , the united states is pursuing missile defenses to defend its allies and forces overseas against threats from shorter and medium - range missiles that they might encounter in regional conflicts around the world , and to defend the continental united states from threats that might emerge as nations deploy small numbers of long - range ballistic missiles .

thus , although the united states may eventually be able to defend against a force of dozens of long - range missiles from an emerging adversary , it would not have the ability to defend against an attack with hundreds of russian missiles .

this model of strategic stability was , however , relevant to assessments of the relationship between offensive and defense weapons during the cold war .

it is seen to have had a significant effect on the way that arms control agreements negotiated in the 1970s and 1980s addressed missile defenses and offensive reductions .

on march 12 , 1985 , the united states and the soviet union began negotiations in geneva , referred to as the nuclear and space talks ( nst ) .

these negotiations addressed defense and space systems , intermediate - range nuclear forces ( inf ) , and strategic nuclear weapons with three separate negotiating teams .

the competing views on strategic stability and the offense / defense relationship were evident in these negotiations and affected both the substance of the proposals presented by the united states and soviet union and the structure of the arms control negotiations .

the historical review presented in this report suggests that the united states did not restrain its ballistic missile defense programs or reduce its expenditures on ballistic missile defenses in an effort to ensure that russia remained committed to the original start treaty .

to the contrary , u.s. spending on ballistic missile defense programs increased during the 1990s ; the u.s. political commitment to missile defenses began to strengthen during the 1990s ; and the united states withdrew from the abm treaty in 2002 .

moreover , in spite of its threat to withdraw from start if the united states withdrew from the abm treaty , russia remained a party to start and continued to negotiate further reductions on strategic offensive weapons .

an argument can be made that the same pattern may not hold true in the coming decade if the united states and russia ratify the new start treaty with russia's unilateral statement on missile defenses attached .

the united states may be so committed to the new start treaty and further reductions in u.s. and russian offensive weapons , both as a way to reset the u.s - russian relationship and as a step on the path to a world free of nuclear weapons , that it would not be willing to upset the process by pursuing expansive ballistic missile defense programs .

some who have criticized start have also noted that because the treaty's 10-year life span would outlast the obama administration , a future administration could be faced with the choice between arms control and ballistic missile defense regardless of its own preferred approach in either policy area .

on the other hand , the pattern exhibited during the original start negotiations and the 1990s could repeat itself in the coming decade .

during the 1990s , the u.s. commitment to missile defense was less solid and secure than it is today .

although president reagan and president george h.w .

bush were strong supporters of missile defenses , congress was less enthusiastic .

the clinton administration initially shifted focus from the george h.w .

bush administration's gpals to theater missile defenses because of desert storm and threat assessments of short - range ballistic missile proliferation .

by the latter half of the decade , the clinton administration promoted an nmd research and development program that could lead to deployment within a few years and would have required modification of the abm treaty or its replacement .

yet , even during this time , the united states did not hold back funding for ballistic missile defenses out of concern for any russian reaction .

moreover , the analysis presented in this report suggest that the u.s. commitment to missile defense is now politically broader and deeper than it was during the 1990s .

the obama administration has displayed a commitment to continue expanding ballistic missile defenses through its ballistic missile defense review and with its proposed budget for ballistic missile defense programs .

congress has also grown more supportive of ballistic missile defenses , appropriating most of the funds requested by the executive branch without challenging the underlying rationale for missile defense programs .

moreover , as was noted above , the obama administration refused , throughout the new start negotiations , to accept russian proposals for limits on missile defense programs , and even seemed willing to walk away from the negotiations to protect u.s. ballistic missile defense programs .

even though the next administration may not share the priorities of preceding administrations , few would project a waning of the u.s. commitment to ballistic missile defenses , particularly as nations who could threaten the united states continue to acquire more capable ballistic missiles .

at the same time , although russia may continue to try to link u.s. ballistic missile defense programs to negotiations on offensive reductions , few would project russia abandoning new start in the coming decade .

its soviet - era missile forces are continuing to age , and it cannot produce new systems quickly enough to replace these older systems or even to retain the numbers of missiles permitted by the new start treaty .

this would not likely change even if it were to abandon the treaty .

a treaty that imposes equal limits on u.s. and russian offensive forces may be the only way that russia can maintain a measure of parity with the united states on strategic offensive forces .

under these circumstances , the priorities displayed by the united states and soviet union during the original start talks and by the united states and russia during the new start talks may continue into the coming decade .

the united states may continue to place a higher priority on its ballistic missile defense programs than on offensive reductions and russia may continue to place a higher priority on securing equal limits on u.s. and russian offensive forces than on restraining or reducing u.s. ballistic missile defense programs .

