under the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 , aca , as amended ) , a number of provisions directly affect access to health insurance coverage .

hereafter , "aca" will refer to aca , as amended .

most of the insurance reforms in aca amend title xxvii of the public health service act ( phsa , 42 u.s.c .

300gg et seq. ) .

title xxvii includes requirements on health insurance coverage for both the group and nongroup ( individual ) markets , enforcement applicable to such requirements , relevant definitions , and other provisions .

this report provides a description of two of the provisions in aca that are targeted toward younger individuals , for plan years beginning on or after s ix months from the date of enactment ( i.e. , the plan year beginning on or after september 23 , 2010 ) .

aca prohibits coverage exclusions for children with preexisting health conditions who are under age 19 , and the law also requires plans to continue to make dependent coverage available to children under age 26 .

this report includes a description of the law and relevant information about the implementation of these two provisions .

the requirement relating to coverage of children under age 26 will also take effect for the plan years beginning on or after september 23 , 2010 .

the statute requires that if a plan provides for dependent coverage of children , the plan must make such coverage available for a child under age 26 .

plans that offer dependent coverage must continue to make that offer available until the adult child turns 26 years of age .

as an example , an adult child who is 26 years and 1 month old would no longer be required to be covered .

plans that offer dependent coverage must make it available for both married and unmarried children under age 26 , but not for the children's children .

the requirement affects individuals enrolled in group and individual health plans , including self - insured plans .

with one exception , these provisions apply to grandfathered plans .

prior to 2014 , grandfathered group health plans are not required to make dependent coverage available to adult children who can enroll in an eligible employer - sponsored health plan based on their own employment .

 ( however , a plan may make dependent coverage available to such adult children if it wishes. ) .

the statute does not require plans to offer dependent coverage in the first place , so that if a plan chooses not to provide such coverage , nothing in this statute would require them to do so .

the age requirement affects only plans that choose to offer dependent coverage .

on may 13 , 2010 , the departments of health and human services , labor , and treasury ( "departments" ) issued joint interim final rules in the federal register on dependent coverage under aca .

the rules clarify that "with respect to a child who has not attained age 26 , a plan or issuer may not define dependent for purposes of eligibility for dependent coverage of children other than in terms of a relationship between a child and the participant" .

thus , for example , a plan or issuer may not deny or restrict coverage for a child who has not attained age 26 based on the presence or absence of the child's financial dependency ( upon the participant or any other person ) , residency with the participant or with any other person , student status , employment , or any combination of those factors. .

the federal requirements are a floor .

that is , they provide a minimum requirement .

states that already impose requirements beyond attaining age 26 may continue to do so .

for example , new jersey requires dependent coverage to be available up to the age of 31 , as long as the adult child is unmarried and has no dependents .

to the extent that the state law is more restrictive than the federal law ( eg , new jersey's requires that the individual not be married ) , the federal statute would apply , therefore covering the married adult child under the age of 26 .

as part of the interim final rules for dependent coverage of children under age 26 , the departments of the treasury , labor , and health and human services estimated the impact of the regulation on the health insurance coverage for this group .

in order to estimate the number of individuals potentially affected , they examined several criteria including whether or not the parents of these adult children had existing employer - sponsored insurance ( esi ) or individual insurance , and whether the adult children themselves were insured .

using this information , they estimated the take - up rates , that is , the number of individuals who are likely to accept coverage if offered it .

the departments estimated that in 2010 there were approximately 29.5 million individuals between the ages of 19 and 25 .

of those , 9.3 million such individuals were estimated to have no access to dependent coverage , because their parents did not have esi or non - group coverage .

that left 20.2 million adult children whose parents were covered either by esi or by non - group insurance .

the 20.2 million are further broken down , as follows: 3.42 million were uninsured , 2.42 million were covered by their own non - group coverage , 5.55 million were covered by their own esi , 5.73 million were already on their parent's or spouse's esi , and 3.01 million had other coverage , such as medicaid .

the departments assumed that the initial group of potential individuals for dependent coverage would only include those who were either uninsured or those who were covered by individual insurance ( 3.44 million + 2.42 million , for a total of 5.86 million ) .

of the 5.86 million , the departments estimated that 3.49 million would choose not to enroll in their parent's plan , because ( 1 ) they are already allowed to enroll in their parent's plan under their state's existing laws , but have chosen not to do so ; ( 2 ) they have their own offer of esi and their parent's plan will not extend coverage to them ; or ( 3 ) their parent's coverage in the nongroup market is underwritten ( based on health status and other factors ) , so that there is no financial benefit for the adult child to enroll in the parent's plan .

subtracting out these 3.49 million individuals leaves a potential pool of 2.37 million .

however , as they noted in the regulation , it is difficult to estimate how many of these 2.37 million individuals would likely take up the insurance .

recognizing the uncertainly in the estimates of take - up rates , the departments produced a range of assumptions , shown in table 3 .

the most current national data on the uninsured from the census bureau showed a decline in the uninsured rate for young adults .

for 19- to 25-year - olds , the rate of uninsurance declined from 31.4% in 2009 to 29.7% in 2010 .

not only was this a statistically significant change from one year to the next , but young adults were the only adult age group that experienced a decline in their uninsured rate .

all other adult age groups experienced slight increases in their uninsured rates .

another national data source also found a decrease in the uninsured rate for young adults , from 2010 to the first half of 2011 .

some observers have attributed the uninsured rate decline to aca's coverage provisions , specifically the dependent coverage requirements .

