the unauthorized immigrant ( illegal alien ) population in the united states is a key and controversial immigration issue .

competing views on how to address this population proved to be a major obstacle to enacting comprehensive immigration reform legislation in past congresses .

the unauthorized immigrant issue remains a key challenge in legislating on immigration reform today .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has primary responsibility for administering and enforcing the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , the basis of immigration law .

within dhs , u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) is responsible for immigration and naturalization adjudications and other service functions ; immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) is responsible for enforcing immigration law in the interior of the united states , among other responsibilities ; and customs and border protection ( cbp ) is responsible for securing u.s. borders at and between official ports of entry .

it is unknown , at any point in time , how many unauthorized aliens are in the united states ; what countries they are from ; when they came to the united states ; where they are living ; and what their demographic , family , and other characteristics are .

demographers develop estimates about unauthorized immigrants using available survey data on the u.s. foreign - born population .

these estimates can help inform possible policy options to address the unauthorized alien population .

dhs and the pew research center ( pew ) regularly publish estimates of the unauthorized resident population based on data from the census bureau's american community survey ( acs ) and other sources .

according to the dhs estimates , the unauthorized population totaled 11.5 million in january 2011 and 11.4 million in january 2012 .

pew also estimated the 2011 unauthorized resident population at 11.5 million , and using data from the march current population survey ( cps ) and other sources , released a preliminary estimate of 11.7 million for the march 2012 unauthorized population .

both the dhs and pew estimates suggest that the unauthorized resident population reached a peak in 2007 , totaling about 11.8 million and 12.2 million , respectively .

between 2007 and 2009 , the unauthorized population decreased , according to both dhs and pew .

the trend in the size of the unauthorized population since 2009 is uncertain .

unauthorized aliens enter the united states in three main ways: ( 1 ) some are admitted to the united states on valid nonimmigrant ( temporary ) visas ( eg , as visitors or students ) or on border - crossing cards and either remain in the country beyond their authorized period of stay or otherwise violate the terms of their admission ; ( 2 ) some are admitted based on fraudulent documents ( eg , fake passports ) that go undetected by u.s. officials ; and ( 3 ) some enter the country illegally without inspection ( eg , by crossing over the southwest or northern u.s. border ) .

it is unknown what percentages of the current unauthorized resident population entered the united states in these different ways .

in past years , researchers have endeavored to make this type of determination .

for example , in 2006 , the pew hispanic center estimated that about 40% to 50% of the unauthorized immigrants living in the united states that year had entered the country with inspection ( i.e. , through [1] or [2] , above ) and that the remaining 50% or more had entered the country without inspection ( i.e. , through [3] , above ) .

recent reports issued by dhs's office of immigration statistics and the pew research center analyze the demography of the u.s. unauthorized resident population , providing useful context for a discussion of possible policy options .

the immigration and nationality act and other federal laws place various restrictions on unauthorized immigrants .

selected provisions related to unauthorized aliens are described below .

these provisions sometimes distinguish between those unauthorized immigrants who entered the country illegally , and those who entered legally but stayed beyond their authorized period of admission or otherwise violated the terms of their admission .

over the years , a range of options has been offered for addressing the unauthorized resident population .

in most cases , the ultimate goal is to reduce the number of aliens in the united states who lack legal status .

many of these options fall under one of two broad categories: ( 1 ) reducing the unauthorized population through departure of unauthorized aliens from the united states and ( 2 ) reducing the unauthorized population through the grant of legal ( or quasi - legal ) status to unauthorized immigrants .

how to address the unauthorized immigrant population remains a key point of disagreement in discussions about immigration reform legislation .

senate - passed s. 744 would enable potentially very large numbers of unauthorized resident aliens to obtain lpr status through new general and targeted legalization programs .

it remains to be seen in the current environment if agreement can be reached on the unauthorized immigrant issue — whether on a legalization - focused strategy that involves establishing new adjustment of status mechanisms and / or amending current law , or on a primarily departure - based approach , or on some combination of the two .

