the food and drug administration ( fda ) regulates the safety of foods ( including animal feeds ) and cosmetics , and the safety and effectiveness of drugs , biologics ( eg , vaccines ) , and medical devices .

with new authority that began in fy2010 , fda also regulates tobacco products according to their impact on public health .

the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations bill provides fda's annual funding .

the total amount that fda can spend , its program level , consists of direct appropriations ( which fda calls budget authority ) and other funds , most of them user fees .

an appropriations bill specifies both the budget authority and user fee amounts each year .

it dictates the total for each of fda's major program areas ( foods , human drugs , biologics , devices and radiological health , animal drugs and feeds , tobacco products , and toxicological research ) and several agency - wide support areas ( office of the commissioner and other headquarter offices , rents to the general services administration , and other rent and rent - related activities ) .

traditionally , the appropriations committees have used report language to recommend , urge , or request specific activities within major programs .

the standard appropriations procedure involves congressional passage of 12 annual regular appropriations acts , of which agriculture ( including fda ) is one .

for 7 of the previous 11 fiscal years , congress had not completed that standard process and had passed omnibus or consolidated appropriations legislation , as shown in table 1 .

recent examples include fy2009 , when congress acted in the final days of fy2008 to provide appropriations for the start of fy2009 as part of the larger consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 , signed on september 30 , 2008 ) , and passed an omnibus fy2009 appropriations bill that included fda ( p.l .

111-8 ) in march 2009 .

the fy2010 agriculture appropriations ( p.l .

111-80 ) followed the standard process except that final passage occurred after the start of the fiscal year .

the process for fy2011 began on february 1 , 2010 , when the president released his budget request .

in february of each year ( except for when a new president has taken office the month before ) , the president presents a budget request to congress .

the annual food and drug administration justification of estimates for appropriations committees contains program - level details of the president's request , while also highlighting successes , needs , and special initiatives for the coming year .

because the topics selected for discussion vary over the years , analysts cannot use this information to track exact changes over time .

the program - level detail , however , provides a window into the priorities and activities of the agency .

the appropriations committees in the house and the senate each have subcommittees that parallel the 12 annual appropriations bills .

the subcommittees on agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies consider fda appropriations .

the textbook order of activity is as follows: in each chamber , the subcommittee considers the issues , perhaps holds hearings , and marks up a bill for the full committee's consideration .

in each chamber , the full committee considers the subcommittee - marked bill or a version that the full committee chair presents , and reports a bill , perhaps with committee amendments , to the full house or the full senate for consideration .

the full house considers the house committee on appropriations - reported bill , perhaps amending it on the floor , and passes the bill ; the full senate considers the senate committee on appropriations - reported bill , perhaps amending it on the floor , and passes the bill .

if the house - passed and senate - passed bills are not identical , each chamber assigns members to meet in conference to work out one acceptable bill .

each chamber must vote to approve the conference bill ; the second chamber that passes the conference bill sends it to the president for signing .

the annual appropriations process began in february 2010 with the president's submission of his proposed budget for fy2011 .

the budget justification documents for the food and drug administration , available online through the white house office of management and budget and the fda web sites , describe the agency's programs , provide some funding history , and outline plans for the use of the requested funding .

on september 29 , 2010 , neither the full senate nor the full house had approved an agriculture appropriations bill for fy2011 , nor had congress passed any other of the regular fy2011 appropriations bills .

the senate amended and approved h.r .

3081 , the continuing appropriations act , 2011 , which would allow federal operations , including the fda , to generally continue at fy2010 levels from october 1 , 2010 , the start of fy2011 , through december 3 , 2010 .

the house passed the continuing resolution early on september 30 , 2010 , and the president signed it later that day as p.l .

111-242 .

table 3 presents the action taken thus far this appropriations cycle .

the next steps for fda's fy2011 appropriations will likely occur within congressional negotiations either for an omnibus , government - wide appropriations bill for the remainder of fy2011 or in incremental continuing resolutions .

the subcommittee on agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies of the house committee on appropriations held a hearing on march 10 , 2010 , on the president's fy2011 request for fda .

fda commissioner margaret hamburg testified and responded to questions .

on june 30 , 2010 , chair rosa delauro held a markup of a bill distributed to committee members but not to the public .

representative delauro stated that the bill would include $2.571 billion in budget authority for fda ; including user fee revenue , the total fda program level would be $3.773 billion for fy2011 , as shown in data column 6 of table 2 .

she said that the bill differed from the president's request by including , for example , additional money for the office of generic drugs ( $15 million ) , review of direct - to - consumer ads ( $3 million ) , review of communications to medical professionals ( $2 million ) , center for devices and radiological health ( $7 million ) , and food safety activities ( $16 million ) .

delauro also said that the report to accompany the bill ( neither of which are yet available ) would mention the "need to create an independent office of post - market drug evaluation. .

it would also direct fda to provide a status report on its work on track - and - trace technologies for improving drug supply chain safety .

neither subcommittee chair delauro nor the committee on appropriations has released bill text of the mark .

the subcommittee on agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies of the senate committee on appropriations held a hearing on march 9 , 2010 , on the president's fy2011 budget request for fda .

fda commissioner margaret hamburg testified and responded to questions .

on july 15 , 2010 , the senate committee on appropriations reported s. 3606 .

for fy2011 , the bill would provide $2.516 billion in budget authority and $1.233 billion in user fees for a total fda program level of $3.75 billion .

the accompanying s.rept .

111-221 , submitted by subcommittee chair herb kohl , noted that the committee did not include $290 million in administration - requested user fees for which congress has not passed authorizing legislation ( for generic drug review , reinspection , export certification , and food inspection and facility registration ) .

data column 7 of table 2 shows the committee - reported amounts .

s.rept .

111-211 described the committee's rationale for its recommendations , in agreement with the president's request , to increase fy2010 amounts for food safety ( $83 million ) ; drug , device , and biologics safety ( $43 million ) ; and regulatory science ( $20 million ) .

repeating concerns it had raised in its fy2010 appropriations report , the committee strongly encouraged fda to develop a program , with states , for increasing the inspection of imported shrimp for banned antibiotics .

regarding antibiotic development , it directed fda to report on its progress toward the committee's request last year for development of guidance on clinical trials .

it specified that the report cover the guidance on community - acquired bacterial pneumonia , fda plans for guidances on multi - drug and pan - resistant organisms , and progress regarding development and appropriate use of antibacterial drugs for humans .

the committee recommended several fda activities relating to antimicrobial resistance , specifically regarding use of antibacterial drugs in animals .

the committee directed that the agency use $22 million for its critical path initiative , with $6 million of that going to partnerships .

of the $6 million , at least $2 million must be used to support research in prevention , diagnosis , and treatment of tuberculosis .

it directed fda to report on critical path spending semi - annually .

the committee recommended $3 million for demonstration grants for improving pediatric device availability .

regarding the drug supply chain ( e - pedigrees ) , it directed fda to report on the status of its work with electronic track - and - trace and authentication technologies .

the committee stated its support of an administration - requested $1.4 million increase for studies to develop a modernized food label .

it recommended $97 million for the generic drugs program , of which $56 million is for the office of generic drugs ( $4 million more than fy2010 and $2 million more than the administration's request ) .

the committee directed fda to report on emergency use authorizations to include an assessment of whether the authority is sufficient .

it recommended that $7 million in appropriated funds , as well as the $19 million in user fees , be used for mammography quality standards act activities ; supported the expansion of nanotechnology research ; recommended $16 million for orphan product development grants ( $2 million more than the budget request ) ; recommended $6 million for the office of women's health ; and recommended a $1 million increase to hire staff "facilitating the development of drugs to treat rare diseases. .

the committee reiterated its encouragement for fda to work with states to more aggressively combat fraud in the seafood industry ; it supported fda's work with the national oceanic and atmospheric administration on seafood safety and encouraged sharing information with the federal trade commission regarding fraud in seafood marketing and labeling .

it again directed fda to respond to a proposed standard of identity to prevent the misbranding and adulteration of honey .

finally , the committee directed fda to initiate traceability projects on food products or ingredients linked to foodborne disease outbreaks .

updates to this report will track legislative activity .

