the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill includes funding for agencies and programs in three separate federal departments , as well as numerous related agencies and bureaus .

it provides funding for department of the interior ( doi ) agencies ( except for the bureau of reclamation , funded in energy and water development appropriations laws ) , many of which manage land and other natural resource or regulatory programs .

the bill also provides funds for agencies in two other departments — the forest service in the department of agriculture , and the indian health service ( ihs ) in the department of health and human services — as well as funds for the environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

further , the annual bill includes funding for arts and cultural agencies , such as the smithsonian institution , the national endowment for the arts , and the national endowment for the humanities , and for numerous other entities and agencies .

congress typically debates a variety of funding and policy issues when considering each year's appropriations legislation .

these issues have included onshore and offshore energy development , wildland fire fighting , indian trust fund management , royalty relief , climate change , doi science programs , and wild horse and burro management .

other issues have included the appropriate funding levels for bureau of indian affairs law enforcement and education ; indian health service construction and contract health services ; wastewater / drinking water needs ; the arts ; land acquisition through the land and water conservation fund ; and the superfund program .

in former years , the appropriations laws for interior and related agencies provided funds for several activities within the department of energy ( doe ) , including research , development , and conservation programs ; the naval petroleum reserves ; and the strategic petroleum reserve .

however , at the outset of the 109 th congress , these doe programs were transferred to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees covering energy and water , to consolidate jurisdiction over doe .

at the same time , jurisdiction over the epa and several smaller entities was moved to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees covering interior and related agencies .

this change resulted from the abolition of the house and senate appropriations subcommittees on veterans affairs , housing and urban development , and independent agencies , which previously had jurisdiction over epa .

since fy2006 , appropriations laws for interior , environment , and related agencies have contained three primary titles .

this report is organized along these lines .

the first section ( title i ) provides information on interior agencies ; the second section ( title ii ) discusses epa ; and the third section ( title iii ) addresses other agencies , programs , and entities .

a fourth section of this report discusses selected cross - cutting topics that encompass more than one agency .

entries in this report are for major agencies ( eg , the national park service ) and cross - cutting issues ( eg , wildland fire management ) that receive funding in the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

for each agency or issue , we discuss some of the key funding changes that appear to be of interest to congress .

we also address related policy issues that occur in the context of considering appropriations legislation .

appropriations are complex , and not all issues are summarized in this report .

for example , budget submissions for some agencies number several hundred pages and contain innumerable funding , programmatic , and legislative changes for congressional consideration .

further , appropriations laws provide funds for numerous accounts , activities , and subactivities , and the accompanying explanatory statements provide additional directives and other important information .

for information on programs funded in the bill but not directly discussed in this report , please contact the key policy staff members listed at the end of the report .

in general , in this report the term appropriations represents total funds available , including regular annual and supplemental appropriations , as well as rescissions , transfers , and deferrals , but excludes mandatory budget authorities .

the house committee on appropriations is the primary source of the funding figures used throughout the report .

other sources of information include the senate committee on appropriations , agency budget justifications , and the congressional record .

in the tables throughout this report , some columns of funding figures do not match the precise totals provided due to rounding .

epa's primary responsibilities include the implementation of federal statutes regulating air quality , water quality , pesticides , toxic substances , the management and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes , and the cleanup of environmental contamination .

epa also awards grants to assist states and local governments in complying with federal requirements to control pollution .

the fy2011 full - year continuing appropriations law provided $8.70 billion for epa , which was $1.59 billion ( 15% ) less than the fy2010 appropriation of $10.29 billion .

the fy2011 enacted level also was $1.32 billion ( 13% ) less than the $10.02 billion included in the president's fy2011 budget request and $1.20 billion ( 12% ) less than the $9.90 billion in the senate amendment , but an increase of $1.46 billion ( 20% ) above the $7.24 billion in the house - passed bill .

table 10 presents funding levels proposed and enacted for fy2011 compared to appropriations enacted in fy2010 for the eight statutory accounts that fund the agency .

with a few exceptions , fy2011 appropriations for epa were specified only at the account level .

within 30 days of enactment of the fy2011 appropriations law , epa and other agencies must submit spending plans at a level below the account level to the committees on appropriations of the house and senate .

as indicated in the table , the overall decrease for epa for fy2011 compared to the fy2010 enacted , fy2011 president's request , and senate amendment was reflected in reductions for five of the eight epa regular accounts .

fy2011 funding levels for the other three accounts ─ office of inspector general , leaking underground storage tank trust fund program , and oil spill response ─ are the same as fy2010 enacted levels .

the overall decrease for epa for fy2011 was mostly specified in reductions within the environmental programs and management ( epm ) and the state and tribal assistance grants ( stag ) accounts .

within the stag account , the decrease was reflected primarily in amounts provided for the clean water and drinking water state revolving funds ( srfs ) and for special project grants ( "earmarks" ) .

the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations laws have previously provided funds to doi for restoration projects authorized under the comprehensive everglades restoration plan ( cerp ) and other authorities .

these projects were authorized to restore , protect , and preserve the natural ecosystem of the florida everglades .

doi conducts both cerp and non - cerp activities in southern florida through the national park service , fish and wildlife service , u.s. geological survey , and bureau of indian affairs .

other agencies , including the army corps of engineers , contribute to everglades restoration activities under their own authorities and with funding from other appropriations bills .

the full - year continuing appropriations law for fy2011 did not specify the appropriations for everglades restoration .

the administration's fy2011 request for everglades restoration for the department of the interior was $74.5 million , an increase of $6.0 million over the fy2010 appropriation .

the request included $8.0 million for doi under cerp and $8.0 million for the modified waters delivery project to everglades national park .

separate from the doi request , the administration also requested approximately $180 million for everglades restoration within the corps of engineers budget , for total federal funding of approximately $255 million in the administration's fy2011 request .

the level of commitment by the federal government to implement restoration activities in the everglades continues to receive attention .

some observers measure commitment by the frequency and number of projects authorized under cerp , and the appropriations they receive .

because only three restoration projects have been authorized since the water resources development act ( wrda ) 2000 , these observers are concerned that the federal commitment to everglades restoration is waning .

others assert that the federal commitment to cerp and everglades restoration has increased in recent years , evidenced by projects moving from design to construction phases as well as through additional funding provided through the american recovery and reinvestment act .

these observers note that in january of 2010 , the first cerp project broke ground at picayune strand in south florida .

the federal government also recently broke ground on the mod waters construction project , which must be completed before appropriations can be made for cerp projects in the eastern everglades .

the lwcf ( 16 u.s.c .

§§ 460 l - 4 , et seq. ) .

is authorized at $900 million annually through fy2015 .

however , these funds may not be spent without an appropriation .

the lwcf is used for three purposes .

first , the four principal federal land management agencies — bureau of land management , fish and wildlife service , national park service , and forest service — draw primarily on the lwcf to acquire lands .

second , the lwcf funds acquisition and recreational development by state and local governments through a grant program administered by the nps , sometimes referred to as stateside funding .

third , congress has appropriated money from the lwcf to fund some related activities , with programs varying from year to year .

from fy1965 through fy2011 , a total of about $34 billion was credited to the lwcf .

a total of roughly $16 billion of that amount has been appropriated .

annual appropriations from lwcf have fluctuated considerably over time .

table 15 shows funding for lwcf since fy2007 .

the fy2011 full - year continuing appropriations law provided $301.1 million for the lwcf , a reduction of $149.2 ( 33% ) from the fy2010 level .

the enacted level was less than half the level sought by the administration ─ $619.2 million ─ as part of a multi - year plan to achieve "full funding" for lwcf at the $900.0 million level .

the fy2011 appropriation was $243.3 million ( 421% ) higher than the house - passed amount but $76.0 million ( 20% ) less than the senate amendment .

for land acquisition for fy2011 , the fy2011 law provided $165.0 million , a reduction of $100.8 million from the fy2010 appropriation of $265.8 million .

the fy2011 level also was a reduction of $204.9 million from the administration's request of $369.9 million and of $27.6 million from the level in the senate amendment ─ $192.6 million , but an increase of $124.0 million above the house - passed level ─ $41.0 million .

the variability of funding for this activity throughout history reflects a tension regarding the extent of federal land ownership .

the fy2011 law did not identify the particular land units ( eg , a specific national wildlife refuge ) that would receive funding to acquire land .

for all four agencies , most of the funds requested by the administration were for acquisitions for particular management units .

in seeking funds for acquisition projects for fy2011 , for the first time the doi agencies used consistent , merit - based criteria , according to the department .

these criteria were designed to meet common conservation goals , such as developing additional recreational opportunities and maximizing landscape conservation for wildlife and habitat .

the fy2011 fs budget justification also noted changes to the lwcf program , including the use of selection criteria to rank land acquisition projects .

the changes in part seek to address congressional concerns regarding the land acquisition process .

for instance , the conferees on the fy2010 appropriations bill had expressed concern with the processes for acquiring lands , and provided several related directives to the agencies .

conferees directed the agencies to use funds for inholdings to acquire high - priority lands that are threatened by development , and address delays in conducting land appraisals , including by considering alternative organizational structures .

the conferees expressed their intention that , to the maximum extent possible , there be a single set of policies among the four agencies for conducting land acquisitions .

they directed the doi and agriculture secretaries to jointly examine their acquisition policies and practices and to submit a report with findings and recommendations to the house and senate appropriations committees .

further , the conferees expressed concern that lands acquired with lwcf funds are being used in ways inconsistent with the recreation , conservation , or public access uses for which they were purchased , and directed the doi and agriculture secretaries to notify the appropriations committees before changing the use of the lands .

for state grants , the fy2011 law continued the level of funding from fy2010 ─ $40.0 million .

this level also was included in the senate amendment .

however , the administration had requested an increase to $50.0 million , while the house - passed bill did not contain funding for state grants .

the appropriations for the state grant program typically are not specified for individual projects or areas , but rather are allocated to states in accordance with a formula in law .

since fy2000 , funding for state grants has ranged from a high of $143.9 million in fy2002 to a low of $19.0 million in fy2009 .

for fy2011 , the appropriations law contained $84.0 million in funding from lwcf for two other programs — fws cooperative endangered species grants and the fs forest legacy program .

the fy2011 level was $48.5 million lower than both the fy2010 level and the amount in the senate amendment ( $132.5 million ) and $101.1 million lower than the administration's request for fy2011 ( $185.1 million ) , but $77.8 million higher than the house - passed appropriation ( $6.2 million ) .

these two programs have been funded , at least in part , from lwcf for several years .

for fy2007 , the largest portion of the lwcf appropriation was for other programs , as shown in table 15 .

since fy2008 , the largest portion of the lwcf appropriation has been for land acquisition .

table 16 shows the other programs for which congress appropriated funds for fy2007 through fy2011 .

wildfire protection programs and funding continue to generate controversy .

ongoing discussions include questions about the high cost of fire suppression efforts ; locations for various wildfire protection treatments ; and whether , and to what extent , environmental analysis , public involvement , and legal challenges to administrative decisions hinder fuel reduction and post - fire rehabilitation .

the fs and doi wildfire funding includes funds for fire suppression , preparedness , and other operations .

excluding flame funds , prior - year funds , and rescissions , the fy2011 law provided $3.09 billion for wildland fire management ( $2.17 billion for the fs and $919.9 million for doi ) , a decrease of $6.3 million from fy2010 .

the administration had requested a total of $2.84 billion for wildland fire management ( $2.07 billion for the fs and $762.9 million for doi ) , excluding flame funding .

see "fs and doi subtotal" in table 17 below .

in total , the fy2011 appropriations law contained $2.84 billion for wildland fire management .

this was lower than enacted for fy2010 and contained in all proposals for fy2011 .

specifically , it was a decrease of $528.3 million ( 16% ) from the fy2010 level ( $3.37 billion ) , $735.0 million ( 21% ) from the administration's request ( $3.58 billion ) , $128.3 million ( 4% ) from the level in the house - passed bill , and $6.0 million ( < 1% ) from the amount in the senate amendment ( $2.85 billion ) .

see "total appropriations" in table 17 below .

the fy2010 interior appropriations law modified the traditional approach to funding wildfire suppression .

title v , the federal land assistance , management , and enhancement ( flame ) act of 2009 , established in the treasury the flame wildfire suppression reserve fund for doi and the flame wildfire suppression reserve fund for the department of agriculture ( for the forest service ) .

the funds are to be used to cover the costs of large or complex fires , when amounts provided in the wildland fire management accounts for suppression and emergency response are exhausted .

the requirements are the same for the two accounts .

each secretary may transfer funds from the flame fund into the respective wildland fire management account , for suppression activities , upon a secretarial declaration .

the declaration may be issued if the fire covers at least 300 acres or threatens lives , property , or resources , among other criteria .

the conferees stated their intent that the money in the flame funds , together with appropriations through the wildland fire management accounts , should fully fund suppression needs and prevent borrowing funds from other programs .

they directed the secretaries to develop new methods of estimating fire suppression funding needs as part of their fy2011 budget requests , and the fy2011 requests stated that they complied with this direction .

differences among the fy2010 enacted and fy2011 requested , house - passed , senate amendment , and enacted levels largely involved the flame funds .

the fy2011 appropriations law provided $352.0 million for the flame funds ( $291.0 million for the fs and $61.0 million for doi ) , as had been contained in the senate amendment .

this was $122.0 million less than both what was enacted for fy2010 and what was included in the house - passed bill ( $413.0 million for the fs and $61.0 million for doi ) .

further , the fy2011 enacted level of flame funds was $392.0 million less than requested for fy2011 ( $573.0 million for the fs and $171.0 million for doi ) .

in seeking a substantial increase in flame funding for fy2011 , including a new proposed presidential wildland fire contingency reserve fund , the administration had sought substantially less in regular suppression appropriations than was provided for fy2010 .

other differences among the fy2010 and fy2011 levels related to specific rescissions of fire funds and use of prior - year funds .

the fy2011 law and the senate amendment included a rescission of $600.0 million ( $400.0 million for the fs and $200.0 million from doi ) .

the fy2010 law allowed the use of $200.0 million in prior - year funds .

the fy2011 house - passed bill had provided for both a rescission of $250.0 million and the use of $350.0 million in prior - year funds .

the administration did not include either a rescission or the use of prior - year funds in its fy2011 request .

while the fy2011 law did not generally specify funding below the wildland fire management account level , it specified two decreases: $0.1 million ( from $11.6 million to $11.5 million ) for fs post - fire rehabilitation and $6.3 million ( from $71.3 million to $65.0 million ) for fs state fire assistance .

the president had proposed substantial shifts in funding among sub - accounts , most notably a 40% decrease in fs fire suppression and a 49% increase in fs preparedness .

thus , the fs ( and doi ) spending plans might shift funds among activities , within the enacted level that nearly matches the fy2010 appropriations .

