social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) replaces a portion of earnings for an eligible worker whose illness or injury — while not necessarily caused by a work - related incident — results in an inability to work .

as an insurance program , workers ( including active - duty military ) and employers in covered occupations , as well as self - employed individuals , contribute to the program through the federal insurance contributions act ( fica ) payroll tax and the self - employment contributions act ( seca ) tax .

currently , 94% of all workers are covered by social security .

conversely , veterans disability compensation ( vdc ) provides payments to veterans for illnesses and injuries that are caused or aggravated by military service .

vdc is a compensation program funded through a mandatory appropriation as part of the department of veterans affairs ( va ) annual budget .

vdc is not insurance and therefore , neither veterans nor active military personnel contribute directly toward the funding of the program .

ssdi and vdc — administered by the social security administration ( ssa ) and the va , respectively — are two of the largest federal disability programs .

in december 2013 , there were more than 8.9 million disabled workers receiving payments through ssdi at a cost of approximately $10.3 billion per month .

the number of veterans receiving disability compensation was less than half that amount at the end of fy2012 , with more than 3.5 million recipients .

total monthly receipts for vdc were just under $3.7 billion in fy2012 .

although ssdi and vdc both serve the goal of providing income security for individuals with disabilities , these programs fundamentally differ in how they define "disability" and determine eligibility for benefits .

for example , an individual must be unable to work to be eligible for ssdi benefits , yet employability is not a factor in vdc disability determinations .

indeed , veterans that receive a disability rating from the va will not necessarily be eligible for ssdi benefits , unless their particular condition prevents them from entering the civilian workforce under specific ssa guidelines .

this report seeks to clarify why one group of individuals with disabilities may be eligible for benefits under vdc , but ineligible for benefits under ssdi ( and vice versa ) , through a description and comparison of several distinguishing characteristics of the ssdi and vdc programs .

this report concludes with a discussion of the challenges facing the administration of both programs , including processing delays for pending claims and appeals .

these issues will be of particular interest to congress due to the high numbers of ssdi claims resulting from a combination of the recent economic decline , an increase in the number of baby - boomers approaching retirement age and their most disability - prone years .

in addition , the extension of presumptive conditions has expanded the pool of veterans eligible for vdc .

there are clear differences in the general goals of ssa and va disability compensation programs that have likely evolved from the ssdi focus on administering benefits primarily for a civilian work population , which contrasts with the vdc focus on compensating individuals for the adverse health conditions connected to military service .

under current statute , the vasrd is used as the sole tool in determining compensation levels for veterans with service - connected disabilities .

the vasrd ratings are presumed to reflect the "average" impact of the impairment on "average" earnings capacity or economic loss .

however , because vdc is granted for any condition incurred or aggravated by military service , vdc is also provided for conditions that do not impact employment or earnings capacity ; thus , payments for those conditions then reflect noneconomic loss .

a 2007 report by the veterans' disability benefits commission concluded that va disability compensation should additionally compensate veterans for "… their inability to participate in usual life activities and for the impact of their disabilities on quality of life," also called noneconomic loss .

the institute of medicine has also made recommendations on developing and implementing a methodology that can be used to evaluate the impact of disabilities on veterans' quality of life .

this methodology could presumably be used to recommend appropriate compensation for veterans' noneconomic loss .

crs is not aware of similar studies or efforts to identify ways to compensate ssdi recipients for noneconomic loss .

administering disability benefits through ssa and the va has posed considerable challenges .

both agencies have faced criticism for a failure to thoroughly revise disability evaluation standards to reflect the changing nature of the u.s. labor market and advances in medical technology that have redefined the ability of individuals with disabilities to engage in productive work activities .

ssa and the va have also been criticized for their processes of adjudicating applications , and the high levels of claims and appeals pending .

these were two of several government - wide findings that led the government accountability office ( gao ) to designate federal disability programs as "high - risk. .

according to ssa , the agency seeks to modernize the disability evaluation system and is currently in the process of revising its ratings system , and has further reviewed the role of ssdi in a comprehensive government - wide disability policy .

for example , ssa has conducted outreach efforts to wounded warriors returning from operations iraqi freedom ( oif ) and enduring freedom ( oef ) to begin the application process for ssa disability benefits prior to separating from the military .

moreover , in 2012 , ssa announced a nationwide expansion of its streamlined medical records service , which will allow ssdi case processing sites to request military medical records from a centralized dod site .

in 2007 , ssa developed a plan to eliminate hearings backlogs that increased due to the recent economic decline , increase in baby - boomer claims , and after coming under scrutiny by the gao , which insisted ssa develop a more comprehensive strategy to reduce backlogs .

to expedite the determination process , ssa instituted two new fast - track programs: ( 1 ) the quick disability determination ( qdd ) process uses predictive computer models to flag disability applications with a high likelihood of receiving a favorable determination ; and ( 2 ) the compassionate allowances ( cal ) process expedites applicants with severe conditions that habitually receive a favorable determination .

between fy2009 and fy2013 , pending initial disability claims fell from 779,854 to 707,700 ; however , pending disability claims at the redetermination level increased during the same period from 161,264 to 197,788 .

also , under the provisions of the ticket to work and work incentives improvement act of 1999 ( p.l .

106-170 ) , ssa provides vouchers to social security disability beneficiaries that can be used to receive vocational rehabilitation or other employment support services from public or private providers within the ssa employment network .

ssa has also developed a work incentive policy that enables ssdi recipients to work and still receive monthly benefits with the goal of helping those individuals to eventually achieve self - sufficiency .

in 2014 recipients that earn in excess of $770 per month enter a "trial work" period , where they can test their ability to perform on - the - job without losing disability benefits .

the disability is not considered to be ended until the recipient is able to work for at least nine months over a 60-month period .

ssa also recently concluded the accelerated benefits demonstration project , which tested the health and employment outcomes of ssdi recipients who received health benefits sooner than the 24-month waiting period .

key finding from the study results demonstrated that participants ( 1 ) made extensive use of available program services , ( 2 ) reported fewer unmet medical needs , and ( 3 ) were encouraged to seek work , although employment levels did not increase in comparison with a control group .

the results further suggest that continued tracking of participants' employment gains will be important to understand the long - term impacts of providing early health benefits to ssdi beneficiaries .

as of january 13 , 2014 , the va has 636,064 veterans' claims pending for disability compensation and 60.8% ( approximately 386,727 ) of those claims have been pending for 125 days or longer ( i.e. , from the date the claim was received by the va ) .

the number of claims pending has been of growing concern to veterans , vsos , and members of congress .

congress appropriated additional resources toward reducing the accumulation of claims and appeals .

the average number of days to process a rating - related claim was 181 days in fy2001 , prior to the oif and oef military conflicts .

because of ongoing efforts by the va to add personnel and make greater use of technology , the average processing time has been reduced to 175.3 days as of january 2014 .

in addition to the issues surrounding pending claims , gao has also specifically cited the va for inconsistencies in the ratings systems across the va regional offices .

in a separate response to criticism on their process for awarding benefits , the va — citing the 1956 bradley report — asserts that their "… disability ratings represent noneconomic factors , such as pain and suffering , in addition to average loss of earnings. .

they further state that prior proposals to update the ratings system have proven unpopular with congress and vsos .

nevertheless , a recently established advisory committee will advise the va secretary on reviews of the vasrd .

