in 2001 , the harvard law review published presidential administration by then - visiting professor of law elena kagan .

drawing heavily from her experiences as a member of the white house counsel's office and as deputy assistant to president william j. clinton for domestic policy , professor kagan articulates both a political and legal theory of presidential authority over agencies in the executive branch .

professor kagan's theory of "presidential administration" is seen as a significant departure from the established , competing theories that have been previously developed by the academic and legal literature regarding administrative law and separation of powers .

professor kagan's article has been quite influential in these fields , cited and discussed by numerous academic and legal experts , cited by the supreme court , as well as in two appellate court opinions .

in light of ms. kagan's nomination to serve as an associate justice of the united states supreme court , this report analyzes kagan's views of executive power and the doctrine of separation of powers as laid out in presidential administration .

this report will proceed as follows: first , it will briefly describe the constitutional and legal basis for presidential authority with respect to domestic policy , focusing on the relevant constitutional text as well as the supreme court jurisprudence that forms the foundation for almost all discussions of executive authority .

second , the report will provide a discussion of the well - established and competing theories of executive power , the traditional view as well as the "unitary theory of the executive. .

third , the report will discuss professor kagan's theory of "presidential administration" and her legal responses to both of the aforementioned theories .

fourth , the report will turn to the application of professor kagan's theory to the field of administrative law , with an emphasis on the non - delegation doctrine and the level of deference often afforded to executive branch agencies by the judiciary , often referred to as chevron deference .

finally , the report will provide a discussion of some of the criticism of professor kagan's views , especially as they relate to the president's legal authority in the areas of foreign policy and national security , both of which are expected by many to be issues that the supreme court will adjudicate in future terms .

prior to professor kagan's 2001 article , separation of powers and presidential authority analysis was largely divided into two camps , the "traditional view," and the "unitary theory of the executive. .

both of these camps rely , in various ways , on the constitutional text and supreme court opinions discussed above , but reach very different conclusions about the scope of presidential power and congress's control with respect to the powers and duties of executive departments and agencies .

according to professor kagan , neither the traditional model nor the "unitary theory of the executive" adequately describes the reasons that she believes president clinton enjoyed success in controlling the vast bureaucracy of the executive branch .

by adopting and building on the directives and policies of the reagan administration and its regulatory review process , president clinton was able to dramatically increase the president's level of participation in the administrative decision - making process .

professor kagan's article posits that it was president clinton's "articulation and use of directive authority over regulatory agencies , as well as his assertion of personal ownership over regulatory product" that led to the development of a new and distinctive form of administrative control .

this new form of administrative control includes two parts .

first , the use of "directive authority," which kagan defines as "commands to executive branch officials to take specified actions within their statutorily delegated discretion. .

the second component is what professor kagan termed "presidential ownership," and includes , for example , the public announcement of many regulatory decisions and accomplishments directly by the white house rather than by the responsible agency officials .

the combination of these two concepts as well as the changed relationship between the president and the administrative agencies under professor kagan's theory of "presidential administration," raise significant legal questions , as conceptually these notions do not fit into either of the existing models of separation of powers and presidential authority analysis .

professor kagan addresses these legal issues by employing the very same analytical framework as both the traditionalists and unitarians .

according to professor kagan , at the core of the legal framework for "presidential administration" is a re - conceptualization of how congressional delegations are to be interpreted .

specifically , under her theory of "presidential administration," delegations by congress granting discretion to executive branch officials should be read and interpreted as leaving ultimate decision - making authority with the president .

similar delegations to independent agencies , however , are not to be interpreted in the same manner , and , thus , congress can retain oversight and control over the decisions of those entities .

the first legal hurdle that such a theory must overcome is that it seems to run directly contrary to justice black's majority opinion in youngstown sheet & tube , as it would appear that the president , by asserting decision - making authority where congress has expressly delegated it elsewhere , is acting as a "lawmaker. .

professor kagan , however , distinguishes her concept of presidential administration from president truman's steel seizure order by noting that in youngstown , congress had specifically reserved the decision regarding seizures to itself .

conversely , according to professor kagan , president clinton's directives were always issued in situations where congress had expressly delegated authority to an entity other than itself .

thus , the court in youngstown never reached the question of the president's authority in these types of contexts , much less rendered a decision .

thus , while youngstown establishes that the president cannot encroach into decisions that congress has reserved for itself , it says nothing about the president's ability to assume the decision - making function from a subordinate agency official that congress has specifically authorized to act .

next , professor kagan addresses her theory in correlation with the removal line of cases previously discussed .

accepting the removal cases as "certain to remain the law," kagan turns to a statutory construction argument to support her claim of broad presidential authority over agency decision making .

according to professor kagan , delegation statutes can , and should , be read to "assume that the delegation runs to the agency official specified , rather than to any other agency official , but still subject to the ultimate control of the president. .

for example , when congress delegates decisions related to implementation of the medicare statute to the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) , professor kagan not only accepts the proposition that the statute should be read to mean that the secretary of hhs and not the secretary of treasury is legally empowered to make the decision , but also adds the presumption that , unless specifically excluded by congress , the president is legally entitled to participate in the process by issuing directives to the secretary of hhs .

for professor kagan , this additional presumption is expressly based on the reasoning of the removal cases .

relying on the distinction between delegations to independent agencies and delegations to executive branch agencies , she notes that , in the former , congress has already acted by limiting the president's appointment and removal authority to insulate the agency's decision making from presidential control .

thus , according to professor kagan , "the agency's heads are not subordinate to the president in other respects ; making the heads subordinate in this single way would subvert the very structure and premises of the agency. .

in the latter , the presumption works the other way .

congress , when delegating to an executive branch agency head , already knows that the official is subordinate to the president , can be terminated at will , and is subject to procedural oversight .

therefore , according to professor kagan , "these powers establish a general norm of deference among executive officials to presidential options , such that when congress delegates to an executive official , it in some necessary and obvious sense also delegates to the president. .

having laid out her theory of "presidential administration," professor kagan turns to the field of administrative law as fertile ground for developing judicial doctrines that should embrace and support her concept .

professor kagan specifically focuses her analysis on two doctrines of administrative law for which the application of "presidential administration" could be judicially recognized ; namely , the non - delegation doctrine and judicial review of agency action .

despite its length , professor kagan's presidential administration is silent with respect to the authority of the president regarding the conduct of foreign affairs and national security .

written prior to september 11 , 2001 , and focusing largely on the success of the clinton administration with regards to domestic policy initiatives , it is difficult to ascertain from the text of the article itself what , if any , views kagan holds on national security and foreign affairs related issues such as detention , surveillance , interrogation , and rendition .

although there is arguably some overlap between her theory of presidential power and arguments that have been advanced in the areas of foreign affairs and national security , the legal questions involve and implicate clauses in the constitution and lines of supreme court cases that are not addressed or discussed by professor kagan in presidential administration .

that said , kagan's views of executive power generally have led some scholars and commentators to speculate on what those views might be .

criticism of kagan's views of executive power have come from both the progressive and conservative ends of the political spectrum , and are not always limited to the views and analysis expressed in presidential administration .

from the progressive point of view , it has been suggested that professor kagan's embrace of certain parts of the "unitary theory of the executive," necessarily leads to a strong view of presidential power and , therefore , could be used to justify positions similar to those taken by the administration of george w. bush .

conversely , some conservative writers have criticized kagan's article for not accepting in its entirety the precepts of the "unitary theory of the executive. .

specifically , commentators have noted kagan's express rejection of the theory that the constitution mandates a unitary executive by permitting the unfettered removal of officers and officials .

for strong unitarian supporters , professor kagan's failure to fully accept these unitarian principles calls into question her acceptance of all the president's powers .

in sum , presidential administration presents a complex and multifaceted view of executive - congressional relations focused exclusively on domestic policy .

using the case law , arguments , and structures of both the traditional and "unitary theory of the executive" views , professor kagan articulates a view of executive power that envisions strong personal involvement by the president and the white house in the policy decisions and actions of administrative agencies .

while arguably , professor kagan's theory is favorable to the executive branch , it nevertheless permits congress to continue to develop and delegate executive functions to independent agencies that remain beyond the scope and control of the president .

furthermore , as recognized by the article , professor kagan's theory has some significant real world legal consequences , specifically with respect to administrative law , that may come before the supreme court .

whether , and to what extent , the theories and ideas presented in an academic paper like presidential administration inform her potential decision making as a supreme court justice on issues related to foreign affairs and national security , however , remains to be seen .

