the constitution requires that after any bill or joint resolution that would become law passes both houses of congress in final form , it must be presented to the president for approval or veto .

the constitution also sets time limits on the president's action: after a measure is presented , the president must either sign or veto it within 10 days , excluding sundays .

if the president does neither , the act either becomes law without his signature ( if congress remains in session ) or is pocket vetoed ( if congress has adjourned ) .

by contrast , the constitution specifies no time limit within which congress must present a measure to the president after completing its own action on it .

in a number of instances in recent years , several days or more have elapsed between these two events .

some of these delays have occurred for reasons related to formal requirements of the lawmaking process under the constitution or because of the time needed for preparing the measure for presentment .

others , however , seem to have occurred for reasons related to policy or partisan disputes , and some of these occurrences have led to discussion , either formally or informally but especially in the house of representatives , about the appropriate timing for these actions and possible ways of enforcement .

this report discusses possible institutional reasons for delays in the process of presentment and describes some recent instances of delay for other reasons .

it considers what restrictions against such delays are provided in the constitution and in congressional rules .

it concludes by examining how the house might attempt to overcome such delays by considering them as raising a question of the privileges of the house .

in accordance with the constitutional requirements for lawmaking , acts of congress can result in law only through presentment to the president .

the constitution appears to presume that this requirement itself should offer congress sufficient incentive to make such presentment without needing to be compelled by any further requirements .

two centuries of experience , however , reveal certain circumstances under which congress may have institutional reasons to withhold a measure temporarily from presentment .

the delays in presenting measures that have fostered comment in the past several years appear to stem not from institutional grounds such as those just discussed , but from ones that might be described as political .

yet if congress can constitutionally delay presentment to preserve its institutional prerogatives , it would appear difficult to assert any constitutional grounds against its doing so for other reasons .

these instances of delay have occurred especially at times when congress and the presidency were controlled by different political parties .

in 1991 , for example , a measure extending unemployment benefits , which cleared congress on october 1 , was not signed in the senate and presented to the president until october 9 .

in the interim , a leading member of the minority party stated on the floor of the house that "no member of the ... leadership has yet explained why they kept the bill for ... almost [seven] days now in the senate. .

members of the majority responded that , "frankly , we are hoping to get the votes to override or to get the president to sign it," and that "this bill will arrive on the president's desk in better shape to be enacted if it takes another day or two .

[the] president ... needs to feel the ... heat...." a press report said that "leaders in [the senate] held the bill for eight days ... in order to delay the eventual override vote .

their hope is that constituents might be able to persuade two [senators] to change their votes during the intervening days. .

in another instance , in 1995 , the president vetoed the first legislative branch appropriation bill for fy1996 on the grounds that more action should first take place on at least some of the other regular appropriation bills .

after the veto , congress passed identical provisions in a new bill , clearing the measure on november 2 .

under the circumstances , the leadership preferred that the measure not be again presented to the president "without some indication that he would sign it. .

ultimately , the bill was presented on november 18 and signed the following day .

other examples occurred in 1996 .

h.r .

1833 , to ban partial - birth abortions , cleared congress on march 27 , but was not presented to the president until april 5 .

h.r .

956 , to regulate product liability suits , cleared congress on march 29 , but was presented only on april 30 .

both measures were vetoed , though the congressional schedule in these instances suggests that avoidance of a possible pocket veto was not at issue .

the longest delay in presentment identified during the past two decades was 176 days , occurring in the case of h.r .

1757 from the 105 th congress ( 1995-1996. ) .

one other measure identified , h.r .

2466 from the 106 th congress ( 1997-1998 ) , was enrolled but ultimately never presented , instead being tabled by concurrent resolution .

in these latter two cases , it is not clear from the record whether any specific dispute between the branches led to these delays .

if the constitution offers no source of constraint on the action of congress in presenting measures to the president , the only other likely source of such constraints would be rules of congress itself .

specifically pertinent would be rules governing the administrative actions that take place between final congressional action on a measure and its presentment to the president .

these are internal congressional proceedings , whose regulation is subject to the constitutional grant to each house of congress of plenary power to "determine the rules of its proceedings. .

today's congressional practice in these matters derives in part from joint rules that were in effect from 1789 until 1876 , and in part from provisions of the legislative reorganization act of 1946 ( p.l .

79-602 , 60 stat .

912 ) .

the processes governed by these regulations begin with the preparation of the final text of the measure , under the direction of the clerk of the house or secretary of the senate ( depending on the chamber of origin ) ; this preparation is called enrollment .

the enrolled measure is then examined for correctness , today under the auspices of the clerk or secretary of the senate , respectively .

it is then signed by the speaker , in the house , and then the vice president ( or other presiding officer ) , in the senate , to attest that the respective houses have agreed to it .

once so signed , the enrolled measure is ready for presentment to the president .

despite this paucity of specific mandates , there is precedent for attempting to enforce the timely occurrence of actions requisite to presenting an act of congress to the president .

house rule ix provides that questions of the privileges of the house are privileged for consideration on the floor of the house .

it defines such questions as those "affecting the rights of the house collectively , its safety , dignity , and the integrity of its proceedings. .

it is the practice of the house that such questions must be presented in the form of a resolution .

the speaker then rules on whether the resolution presents a question of the privileges of the house ; if it does , it is privileged for consideration under the one - hour rule , either then or within two days of session ( depending on whether it is presented by the majority or minority leader and , if not , on the discretion of the speaker ) .

in at least two instances , resolutions of this kind have been offered alleging that failure to present to the president , in a timely fashion , a measure passed by congress , affected the integrity of house proceedings .

these two precedents show one means by which at least the house of representatives might , under appropriate circumstances , take action to enforce the presentment to the president of a cleared measure .

the senate possesses no similar mechanism to privilege consideration of a resolution of this kind , but could presumably entertain a resolution with similar intent , and thereby direct remedial action , if it so chose .

using data from the legislative information system of the u.s. congress ( lis ) , crs calculated the time from second chamber passage of all conference reports to their presentment to the president from the 101 st congress ( 1989-1990 ) to the present .

this data set included more than 500 conference reports presented during the period in question .

the shortest period between second chamber passage and presentment of a conference report during the period examined was zero days — that is , the enrolled measure was presented to the president on the same day it passed the second house of congress .

this occurred on more than 40 occasions during the period examined .

as has been noted , the longest delay in presentment identified during the period was 176 days , occurring in the case of h.r .

1757 from the 105 th congress ( 1995-1996. ) .

the average number of days between second chamber passage and presentment of conference reports for each congress is detailed in the table below .

