since 2007 , the supreme court has ruled on two separate occasions that the clean air act authorizes the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to set standards for emissions of greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) .

in the first case , massachusetts v. epa , the court held that ghgs are air pollutants within the clean air act's definition of that term and that epa must regulate their emissions from motor vehicles if the agency found that such emissions cause or contribute to air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare .

in the second case , american electric power , inc. v. connecticut , the court held that corporations cannot be sued for ghg emissions under federal common law , because the clean air act delegates the management of carbon dioxide and other ghg emissions to epa: "... congress delegated to epa the decision whether and how to regulate carbon - dioxide emissions from power plants ; the delegation is what displaces federal common law. .

ghgs are a disparate group of pollutants — the most significant of them being carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) .

according to a widely held scientific consensus , these gases trap the sun's energy in the earth's atmosphere and contribute to climate change .

in 2009 , the house passed comprehensive legislation that would have limited numerous elements of epa's existing authority over ghgs , substituting economy - wide cap - and - trade systems to reduce ghg emissions .

companion legislation emerged from committee in the senate , but failed to reach the floor .

since then , congress has made no serious effort to revive the legislation .

instead , in the 112 th - 114 th congresses , attention to the issue has focused on various bills to repeal or limit epa's authority over ghg emissions without providing a substitute .

meanwhile , epa has taken action , using its existing clean air act ( caa ) authority: in april 2010 , then - epa - administrator lisa jackson signed final regulations that required auto manufacturers to limit emissions of ghgs from new model year ( my ) 2012-2016 cars and light trucks .

effective in january 2011 , epa began requiring new and modified major stationary sources to undergo pre - construction review under the prevention of significant deterioration / new source review ( psd / nsr ) program with respect to their ghg emissions in addition to any other pollutants subject to caa regulation that they emit .

this review requires affected new and modified sources to obtain permits and install best available control technology ( bact ) to address their ghg emissions .

at the same time , epa began requiring large existing stationary sources of ghg emissions ( in addition to new sources ) to obtain operating permits under title v of the clean air act ( or have existing permits modified to include their ghg emissions ) .

in september 2011 , epa promulgated ghg emission standards for my2014-2018 medium - and heavy - duty trucks .

in october 2012 , epa promulgated a second round of ghg emission standards for cars and light trucks , applicable to my2017-2025 vehicles .

in july 2015 , epa proposed a second round of ghg emission standards for medium - and heavy - duty trucks , applicable to my2021-2027 trucks and engines , and my2018 and later trailers .

in august 2015 , epa promulgated emission standards for new and existing fossil - fueled electric generating units ( egus ) under section 111 of the clean air act .

epa's potential regulation of ghg emissions ( particularly from stationary sources ) has led many in congress to suggest that the agency delay taking action or be stopped from proceeding .

in each congress since the 111 th , bills have been introduced to rescind or limit epa's greenhouse gas authority .

early on , epa attempted to respond to congressional and stakeholder concerns by clarifying the direction and schedule of its actions .

the agency provided three clear responses to implementation issues as it was taking the first regulatory actions described above: the first came on march 29 , 2010 , when the administrator reinterpreted a 2008 memorandum concerning the effective date of the stationary source permit requirements .

facing a possibility of having to begin the permitting process on april 1 , 2010 ( the date the first ghg standard for automobiles was finalized ) , the march 29 decision delayed for nine months ( to january 2 , 2011 ) the date on which epa would consider stationary source ghgs to be subject to regulation , and thus subject to the permitting requirements of psd / nsr and title v. on may 13 , 2010 , the administrator signed the ghg "tailoring" rule , which provided for a phasing in of title v and psd / nsr permitting requirements , so that only a limited number of very large sources would initially have to meet requirements .

on november 10 , 2010 , epa released a package of guidance and technical information to assist local and state permitting authorities in implementing psd and title v permitting for greenhouse gas emissions .

the epa administrator and the president also repeatedly expressed their preference for congress to take the lead in designing a ghg regulatory system .

however , epa simultaneously stated that , in the absence of congressional action , it must proceed to regulate ghg emissions: the april 2007 supreme court decision in massachusetts v. epa compelled epa to address whether ghgs were air pollutants that endanger public health and welfare , and if it found they were , to embark on a regulatory course prescribed by statute .

having made an affirmative decision in response to the endangerment question , epa proceeded with regulations .

thus , epa and many members of congress have been on a collision course .

epa is proceeding to regulate emissions of ghgs under the clean air act , as it maintains it must .

opponents of this effort in congress continue to explore approaches to alter the agency's course .

the president has made clear that he intends to take action to control ghg emissions .

in his second inaugural address , he promised to "respond to the threat of climate change. .

he has reiterated his determination to address the issue in multiple state of the union addresses .

in june 2013 , he directed epa to propose new source performance standards for greenhouse gas emissions from new fossil - fueled power plants by september 20 , 2013 , and to propose guidelines for existing power plants by june 1 , 2014 .

epa met both of these deadlines and finalized the power plant rules in august 2015 — leaving congress to consider whether and how best to respond .

this report discusses elements of this controversy , providing background on stationary sources of greenhouse gas pollution and identifying options congress has if it chooses to address the issue .

the report discusses four sets of options: ( 1 ) resolutions of disapproval under the congressional review act ; ( 2 ) freestanding legislation directing , delaying , or prohibiting epa action ; ( 3 ) the use of appropriations bills as a vehicle to influence epa activity ; and ( 4 ) amendments to the clean air act , including legislation to establish a new ghg control regime .

the report considers each of these in turn , but first provides additional detail regarding the sources of ghg emissions , the requirements of the clean air act , and a brief description of the two rules that would limit power plant ghg emissions .

although this report focuses on congress and the executive branch , there is , of course , a third branch of government , the judiciary , which continues to be involved in the issues discussed here .

the courts have upheld epa's regulations related to ghg emissions from motor vehicles .

the supreme court has issued a stay , however , of the clean power plan , epa's august 2015 regulations governing ghg emissions from existing fossil - fueled power plants .

challenges to both epa power plant rules are proceeding in the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit , with the potential for appeals thereafter to the supreme court .

stationary sources are the major sources of the country's ghg emissions .

as shown in figure 1 , 64% of u.s. emissions of greenhouse gases comes from stationary sources ( the remainder comes from mobile sources , primarily cars and trucks , and from agriculture , which has elements in both the stationary and mobile source groups ) .

if epa ( or congress ) is to embark on a serious effort to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , stationary sources , and in particular large stationary sources such as power plants , will have to be included .

the substantial amount of greenhouse gas emissions emanating from stationary source categories is even more important from a policy standpoint: reducing greenhouse gas emissions from these sources is likely to be more timely and cost - effective than attempts to reduce emissions from the transport sector .

a relatively small number of stationary sources ( a few thousand power plants , for example ) account for a large percentage of total emissions , making regulation easier to administer and enforce .

by contrast , there are more than 200 million sources in the fleet of cars and trucks .

epa has no legal authority to impose more stringent standards on these existing vehicles .

even for new vehicles , standards have to be phased in: the manufacturers can't be expected to develop new vehicle designs and engines for every model simultaneously .

the fleet of vehicles turns over slowly .

thus , although new vehicles will be required to reduce ghg emissions by about 50% in model year 2025 and later vehicles , it will be 2040 or later before the full effect of that requirement is felt .

existing power plants and other stationary sources — although not easily modified — are somewhat more amenable to changes than mobile sources: fuel sources can be switched ; processes can be made more efficient , reducing fuel consumption ; and demand for power can be modified through a variety of measures .

as noted earlier , if congress favors a different approach to ghg controls than those on which epa has embarked , including stopping the agency in its tracks , at least four sets of options are available to change the agency's course: the congressional review act ; freestanding legislation ; appropriations riders ; and amendments to the clean air act .

among the most widely discussed options has been the congressional review act .

in some respects , epa's greenhouse gas decisions are similar to actions it has taken previously for other pollutants .

beginning in 1970 , and reaffirmed by amendments in 1977 and 1990 , congress gave the agency broad authority to identify pollutants and to proceed with regulation .

congress did not itself identify the pollutants to be covered by national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) ; rather , it told the agency to identify pollutants that are emitted by "numerous or diverse" sources , and the presence of which in ambient air "may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare" ( caa section 108 ( a ) ( 1 ) ) .

epa has used this authority to regulate six pollutants or groups of pollutants , the so - called "criteria pollutants. .

epa also has authority under other sections of the act — notably sections 111 ( new source performance standards ) , 112 ( hazardous air pollutants ) , and 202 ( motor vehicle emission standards ) — to identify pollutants on its own initiative and promulgate emission standards for them .

actions with regard to ghgs follow these precedents and can use the same statutory authorities .

the differences are of scale and of degree .

greenhouse gases are global pollutants to a greater extent than most of the pollutants previously regulated under the act ; reductions in u.s. emissions without simultaneous reductions by other countries may somewhat diminish but will not solve the problems the emissions cause .

also , ghgs are such pervasive pollutants , and arise from so many sources , that reducing the emissions may have broader effects on the economy than most previous epa regulations .

these and other considerations have led many in congress to try to prevent epa from using its general authority to control ghg emissions .

if the rules are to be overturned during the remainder of the obama administration , there are two arenas in which to do so: the courts and the congress .

opponents of the regulations have not prevailed in either venue , thus far , although the supreme court has stayed epa's implementation of the clean power plan pending the resolution of court challenges to the rule .

in the courts , several of epa's early ghg - related actions , in 2009 and 2010 , survived challenges in 95 consolidated petitions for review in the d.c .

circuit .

the supreme court agreed to review only a narrow question raised by this ruling — whether epa's regulation of ghg emissions from motor vehicles triggered caa permitting requirements for ghg emissions from stationary sources as well — leaving the remainder of the d.c .

circuit decision intact .

when the supreme court ruled on this one issue , in 2014 , it gave epa most of what it wanted , allowing it to require such permitting for ghg emitters who would be subject to permit requirements anyway because of other pollutants they emit .

in contrast to this record , petitioners may have better chances in the litigation that has been filed against epa's rules for new and existing power plants .

that is one interpretation of the supreme court's unprecedented stay of the clean power plan , issued in february 2016 .

until now , opponents in congress have been unable to overturn most of epa's ghg actions .

with new congressional majorities in the 114 th congress , legislation to overturn epa's rulemaking has had easier going than in previous congresses .

but the legislation still faces two important obstacles: the filibuster rule in the senate and the likelihood of presidential vetoes .

whether either obstacle can be overcome depends on the specifics of the bills in question .

while any congressional action to overturn epa's ghg regulations will face challenges , most analysts expect riders to appropriation bills to have the best odds of success .

