the changing structure of u.s. agriculture has generated concerns about reduced competition in a wide variety of agricultural product markets , including dairy .

two primary areas of concern in the dairy industry are consolidation — the shift to fewer and larger firms — and industry concentration — the extent to which a small number of firms control most of the sales .

on august 5 , 2009 , the administration announced that the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) and the department of justice would hold several public workshops to consider competition issues affecting agriculture and the appropriate role for antitrust and regulatory enforcement .

a workshop on the dairy industry is scheduled for june 25 , 2010 , in madison , wi .

this report provides background on the structure of the u.s. dairy industry and an overview of dairy issues .

the first section briefly discusses recent financial stress for dairy farmers and the historical development of the dairy industry .

the second section reviews disparate movements in farm and retail prices for milk and dairy products .

the third section examines current industry structure in terms of consolidation and concentration at different market levels: farm , cooperative , processor , and retail .

the fourth section considers the economic effects of consolidation and concentration .

finally , u.s. antitrust law is outlined , along with recent antitrust activity directed at the dairy industry .

the financial stress in the dairy industry in 2009 , brought on largely by sharply lower milk prices , activated standing federal programs to support dairy farmers .

in calendar year 2009 , the federal government spent more than $1 billion to support the industry through various dairy programs .

following appeals from dairy farmers for more financial assistance , congress granted $350 million in october 2009 in the form of supplemental payments as well as government purchases of dairy products for domestic feeding programs .

despite the government payments and program support , the number of u.s. dairy farms declined during 2009 by 3% to 65,000 farms as of december 31 , 2009 .

during the same period , the number of dairy cows fell , and the subsequent decline in milk production , along with a simultaneous rebound in foreign demand for dairy products , lifted average farm milk prices , estimated at $15.10 per hundredweight for march 2010 , up from $11.80 per hundredweight a year earlier .

 ( prices averaged $14.68 per hundredweight during 2000-2009. ) .

still , financial concerns remain for dairy farmers who lost significant amounts of farm equity during the milk price collapse and continue to contend with feed prices that are well above historical averages .

the financial stress of 2009 and similar episodes over the years have led the industry and members of congress to reconsider the options available to handle fluctuations in milk prices and income for dairy farmers .

for more information on dairy policy options , see crs report r41141 , previewing dairy policy options for the next farm bill .

financial stress in the dairy sector has also motivated the obama administration and some members of congress to examine issues of consolidation and concentration in the dairy industry .

over the last 100 years , the u.s. dairy industry has evolved from a collection of local producing and consuming areas to a national milk and dairy product market , due in part to significant advancements in milk marketing , particularly the ability to transport milk more efficiently over long distances .

the early history of the dairy industry was also shaped by significant government intervention in the market , which continues today .

a long - standing issue during the development of the dairy industry , and in other parts of agriculture , has been the relationship between farm and retail prices .

most recently , as farm prices of milk and other agricultural commodities fell in late 2008 , retail food price declines were slow to follow .

this decreased the farm value share — the portion of the retail dollar that flows to the farmer — and caused some in congress to question whether processors and retailers were contributing to economic stress in the agricultural sector , particularly for dairy farmers .

in recent decades , across the agricultural sector , several factors have led to a declining farm share of the retail food dollar .

these factors include gains in agricultural productivity , growth in demand for value - added products , and changes in food marketing .

the farm share of the retail food dollar for all farm products ( not just dairy ) was 41% in 1950 , a time when many food products were sold with much less value - added processing or packaging than today .

in 2006 , usda estimated that the average farm - value share of all food products of u.s. farm origin consumed was 18.5% .

the remaining 81.5% was accounted for by a host of marketing factors , including labor ( processing and retail sectors ) , packaging , profit , transportation , and energy .

for milk and dairy products , the farm share is approximately one - third of the retail dollar , which is greater than the all - food average , largely because other food categories such as cereals and bakery products have a higher overall degree of processing .

while the farm share of the retail price bounces around from year to year , the overall trend for milk and dairy products was generally flat between 2000 and 2008 .

by product category , the farm - share trend was flat for whole milk , butter , and ice cream , with a slight uptrend for cheddar cheese .

examining changes in monthly farm and retail prices during 2008 and early 2009 indicates a decline in the farm - value share of retail product values and a widening of the marketing margin .

between july 2008 and december 2008 , the farm price of milk reported by usda fell by $0.33 per gallon ( figure 1 ) .

meanwhile , the average retail milk price fell only $0.28 , with the difference between the retail and farm price ( i.e. , the marketing margin ) increasing to $2.35 per gallon .

in january 2009 , the difference between the average retail price of milk and the farm price of milk reached a record - high $2.43 per gallon .

throughout 2009 , however , amid lower costs for farm milk and other inputs ( eg , energy and transportation ) , retailers reduced their prices and the difference between farm and retail prices declined sharply .

the difference dropped to $1.69 per gallon in december , which is more than $0.25 per gallon below the recent five - year average margin ( figure 2 ) .

in early 2010 , farm prices weakened slightly and the price spread returned to the five - year average level .

as described in crs report r40621 , farm - to - food price dynamics , time lags in retail price response to farm price changes are generally months in length , even for perishables like milk .

another characteristic of food markets is that adjustments in retail prices from higher farm prices occur faster and with greater pass - through to the consumer than adjustments to decreases in farm prices , an economic phenomenon often referred to as "sticky" retail food prices .

that is , retail prices follow commodity prices upward rapidly , but fall back only slowly and partially when commodity prices recede .

economists have noted that certain aspects of consumer behavior ( such as strong consumer store preference and responsiveness to high food prices by higher - income consumers ) , as well as store inventory management and retailing strategies , may limit retail prices from adjusting fully to downward farm price movements .

as a result , these types of price movements do not necessarily imply abnormal or excessive market power by the retailer .

recent economic research has also found that the competition effects of supermarket services can result in stores attracting less price - sensitive consumers .

for retail stores that differentiate themselves from competitors by offering additional services ( eg , banking , restaurant , pharmacy ) rather than through prices , consumers might pay more for milk .

in these cases , there can be a "disconnect" between farm and retail prices of agricultural products .

consolidation has been a long - term trend in agriculture .

across the industry , including the dairy sector , rising productivity has led to fewer and larger operations along the production and marketing chain , including farms , cooperatives , processors , and retailers .

larger operations tend to have lower per - unit costs .

as firms reduce their costs , they become more competitive and can increase sales and market share at the expense of less profitable firms .

as a result , fewer dairy farms are needed to produce the same amount of milk .

firm size is a limiting factor for growth , however , once the gains to economies of scale have been exhausted .

at the farm level , the number of operations continues to decline , although at a much slower pace during the last decade than in previous periods .

consolidation at the cooperative and processor level has followed a similar path , in order to offset potential market power of large retailers and to satisfy demands from retailers to serve them more efficiently .

concentration — the extent to which a small number of firms controls most of the sales or purchases — has also been increasing in the dairy industry .

nearly all segments of the dairy industry have become more concentrated over time .

the primary concern many have with concentration is that it could reduce competition in the marketplace for agricultural and food products and result in market power ( i.e. , the ability of a firm to influence prices ) , putting at a disadvantage some segment of the population , such as producers or consumers .

however , concentration may also result in efficiency gains , whereby cost savings are passed on to consumers through lower retail prices , which in turn can result in additional demand for commodities and benefit farmers .

in summarizing research findings for several agricultural industries , the government accountability office ( gao ) concluded that the economic literature has not established that "concentration in the processing segment of the beef , pork , or dairy sectors , or the retail sector overall has adversely affected agricultural commodity or retail food prices. .

gao concluded that most of the studies it reviewed found either no evidence of market power , or efficiency effects that were larger than the market power effects of concentration .

however , the agency said , experts generally agreed that concentration is likely to increase in the future , potentially raising greater concerns about market power and the manipulation of commodity or food prices .

the report also cited an expert who said that further increases in concentration would continue to generate efficiency gains and be beneficial .

the gao report reviewed four studies of dairy processing , concluding overall that concentration in dairy processing had little or no impact on commodity or food prices .

in the studies that found concentration affected market power , the authors concluded that efficiency benefits ( lower costs that benefit all market participants ) were greater than the market power effects .

also , the report commented that the market power of dairy processors can be offset by the market power of dairy cooperatives .

the same report included reviews of three studies of regional retail milk markets that generally suggested evidence of market power .

for example , one found evidence of noncompetitive behavior ( eg , time lags for retailers response to farm price declines , and retail prices not aligned with product costs ) in nine metropolitan markets in several western states .

two other studies found evidence of some market power among retailers in the boston retail fluid milk market .

gao also reported that most experts it contacted said that concentration is likely to increase , leading to fewer retail outlets , although opinions were mixed on the likely impact of this potential trend .

a few experts told gao that large retail firms may be exerting pressure on food processors to consolidate because some retailers prefer to deal with relatively large suppliers .

in this way , concentration at the retail level can lead to further concentration at the food processor level .

another concern is how concentration affects price transparency in markets for dairy products and milk .

some policymakers and industry participants feel that concentration in the dairy industry has weakened market "discovery" of prices .

fewer buyers and sellers means that fewer transactions are made .

typically , markets work more efficiently when there are many "observable" transactions that provide sufficient information to all market participants about demand , supply , and prices .

the move within the dairy industry to a more integrated market , with closer ties between various market players such as custom contracts or other pre - arranged transactions , results in fewer trades of products on the cash or "spot" market .

in years past , these sales would account for a greater share of market transactions and provide a good measure of current prices .

the primary spot market for dairy is located at the chicago mercantile exchange ( cme ) , where cheese , butter , and nonfat dry milk are traded .

actual quantities traded are quite small , but prices determined by buyers and sellers at this market are used to establish wholesale price contracts across the country , subject to premiums and discounts for factors such as quality and transportation .

wholesale dairy product prices are then used to set monthly minimum prices by usda that milk handlers must pay for farm milk under the federal orders .

some dairy producer groups believe that the cme is an inadequate pricing mechanism because of perceptions that the market is too thinly traded , lacks transparency and sufficient oversight , and creates a highly volatile market that adversely affects producers .

the gao concluded in a 2007 study that "certain market conditions at the cme spot cheese market , including a small number of trades and a small number of traders who make a majority of trades , continue to make this market particularly susceptible to manipulation. .

however , the report also noted that if price manipulation were to occur , some industry participants claim it would be short - lived because many large participants in the cheese and dairy industry with diverse interests monitor the market and are prepared to participate in it .

reportedly , they would begin trading once prices became disconnected from underlying supply and demand conditions , potentially counteracting any attempted price manipulation .

nevertheless , some industry participants want sales volume to increase on the cme , thereby reducing the possibility of price manipulation .

the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) and the cme itself monitor activities of the spot market participants for signs of price manipulation .

in december 2008 , several dairy industry participants agreed to pay a civil monetary penalty for attempting to manipulate milk futures prices through purchases of cheese on the cme in 2004 .

while there are apparently no current proposals on how to encourage additional volume , the cme recently announced new futures and options contracts for skimmed milk powder as an international dairy risk management tool , with six worldwide delivery points .

some producers and policymakers are also interested in improving overall dairy price transparency by expanding usda's mandatory price reporting system for dairy products in terms of additional products ( eg , cheese other than cheddar ) and / or frequency of price reports .

in the 2008 farm bill , congress authorized more frequent price reporting for dairy products , subject to appropriations .

u.s. antitrust laws ( including other statutes applicable to antitrust issues ) are concerned with competition in markets and not the protection of any individual competitor .

these laws proscribe unlawful mergers and business practices in general terms , leaving courts to decide which are illegal based on the facts of each case .

the two basic antitrust laws in the united states are the sherman act and the clayton act .

both are enforceable either by the antitrust division of the department of justice ( doj ) or by the federal trade commission ( ftc ) .

private persons may allege economic injury caused by violation of either of the acts .

the acts spell out the conduct and activities prohibited in economic and market transactions .

the sherman act ( 15 u.s.c .

§§ 1-8 ) prohibits concerted activity that actually restrains trade ; an agreement among separate firms not to compete with each other would likely violate section 1 of the sherman act .

the act also prohibits unilateral conduct ; section 2 prohibits monopolization or attempted monopolization ( merely having a monopoly or being a monopolist does not , by itself , violate section 2 ) .

violation of either provision is a felony subject to fines of up to $1 million for individuals and $100 million for corporations , or imprisonment of up to 10 years , or both .

section 7 of the clayton act ( 15 u.s.c .

§ 18 ) prohibits mergers or acquisitions that may tend to "substantially" lessen competition .

in other words , while enforcement under the sherman act requires a completed act , the clayton act ( 15 u.s.c .

§§ 12 et seq. ) .

is directed at preventing activities that might restrain trade .

the "merger guidelines" issued by doj and ftc , which were promulgated to offer an indication of the ways in which mergers and acquisitions would be analyzed by the two agencies , are currently being updated to reflect the agencies' actual practices .

the clayton act also provides for "premerger notification" to allow the antitrust enforcement agencies the opportunity to examine potential mergers / acquisitions of certain - sized transactions prior to their consummation .

the premerger remedies doj / ftc might seek with respect to a proposed merger that is not approved as the transaction was presented are either filing legal action to stop the merger , or conditioning federal approval on modifications to the proposed transaction to remove perceived antitrust concerns ( eg , divestiture by one or another party of assets or operations that duplicate or overlap those of the other party or parties ) .

negotiating such changes often is seen as in the interests of all parties , because going to court can be expensive , time - consuming , and risky .

an important exemption to antitrust laws for agriculture is the capper - volstead act ( 7 u.s.c .

§§ 291-292 ) .

the act confers limited exemption from antitrust liability to farmer cooperatives , both for their existence and for joint processing and marketing of their commodities .

the act specifically states: "persons engaged in the production of agricultural products as farmers , planters , ranchmen , dairymen , nut or fruit growers may act together in associations , corporate or otherwise , with or without capital stock , in collectively processing , preparing for market , handling , and marketing in interstate and foreign commerce , such products of persons so engaged. .

from an economic and legal standpoint , determining the net effect of concentration — namely , the potentially offsetting effects of market power ( negative for some participants ) and efficiency gains ( neutral or positive for all participants ) — is complicated by the presence of many other factors that influence prices and the marketplace in general .

market power can be affected by such factors as product differentiation , ease of entering a market , or the structure of contracts between farmers and processors .

likewise , efficiency gains can stem from a variety of sources , including technology changes and business practices .

finally , economic events and government policies can certainly influence commodity prices , making it difficult to pinpoint effects of concentration on the dairy industry .

