israel withdrew from the gaza strip in 2005 , but retained control of the territory's borders .

hamas emerged as the predominant force in the territory .

in january 2006 , hamas won the palestinian authority ( pa ) legislative elections and established itself as a major actor in domestic politics .

some countries and organizations , including turkey , consider hamas a democratically elected , legitimate representative of the palestinian people .

israel considers hamas to be a terrorist group , and the u.s. state department designates it as a foreign terrorist organization ( fto ) .

hamas has criticized peace talks with israel in line with its commitment to resistance , has perpetrated terrorist attacks against israel , and has launched rockets from gaza into israel .

hamas's participation in politics heightened its rivalry with fatah , which had led all previous palestinian governments .

it also prompted the united states to end all direct foreign aid to the palestinians .

under pressure from saudi arabia , hamas and fatah formed a unity government in february 2007 , which proved to be short - lived .

in what it considered a pre - emptive act to prevent fatah from striking it first , hamas took control of the gaza strip by force in june 2007 .

this "coup" prompted pa president mahmud abbas to dissolve the hamas - led government and replace it with the current one under prime minister salam fayyad , who administers only the west bank .

hamas remains in control of gaza .

israel and the united states reestablished relations with the new pa government , and israel imposed a tight land , sea , and air blockade on the gaza strip , in what it describes as an act of self - defense to prevent arms from reaching hamas .

with the blockade , israel also hoped to turn gazans against hamas by contrasting hamas rule with the better life of palestinians in the west bank .

instead , the blockade isolated the territory and helped to strengthen hamas's control .

from december 2008 to january 2009 , israeli forces carried out a major military offensive , called operation cast lead , against hamas in order to stop rocket fire into southern israel and to weaken or overthrow hamas .

the campaign resulted in more than 1,000 palestinian deaths and the destruction of much of the gaza strip's infrastructure and many buildings .

afterwards , israel tightened the blockade and conditioned its end on the release of israeli defense forces ( idf ) sergeant gilad shalit , who had been captured in 2006 .

the blockade has severely affected the humanitarian situation in the gaza strip , although israel and its critics differ about the effects .

the israeli government maintains that there is no humanitarian crisis in gaza , and the idf issues a detailed weekly summary of humanitarian aid transferred into gaza to support that position .

the ministry of defense coordinator of government activities in the territories ( cogat ) issues a similar gaza strip merchandise and humanitarian aid report .

they provide information on the number of trucks and persons allowed to enter gaza and list the cargos of food , medicine , and other supplies .

the united nations office for the coordination of humanitarian aid ( ocha ) issues contrasting regular reports on the situation in gaza .

it summarily states that the blockade has "worsened conditions of life of palestinians , deepened poverty and food insecurity , prevented reconstruction , and increased aid dependence by destroying livelihoods and economic activity. .

it refers to the blockade as "collective punishment. .

u.s. non - governmental humanitarian aid organizations , such as care and mercy corps , report difficulties experienced in rebuilding gaza more than a year after cast lead , as well as obstacles that their workers face in trying to provide assistance because they cannot simultaneously accommodate u.s. , israeli , and hamas rules — and hamas is in control .

gazans have been unable to repair public infrastructure — hospitals , schools , electric systems , or sewage treatment plants — because israel will not permit the delivery of materials such as steel , concrete , and tiles that could be used both for rebuilding and for the manufacture of weapons or other military purposes .

in recent years , humanitarian aid groups have sent supply ships and activists to gaza .

however , israel directs them to land at its port of ashdod for inspection before delivery to gaza .

in addition to the deliveries allowed by israel , egypt intermittently opens the border crossing at rafah with gaza that it sealed in 2007 .

moreover , the smuggling of goods ( and weapons ) via a network of tunnels under the border also relieves the blockade somewhat , but smuggled goods create economic distortions by fueling a large informal economy .

israeli planes often bomb the tunnels , but these attacks have not put a stop to the activity .

on may 22 , 2010 , the mv mavi marmara , a former istanbul passenger ferry owned by the turkish humanitarian relief foundation ( more fully the foundation for human rights and freedoms and humanitarian relief ( ihh ) ) , left istanbul and , after stopping in the mediterranean port of antalya to pick up more than 500 passengers , met up at sea with five other ships south of cyprus .

ihh also sent two cargo vessels .

several ships from the free gaza movement had departed from the greek port of piraeus .

a six - ship flotilla then set sail for the gaza strip with the intent to deliver 10,000 tons of humanitarian aid and to break the israeli blockade .

in all , about 700 activists from 38 countries participated in the expedition , including approximately 11 americans , some european parliamentarians , and swedish writer henning mankell .

on may 30 , the ships refused israel's offer to unload at the port of ashdod so that their cargos could be inspected before delivery accompanied by representatives of the non - governmental organizations .

on may 31 , when the ships were in international waters between 80 and 100 miles from the israeli coast , israeli navy zodiac boats intercepted them and naval commandos took over five ships , reportedly without incident .

however , the marmara resisted and commandos rappelled from helicopters onto that ship and were confronted by some passengers / activists .

the idf released videos showing that individuals attacking the commandos were armed with iron rods , knives , broken glass bottles , and sling shots , and equipped with gas masks , night vision goggles , and life vests .

the idf says that the passengers also seized a commando's side arm .

ihh president bulent yildirim admitted that activists had used iron rods , but claimed that they threw seized israeli weapons into the sea .

it is not clear if the commandos , who had paintball guns and firearms , struck first or in response to an attack from the passengers , and each side has given a different account .

nine passengers were killed , including eight turks and a turkish - american ; 24 were injured , including one american , and 10 commandos were injured .

the dead were members of or volunteers for ihh , which hailed them as "martyrs. .

all of the ships were taken to ashdod , where the passengers were detained and the cargo was unloaded , inspected , and trucked to the kerem shalom border crossing between israel and gaza .

hamas initially refused to allow the aid to be transferred into gaza and the israeli defense ministry stored it at a military base while it consulted international organizations .

on june 15 , it was announced that the u.n. would distribute the aid .

by june 3 , israel had deported all the detainees , including all alleged perpetrators of the attacks on its military personnel , except for a few severely wounded who were repatriated a few days later .

israeli officials claim to have found molotov cocktails , detonators , wood and metal clubs , slingshots and rocks , large hammers , and sharp metal objects on the marmara , but no rockets .

the flotilla was the idea of the free gaza movement , which teamed up with the ihh .

the free gaza movement is a cyprus - based coalition or alliance formed to oppose israel's blockade of the gaza strip and is said to have roots in the international solidarity movement , a non - violent movement dedicated to ending the israeli occupation of palestinian territory .

its members had sailed to gaza several times before , and israel had let them dock there five times .

after operation cast lead , however , israel began intercepting free gaza movement ships before they reached gaza .

this year , free gaza decided to cooperate with other groups , including the ihh , in a "freedom" flotilla .

free gaza movement founder greta berlin said that former malaysian prime minister mahathir mohammed had raised €300,000 ( approximately $367,000 ) to enable the movement's participation in the convoy .

she said that it will continue to send ships to gaza , and israel peacefully intercepted another one , the mv r achel corrie , on june 5 .

ihh is a humanitarian aid organization founded in 1995 that is said to have ties to the international red cross ; holds special consultative status with the u.n. economic , social , and cultural organization ( unesco ) ; and operates in more than 100 countries .

it has provided humanitarian aid to bosnia and chechnya as well as to victims of hurricane katrina and the earthquake in haiti , among other activities .

ihh's involvement with the aid flotilla is in line with its previous aid to gaza , where it has an office .

in addition to the mavi marmara , ihh contributed two cargo ships to the may convoy .

days before the raid , an israeli think tank released a report linking ihh to radical islamist networks , including hamas and the muslim brotherhood , and to "global jihad elements" in the 1990s .

it cited a french intelligence report claim that ihh president bulent yildirim had recruited muslims for jihad in bosnia , chechnya , and afghanistan in the 1990s , but also stated that ihh engages in "legitimate humanitarian activities. .

since the incident , the think tank has released additional reports , including one alleging that ihh employed violence on the mavi marmara with premeditation .

ihh openly supports hamas , which led israel to outlaw it in 2008 .

it is not a u.s. state department - designated terrorist group , although it is part of a saudi - based , hamas - created umbrella group of muslim charities called union of good that the u.s. treasury has designated as a terrorist organization .

ihh has influential connections in turkey .

in his remarks at the marmara 's departure from istanbul , yildirim thanked the ruling justice and development party ( akp ) and two small islamist parties for their support .

ihh is believed to be close to the conservative islamist felicity party ( sp ) .

while there was no direct turkish government involvement in the aid mission , government administrators facilitated ihh's purchase of the ferry from the istanbul municipality , which akp controls , and its departure from turkish ports .

yildirim also mentioned recent instances of ihh aid workers' "martyrdom" in afghanistan and imprisonment in israel , and ihh leaders have referred to those killed on the marmara as "martyrs. .

ihh is said to have had about 40 to 50 members aboard the marmara .

while there is a multiplicity of views in israel concerning the blockade of gaza and the raid on the marmara , most israelis equate security with survival and peace .

israel's leaders appear to believe that the blockade of the gaza strip , the security barrier that israel has constructed in the west bank , the successes of the palestinian security forces and economy in the west bank , and what it views as enhanced deterrence in the aftermath of military campaigns against hezbollah in lebanon in 2006 and hamas in the gaza strip from december 2008 to january 2009 have brought about a kind of quiet , if not peace .

as of the date of the incident , no israeli had been killed in a terrorist attack or a cross - border rocket attack in israel in more than a year .

therefore , the government is unwilling to abandon a tactic ( i.e. , the blockade ) that has worked — and is still working from its perspective .

prime minister benjamin netanyahu insists that the blockade is necessary to prevent weapons from reaching gaza .

he maintains , " ( i ) t's our obligation — as well as our right in accordance to international law and to common sense — to prevent these weapons from entering by air , sea , and land. .

he cites two earlier examples of israel's seizure of ships that were discovered to be carrying arms .

the prime minister claimed that the flotilla intercepted in may intended to break the naval blockade , not to bring goods , and said israel allows goods and cargo to enter gaza .

he added , "had the blockade been breached , this flotilla would have been followed by dozens , by hundreds of ships .

the amount of weapons that can be transported aboard a ship is totally different from what we saw get through the tunnels ( beneath the gaza - egypt border ) .

hundreds of missiles and rockets , and an innumerable number of weapons can be smuggled aboard a ship. .

netanyahu argued that the consequences of israel's failure to maintain the blockade would be "an iranian port in gaza , only a few dozen kilometers from tel aviv and jerusalem. .

israeli officials refer to those killed on the marmara as "terrorists" and , as noted above , israel banned the ihh in 2008 .

as noted , several turkish political parties , including the ruling akp , supported the ihh effort to aid the palestinians .

however , the turkish government claims it was not directly involved .

foreign minister ahmet davutoglu said afterwards that the government had tried to convince the non - governmental organizations in charge of the flotilla to take the aid to israeli ports , but it was not successful .

the government also urged israel to let the ships land in gaza .

the turkish government , all political parties , and people were outraged by the israeli attack .

after the raid , mass demonstrations occurred in ankara and istanbul , and officials made repeated , dramatic , if not hyperbolic , statements about israel's actions .

the turkish foreign ministry first protested israel's use of force "in the strongest terms," charging that "israel has once again clearly demonstrated that it does not value human lives and peaceful initiatives through targeting innocent civilians. .

turkey called for an emergency meeting of the u.n. security council — on which it holds a non - permanent seat — that foreign minister davutoglu attended on may 31 .

turkey also called for nato permanent representatives in brussels and the organization of the islamic conference ( oic ) , which it chairs , to meet on the issue .

at the security council session , davutoglu called israel's actions "banditry and piracy ... murder conducted by a state ... and barbarism. .

he stated that the use of force was "inappropriate" and "disproportionate" and that international law dictates that "even in wartime , civilians are not to be attacked or harmed. .

he argued that the doctrine of self - defense could not justify the actions of israeli forces .

finally , he called on the council to condemn israel's "act of aggression," demand an urgent inquiry , and call for the punishment of all responsible authorities and persons .

prime minister recep tayyip erdogan described israel's actions as a "bloody massacre" deserving "every kind of curse. .

he said , "this insolent , irresponsible , reckless , and unfair attack by the israeli government which trampled on every kind of human value must be punished by all means. .

these quotes are characteristic of his many unsparing , trenchant remarks .

the most offensive and inflammatory may have been his blaming israel for increasingly common global comparisons of the "zionist star" ( i.e. , star of david ) with the nazi swastika .

for some time , turkish officials' anti - israeli rhetoric have gained them considerable regional influence .

erdogan is very popular with arab publics and his fervor and rage also benefit him with voters .

while the heat of the first days after the raid may dissipate , the anger will remain .

the prime minister may be feeding or exploiting it for domestic political purposes in the run - up to national elections next year , or earlier , as he cannot afford to lose votes to either more islamist parties or the reviving secular opposition .

there has been near - universal condemnation of israel's actions .

nicaragua broke off relations with israel , while ecuador and south africa recalled their ambassadors and many other governments called in israeli ambassadors to protest .

the european union reiterated its demand for an immediate opening of gaza's border crossings .

china urged israel to end the blockade and condemned the israeli raid on the ship .

russia called on israel to lift the blockade and for an impartial investigation .

u.n. secretary general ban ki - moon condemned the violence and called for a full investigation .

the u.n. human rights council voted to launch an independent , international inquiry into the events , although the united states voted against it .

on june 1 , a compromise statement by the president of the security council at the u.n. regretted "the loss of life and injuries resulting from the use of force during the israeli military operation in international waters against the convoy sailing to gaza... .

the council ... condemns those acts which resulted in the loss of at least ten civilians and many wounded. .

it called for a "prompt , impartial , credible , and transparent investigation conforming to international standards. .

in addition , the council reiterated its "grave concern at the humanitarian situation in gaza" and stressed "the need for sustained regular flow of goods and people to gaza as well as unimpeded provision and distribution of humanitarian assistance throughout gaza. .

it again called for a two - state solution to the israeli - palestinian conflict and expressed support for the ongoing proximity talks ( that are being mediated by u.s. special envoy for middle east peace george mitchell ) .

british prime minister david cameron called israel's actions "unacceptable. .

he said that britain remained committed to israel's security and urged netanyahu to respond constructively to "legitimate" international criticism and to lift the blockade .

german chancellor angela merkel expressed her "deep concern" to both netanyahu and erdogan , and her spokesman said , "every german government has always recognized and supported the right of israel to defend itself , but this right must of course be within the bounds of proportionality. .

french president nicolas sarkozy condemned "the disproportionate use of force" and said , "all possible light must be shed on the circumstances surrounding this tragedy , which highlights the urgent need for the peace process to be relaunched. .

on june 14 , the council of the european union adopted conclusions regretting the loss of life during israel's military operation in international waters against the flotilla sailing to gaza and condemned the use of violence .

it called of an immediate , full , and impartial inquiry with credible international participation .

it called for "the immediate , sustained , and unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid , commercial goods , and person to and from gaza" and "for a solution that addresses israel's legitimate security concerns. .

in response to international calls for an investigation of the incident , israel has launched several probes .

on june 7 , israel defense forces ( idf ) chief of staff lt. gen. gabi ashkenazi appointed former head of the national security council maj. gen. giora eiland ( ret. ) .

to head an external military probe that will report by july 4 .

three other retired senior officers are on the panel that is tasked with drawing operational conclusions .

it reportedly will delve into the choice of unit to carry out the operation , possible alternative tactics that might have been used to stop the flotilla , military decision - making leading up to the operation , and intelligence matters .

eiland has already defended the commandos' right to self - defense and said , " ( t ) here was a mistake , but not on the soldiers' part .

the mistake lay in underestimating who the turkish ship's passengers were. .

on june 13 , prime minister netanyahu announced the establishment of a special , independent public commission to inquire into the events of may 31 .

it will be chaired by retired supreme court justice jacob turkel , who still sits on a military appeals court panel , and , as members , shabtai rosen , a professor of international law and former diplomat , and maj. gen. amos horen ( ret .

 ) , a former president of technion ( israel institute of technology ) .

the panel includes two foreign observers: lord david trimble , the former first minister of northern ireland , and brig .

gen. ken watkin , former judge advocate general of the canadian forces .

the commission has a limited mandate .

it will investigate whether israel's blockade of the gaza strip and the enforcement of it conform to international law .

it also will consider the actions and identities of those who organized and participated in the flotilla .

military personnel will not be required to testify .

instead , the idf will provide it with summaries of the eiland investigation .

israel had coordinated its approach to the investigation with the obama administration , which had urged the inclusion of an "international component" to enhance the inquiry's credibility .

hence , the white house reaction to the israeli announcement was positive: we believe that israel , like any other nation , should be allowed to undertake an investigation into events that involve its national security .

israel has a military justice system that meets international standards and is capable of conducting a serious and credible investigation , and the structure and terms of reference of israel's proposed independent public commission can meet the standard of a prompt , impartial , credible , and transparent investigation .

but we will not prejudge the process or its outcome , and will await the conduct and findings of the investigation before drawing further conclusions .

however , turkish foreign minister davutoglu was not satisfied .

he declared , the crime was committed in international waters , not in israel's territorial waters .

a commission which will conduct an inquiry into an attack staged in international waters should be international .

we demand that an international commission should be formed under the supervision of the u.n. with participation of turkey and israel… .

we believe that israel , as a country which attacked on a civil convoy in international waters , will not conduct an impartial inquiry .

he also said that "international participation in a commission established by israel does not give it an international quality. .

finally , davutoglu stated that if an international commission were not set up , then turkey would unilaterally review its ties with israel and implement sanctions against it .

israel's state comptroller micha lindenstrauss will carry out yet another investigation into the legality of the government's decision - making as well as intelligence and public relations issues .

the probe will not duplicate that of the idf or the turkel group .

meanwhile , u.n. secretary general ban ki - moon took note of the israeli announcement , but added that his own proposal for an international inquiry remains on the table and he hoped for a positive israeli response .

turkey accepted ban's proposal and called on israel to do so .

however , israeli defense minister ehud barak said , after meeting the secretary general and providing details concerning new steps to ease the blockade ( see " the blockade ," below ) "we consider an [international probe] while organizations that support terror are trying to send more ships to gaza to be an irresponsible act. .

on june 17 , the turkish foreign ministry announced that a panel headed by the foreign and justice ministers "will assess the national and international dimensions" of the raid and prepare the ground for a possible international investigation .

s.res .

548 , introduced and referred to the committee on foreign relations on june 9 , 2010 .

to express the sense of the senate that israel has an undeniable right to self - defense , and to condemn the recent destabilizing actions by extremists aboard the mavi marmara .

h.r .

5501 , american stands with israel act , introduced and referred to the committee on foreign affairs on june 10 , 2010 .

to prohibit the united states participation on the u.n. human rights council and prohibit contributions to the u.n. for the purpose of paying for any u.n. investigation into the flotilla incident .

