on may 17 , 2010 , the senate adopted ( 94-0 ) an amendment ( s.amdt .

3986 ) , introduced by senator john cornyn , to s. 3217 , the restoring financial stability act of 2010 .

the senate passed its version of the financial regulatory reform bill ( h.r .

4173 ) , which included s.amdt .

3986 on may 20 , 2010 .

the dodd – frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ) was signed by the president on july 21 , 2010 .

the original version of the amendment , titled "restrictions on use of federal funds to finance bailouts of foreign governments," directed the u.s. executive director ( used ) at the imf to: evaluate any imf loan to a country where the public debt exceeds gdp ; determine and certify to congress whether the loan "will be" repaid ; and use the voice and vote of the united states to oppose any loans where such certification could not be made .

as written , the impact of the amendment was unclear .

large imf packages to advanced economies appeared to be the amendment's main concern .

however , its provision would apply to all such heavily - indebted countries .

thus , it might require the united states to oppose imf loans to low - income countries with substantial debts .

as of 2009 , nine countries had public debt burdens greater than their gdp .

several low income countries are near that level and might exceed it if their gdp levels shrank during the midst of a financial crisis that prompted them to seek imf aid .

the house - senate conference on the financial reform bill made changes in the original language of this amendment .

section 1500 of the new law specifies that u.s. representatives at the imf must oppose loans to such heavily indebted countries if it is "not likely" that they will be repaid .

prospective imf loans to low - income countries ( those eligible at the world bank only for loans from its concessional aid facility , the international development association ) are exempted from this requirement .

lastly , instead of requiring a treasury certification , the new law requires the treasury department to report regularly to congress about conditions in any such heavily indebted country that received an imf loan despite u.s. opposition .

these reports would discuss the debt status of the borrower country , economic conditions affecting its vulnerability and its ability to repay , and its debt management status .

the house appears to be considering legislation based on the language of the original cornyn amendment in the fy2011 state , foreign operations bill .

the house state - foreign operations appropriations subcommittee approved a draft fy2011 bill on june 30 , 2010 .

congressional quarterly reports that the draft bill includes an amendment proposed by representative granger that would require the treasury department to review every imf loan to countries where the public debt level is greater than 60% the size of the gdp .

if treasury determines that the loan cannot be repaid , the united states must oppose the loan .

on may 13 , 2010 , representative mike pence introduced h.r .

5299 , a bill titled the "european bailout protection act. .

senator jim demint introduced a companion bill , s. 3383 , on may 18 , 2010 .

sec .

2 would require the secretary of the treasury to oppose any activation of the expanded new arrangements to borrow ( nab ) facility that would fund directly or indirectly an imf loan to a member country of the european union if it or any other member of the eu has a public debt - to - gdp ratio greater than 60% .

sec .

3 would direct the secretary to instruct the used at the imf to oppose any assistance directly or indirectly to an eu member if any other eu member had a debt - to - gdp ratio above that level .

the bills state in their heading that the provisions are temporary , but no time limitation is provided .

because of the size of its share , the united states can block activation of the expanded nab facility by withholding support , if and when the expanded nab comes into effect .

this legislation would require the united states to oppose use of the nab facility for any loans to european countries that have substantial public debts .

some suggest , however , that the legislation might also have unintended effects .

for example , if this legislation had been in effect last year , the united states would have had to oppose all imf loans to post - communist countries of central and eastern europe that are members of the eu , even though most analysts agree that excessive levels of public indebtedness were not the source of their difficulties .

the bills seem to presume that the expanded nab resources will be activated on a country - by - country basis and therefore loans to european countries can be blocked while loans to other countries may be approved .

imf member countries agreed in april 2010 , however , that the expanded nab will be activated for a set period of time ( up to 6 months ) and would be used to finance any applicable loans during that period .

the united states has the power to prevent the nab from being activated but it cannot veto specific borrowers .

under this legislation , the secretary of the treasury would need to keep the nab shut indefinitely or risk the possibility that an eu country might unexpectedly seek to borrow during a period when the nab has been activated .

this legislation might also prevent the existing bilateral lines of credit provided by some countries from being folded into the expanded nab , since this would be done by reimbursing countries from the nab for money the imf had previously drawn from their bilateral credits .

bilateral credits were used to help fund the recent loan to greece .

thus , if this legislation were in effect , the united states might have to oppose activation of the nab for the purpose of reimbursing bilateral creditors for their share in the greek loan .

congress has taken no action on this legislation .

however , the granger amendment to the pending fiscal 2011 senate - foreign operations appropriations bill uses the 60% threshold .

it might also be interpreted as requiring u.s. opposition to many proposed imf loans , though the effect would not be limited solely to loans for european union countries .

on may 18 , 2010 , representative mcmorris rodgers introduced house concurrent resolution 279 ( h.con.res .

279 ) , a measure that would disapprove u.s. participation in any imf funding package for the eu , unless each eu member country complies with the eu rules on deficit spending and each had a public debt - to - gdp ratio at or below 60% .

the legislation seeks to discourage or prevent u.s. resources being used to help fund the european financial stability plan announced on may 9 , 2010 .

the legislation has been referred to the house committee on financial services and no further action has been taken .

