north korea's threatening behavior ; development of proscribed nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons capabilities ; and pursuit of a range of illicit activities , including proliferation , has posed one of the most vexing and perpetual problems in u.s. foreign policy in the post - cold war period .

since north korea's creation in 1948 , the united states has never had formal diplomatic relations with the democratic people's republic of korea ( dprk , the official name for north korea ) .

successive u.s .

administrations since the early 1990s have sought to use a combination of negotiations , aid , and bilateral and international sanctions to end north korea's weapons programs , but have not curbed the dprk's increasing capabilities .

u.s. interests in north korea encompass grave security , political , and human rights concerns .

bilateral military alliances with the republic of korea ( rok , the official name for south korea ) and japan obligate the united states to defend these allies from any attack from the north .

tens of thousands of u.s. troops based in south korea and japan , as well as tens of thousands of u.s. civilians residing in those countries , are stationed within striking range of north korean intermediate - range missiles .

north korea's rapid advances in its nuclear and long - range missile capabilities may put the u.s. homeland at risk of a dprk strike .

a conflict on the korean peninsula or the collapse of the government in pyongyang would have severe implications for the regional — if not global — economy .

negotiations and diplomacy surrounding north korea's nuclear weapons program influence u.s. relations with all the major powers in the region , particularly with china and south korea .

at the center of this complicated intersection of geostrategic interests is the task of dealing with a totalitarian regime that is unfettered by many of the norms that govern international relations .

a country of about 25 million people , north korea was founded by kim jong - un's grandfather , kim il - sung , on an official philosophy of juche ( self - reliance ) that has led it to resist outside influences , which the regime generally has seen as a potential threat to its rule .

the kim family's near - totalitarian control has helped enable north korea to resist outside influences , as well as to enter into and then break diplomatic and commercial agreements , to an extent surprising for a relatively small country surrounded by more materially powerful neighbors .

over the past 70 years , the kims have created one of the world's largest militaries , which acts as a deterrent to outside military intervention and provides pyongyang with a degree of leverage over foreign powers that has helped the regime extract diplomatic and economic concessions from its neighbors .

this same militarization , however — combined with north korea's often - provocative behavior , opaque policymaking system , and willingness to defy international conventions — also has severely stunted north korea's economic growth by minimizing its interactions with the outside world .

despite kim's apparently solid hold on power and indications that the dprk economy is strengthening , north korea's internal situation remains difficult , with most of the population deeply impoverished , and slowly increasing access to information from the outside world potentially could lead to greater public discontent with the regime if growth does not continue .

congress has both direct and indirect influence on the u.s. policy on north korea .

through sanctions legislation , congress has set the terms for u.s. restrictions on trade and engagement with the dprk , as well as on the president's freedom to ease or lift sanctions against the dprk .

congress has also passed and repeatedly reauthorized the north korean human rights act , which calls on the u.s. government to address the dprk's poor human rights record as well as accept north korean refugees .

under past nuclear agreements , congress authorized millions of dollars in energy assistance , at times putting conditions on the provision of aid if it doubted north korean compliance .

in future arrangements , if the united states agrees to provide aid in exchange for dprk steps on denuclearization , congress will need to authorize and appropriate funds , as it presumably would if the administration sought to normalize diplomatic relations as the june 2018 singapore agreement implies .

in its oversight capacity , congress has held dozens of hearings with both government and private witnesses that question north korea's capabilities , intentions , human rights record , sanctions evasion , and linkage with other governments , among other topics .

over the years , north korea's stated demands in negotiating the cessation of its weapons programs have repeatedly changed , and have at times included u.s. recognition of the regime as a nuclear weapons state and a peace treaty with the united states as a prerequisite to denuclearization .

identifying patterns in north korean behavior is challenging , as pyongyang often weaves together different approaches to the outside world .

north korean behavior has vacillated between limited cooperation , including multiple agreements on denuclearization , and overt provocations , including testing several long - range ballistic missiles over the last 20 years and six nuclear devices in 2006 , 2009 , 2013 , 2016 , and 2017 .

pyongyang's willingness to negotiate has often appeared to be driven by its internal conditions: food shortages or economic desperation can push north korea to reengage in talks , usually to extract more aid from china or , in the past , from the united states and / or south korea .

north korea has proven skillful at exploiting divisions among the other five parties and taking advantage of political transitions in washington to stall the nuclear negotiating process .

the seeming fickleness of north korea's demands has contributed to debates over the utility of negotiating with north korea .

a small group of analysts argue not only that negotiations are necessary to reduce the chances of conflict , but also that they are feasible , because kim jong - un's "real goal is economic development," in the words of one north korea - watcher .

implied in this vision is the concept of a basic bargain in which north korea would obtain a more secure relationship with the united states , a formal end to the korean war , as well as economic benefits and sanctions removal in exchange for nuclear weapons and missile dismantlement .

kim jong - un's increased emphasis on economic development in 2018 , discussed below , is often mentioned as a sign that he has made a decision to denuclearize ; without breaking free of north korea's isolation and obtaining relief from sanctions , it will be difficult for him to achieve his economic goals .

many analysts believe , however , that the north korean regime , regardless of inducements , will not voluntarily give up its nuclear weapons capability .

after years of observing north korea's negotiating behavior , many analysts now believe that pyongyang's demands are tactical moves and that north korea sees having a nuclear capability as essential to regime survival and has no intention of giving up its nuclear weapons in exchange for aid and recognition .

pyongyang's frequent statements of its determination to maintain its nuclear weapons program , also have led analysts to doubt the idea that the pledge at the singapore summit has dramatically shifted its intentions .

in april 2010 , for instance , north korea reiterated its demand to be recognized as an official nuclear weapons state and said it would increase and modernize its nuclear deterrent .

on april 13 , 2012 , the same day as a failed rocket launch , the north korean constitution was revised to describe the country as a "nuclear - armed nation. .

in march 2013 , north korea declared that its nuclear weapons are "not a bargaining chip" and would not be relinquished even for "billions of dollars. .

following the successful test of the hwasong - 15 intercontinental ballistic missile in november 2017 , official north korean news outlets announced that the dprk had "finally realized the great historic cause of completing the state nuclear force. .

north korea has also suggested that it will not relinquish its nuclear stockpile until all nuclear weapons are eliminated worldwide .

the multinational military intervention in 2011 in libya , which abandoned its nuclear weapon program in exchange for the removal of sanctions , may have had the undesirable side effect of reinforcing the perceived value of nuclear arms for regime security .

north korean leaders may believe that , without the security guarantee of nuclear weapons , they are vulnerable to overthrow by a rebellious uprising aided by outside military intervention .

some observers assert that the 2018 singapore summit conferred a degree of legitimacy on north korea as a nuclear state , in that the u.s. president sat down with kim as he would any other world leader and agreed to the "denuclearization of the korean peninsula. .

the summit may have satisfied some of north korea's past demands: the cancelation of u.s. - rok military exercises , the easing of sanctions implementation , and the prestige conferred by meeting with other heads of state , including the president of the united states .

prior to the trump administration's efforts , the united states engaged in four major sets of formal nuclear and missile negotiations with north korea: the bilateral agreed framework ( 1994-2002 ) , the bilateral missile negotiations ( 1996-2000 ) , the multilateral six - party talks ( 2003-2009 ) , and the bilateral leap day deal ( 2012 ) .

in general , the proposed formula for these negotiations has been for north korea to halt , and in some cases disable , its nuclear or missile programs in return for economic and diplomatic concessions .

the u.s. policy of putting economic and diplomatic pressure on north korea depends heavily on china .

in addition to being north korea's largest trading partner by far — accounting for over 90% of north korea's total trade since 2015 — china also provides food and energy aid that is an essential lifeline for the regime and is one of pyongyang's few diplomatic partners .

although not supportive of pyongyang's nuclear goals — as seen in its voting for increasingly restrictive unsc sanctions — china's overriding priority appears to be to maintain stability on the korean peninsula , and therefore to prevent the collapse of north korea .

analysts assess that beijing fears the destabilizing effects of a humanitarian crisis , significant refugee flows over its borders , and the uncertainty of how other nations , particularly the united states , would assert themselves on the peninsula in the event of a power vacuum .

china also sees strategic value in having north korea as a "buffer" between china and democratic , u.s. - allied south korea .

beijing often has been an obstacle to u.s. policy goals with regard to north korea .

imposing harsher punishments on north korea in international fora , such as the u.n. , is frequently hindered by china's seat on the unsc , where beijing often waters down u.s. efforts to punish north korea .

chinese companies often have been found to violate sanctions against north korea , and the chinese government's enforcement of sanctions has been uneven , with authorities often turning a blind eye to violations .

however , according to a number of indicators china in 2017 significantly increased its enforcement of unsc sanctions , perhaps to convince the united states not to follow through on the trump administration's threats of a military strike against north korea .

additionally , chinese trade with and aid to north korea is presumed to be a fraction of what it might be if beijing decided to fully support north korea , likely due in part to beijing's desire to appear to the international community as a responsible leader instead of an enabler of a rogue regime .

this assumption is a key factor driving the u.s. and south korean approach , which seeks to avoid pushing china to a place where it feels compelled to provide more diplomatic and economic assistance to north korea .

relations between beijing and pyongyang suffered after kim jong - un's rise to power in 2011 .

beijing appeared displeased with kim jong - un , particularly after he executed his uncle jang song - taek in 2013 , who had been the chief interlocutor with china .

chinese president xi jinping had several summits with former south korean president park geun - hye , as well as with current president moon , without meeting with kim .

in addition , an increasing number of chinese academics called for a reappraisal of china's friendly ties with north korea , citing the material and reputational costs to china .

chinese public opinion also seemed to turn against north korea: two - thirds of 8,000 respondents on a weibo ( a twitter - like chinese social media platform ) poll indicated that they favored a u.s. preemptive airstrike on north korea's nuclear sites .

content ridiculing pyongyang's leadership was regularly deleted by state censors .

in 2017 , china agreed to increasingly stringent unsc sanctions resolutions and to an unprecedented degree appeared to be implementing these measures .

trump and kim's aggressive pursuit of a diplomatic opening in 2018 appeared to restore some of the previous closeness of the north korea - china relationship .

after trump agreed to meet the north korean leader , kim traveled outside north korea for the first time to beijing , a move that suggested he was seeking to reaffirm a close relationship with china ahead of the meeting .

 ( he traveled to china again in may. ) .

having achieved some results that china likely perceives as victories — the deescalation of hostilities , the turn to diplomacy and , notably , the cancelation of u.s. - south korean military exercises that have long irked beijing — kim likely has new goodwill and leverage in his relationship with beijing .

although the nuclear issue has dominated interactions with pyongyang , past administrations have drawn attention to north korea's abysmal human rights record .

congress has passed bills and held multiple hearings on the topic .

the plight of most north koreans is dire .

the state department's annual human rights reports and reports from private organizations have portrayed a little - changing pattern of extreme human rights abuses by the north korean regime over many years .

the reports stress a total denial of political , civil , and religious liberties and say that no dissent or criticism of leadership is allowed .

freedoms of speech , the press , and assembly do not exist .

there is no independent judiciary , and citizens do not have the right to choose their own government .

reports also document the extensive ideological indoctrination of north korean citizens .

severe physical abuse is meted out to citizens who violate laws and restrictions .

multiple reports have described a system of prison camps ( kwanliso ) , often portrayed as concentration camps , that house roughly 100,000 political prisoners , including family members who are considered guilty by association .

there reportedly are four kwanliso camps in the country plus one complex that remains as a holdover from an earlier camp that was closed .

each camp contains 5,000 to 50,000 political prisoners .

reports from survivors and escapees from the camps indicate that conditions are extremely harsh and that many do not survive .

according to a commission of inquiry ( coi ) established in 2013 by the united nations human rights council to investigate north korea's human rights violations , close to 400,000 prisoners perished while in captivity during the 31-year period .

reports cite starvation , disease , executions , and torture of prisoners as a frequent practice .

 ( conditions for nonpolitical prisoners in local - level "collection centers" and "labor training centers" are hardly better. ) .

the number of political prisoners in north korea appears to have declined in recent years , likely as a result of high mortality rates in the camps .

crs in focus if10467 , possible u.s. policy approaches to north korea , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs insight in10916 , the june 12 trump - kim jong - un summit , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r45033 , nuclear negotiations with north korea , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] crs report r45169 , a peace treaty with north korea ? .

 , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs in focus if10472 , north korea's nuclear and ballistic missile programs , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r44994 , the north korean nuclear challenge: military options and issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41438 , north korea: legislative basis for u.s. economic sanctions , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r44912 , north korean cyber capabilities: in brief , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report r40095 , foreign assistance to north korea , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r41481 , u.s. - south korea relations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] crs report r43116 , ballistic missile defense in the asia - pacific region: cooperation and opposition , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] crs report rl34256 , north korea's nuclear weapons: technical issues , by [author name scrubbed .

