the oil pollution act of 1990 ( opa ) establishes a framework that addresses the liability of responsible parties in connection with the discharge of oil into the navigable waters of the united states , adjoining shorelines , or the exclusive economic zone .

among other provisions , opa limits certain liabilities of a responsible party in connection with discharges of oil into such areas .

opa replaced the liability limitations established in clean water act section 311 with much higher ones and expanded the class of persons authorized to recover removal costs from the responsible party to "any person" who has incurred removal costs in connection with a discharge of oil into covered waters .

under the clean water act , only the federal government could recover removal costs from the responsible party .

additionally , opa created categories of damages for which the responsible party would be liable , within specified limits , based on the type of vessel or facility involved in the oil spill incident .

the following sections of this report will discuss liability under opa for removal costs and damages , and the basic procedure for recovering removal costs and damages from the oil spill liability trust fund in the event that the responsible party fails to pay such claims .

under opa , a responsible party is strictly and jointly and severally liable for removal costs plus damages in connection with a discharge of oil into covered waters .

a responsible party's liability for damages , however , is limited under opa .

the oil pollution act of 1990 also states that additional liability may be imposed upon a responsible party under state law .

although the oil spill liability trust fund is not the focus of this report , the purpose and operation of the fund should be briefly explained .

the oil spill liability trust fund is a federally administered trust fund that may be used to pay costs related to federal and state oil spill removal activities ; costs incurred by federal , state , and indian tribe trustees for natural resource damage assessments ; and unpaid damages claims .

the fund is financed by a per - barrel tax on crude oil received at united states refineries , and on petroleum products imported into the united states for consumption .

the maximum amount of money that may be withdrawn from the fund is $1 billion per incident .

such money may be used to pay claims up to and beyond the responsible party's liability limit , if any .

the united states attorney general , however , may commence an action on behalf of the fund , against a responsible party , to recover any money paid by the fund to any claimant pursuant to opa , up to the responsible party's liability limit .

appendix a .

oil pollution act of 1990: definitions the oil pollution act of 1990 defines the key terms used throughout the act .

for the reader's convenience , this appendix provides definitions of key terms as they appear in 33 u.s.c .

§ 2701 .

definitions for the purposes of this act , the term — ( 1 ) " act of god " means an unanticipated grave natural disaster or other natural phenomenon of an exceptional , inevitable , and irresistible character the effects of which could not have been prevented or avoided by the exercise of due care or foresight ; ( 2 ) " barrel " means 42 united states gallons at 60 degrees fahrenheit ; ( 3 ) " claim " means a request , made in writing for a sum certain , for compensation for damages or removal costs resulting from an incident ; ( 4 ) " claimant " means any person or government who presents a claim for compensation under this title ; ( 5 ) " damages " means damages specified in section 1002 ( b ) of this act [33 u.s.c .

§ 2702 ( b ) ] , and includes the cost of assessing these damages ; ( 6 ) " deepwater port " is a facility licensed under the deepwater port act of 1974 ( 33 u.s.c .

§ 1501-1524 ) ; ( 7 ) " discharge " means any emission ( other than natural seepage ) , intentional or unintentional , and includes , but is not limited to , spilling , leaking , pumping , pouring , emitting , emptying , or dumping ; ( 8 ) " exclusive economic zone " means the zone established by presidential proclamation numbered 5030 , dated march 10 , 1983 , including the ocean waters of the areas referred to as "eastern special areas" in article 3 ( 1 ) of the agreement between the united states of america and the union of soviet socialist republics on the maritime boundary , signed june 1 , 1990 ; ( 9 ) " facility " means any structure , group of structures , equipment , or device ( other than a vessel ) which is used for one or more of the following purposes: exploring for , drilling for , producing , storing , handling , transferring , processing , or transporting oil .

this term includes any motor vehicle , rolling stock , or pipeline used for one or more of these purposes ; ( 10 ) " foreign offshore unit " means a facility which is located , in whole or in part , in the territorial sea or on the continental shelf of a foreign country and which is or was used for one or more of the following purposes: exploring for , drilling for , producing , storing , handling , transferring , processing , or transporting oil produced from the seabed beneath the foreign country's territorial sea or from the foreign country's continental shelf ; ( 11 ) " fund " means the oil spill liability trust fund , established by section 9509 of the internal revenue code of 1986 ( 26 u.s.c .

§ 9509 ) ; ( 12 ) " gross ton " has the meaning given that term by the secretary under part j of title 46 , united states code [46 u.s.c .

§§ 14101 et seq .

] ; ( 13 ) " guarantor " means any person , other than the responsible party , who provides evidence of financial responsibility for a responsible party under this act ; ( 14 ) " incident " means any occurrence or series of occurrences having the same origin , involving one or more vessels , facilities , or any combination thereof , resulting in the discharge or substantial threat of discharge of oil ; ( 15 ) " indian tribe " means any indian tribe , band , nation , or other organized group or community , but not including any alaska native regional or village corporation , which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the united states to indians because of their status as indians and has governmental authority over lands belonging to or controlled by the tribe ; ( 16 ) " lessee " means a person holding a leasehold interest in an oil or gas lease on lands beneath navigable waters ( as that term is defined in section 2 ( a ) of the submerged lands act ( 43 u.s.c .

§ 1301 ( a ) ) ) or on submerged lands of the outer continental shelf , granted or maintained under applicable state law or the outer continental shelf lands act ( 43 u.s.c .

§ 1331 et seq .

 ) ; ( 17 ) " liable " or " liability " shall be construed to be the standard of liability which obtains under section 311 of the federal water pollution control act ( 33 u.s.c .

§ 1321 ) ; ( 18 ) " mobile offshore drilling unit " means a vessel ( other than a self - elevating lift vessel ) capable of use as an offshore facility ; ( 19 ) " national contingency plan " means the national contingency plan prepared and published under section 311 ( d ) of the federal water pollution control act [33 uscs § 1321 ( d ) ] , as amended by this act , or revised under section 105 of the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 9605 ) ; ( 20 ) " natural resources " includes land , fish , wildlife , biota , air , water , ground water , drinking water supplies , and other such resources belonging to , managed by , held in trust by , appertaining to , or otherwise controlled by the united states ( including the resources of the exclusive economic zone ) , any state or local government or indian tribe , or any foreign government ; ( 21 ) " navigable waters " means the waters of the united states , including the territorial sea ; ( 22 ) " offshore facility " means any facility of any kind located in , on , or under any of the navigable waters of the united states , and any facility of any kind which is subject to the jurisdiction of the united states and is located in , on , or under any other waters , other than a vessel or a public vessel ; ( 23 ) " oil " means oil of any kind or in any form , including petroleum , fuel oil , sludge , oil refuse , and oil mixed with wastes other than dredged spoil , but does not include any substance which is specifically listed or designated as a hazardous substance under subparagraphs ( a ) through ( f ) of section 101 ( 14 ) of the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 9601 ) and which is subject to the provisions of that act ; ( 24 ) " onshore facility " means any facility ( including , but not limited to , motor vehicles and rolling stock ) of any kind located in , on , or under , any land within the united states other than submerged land ; ( 25 ) the term " outer continental shelf facility " means an offshore facility which is located , in whole or in part , on the outer continental shelf and is or was used for one or more of the following purposes: exploring for , drilling for , producing , storing , handling , transferring , processing , or transporting oil produced from the outer continental shelf ; ( 26 ) " owner or operator " — ( a ) means — ( i ) in the case of a vessel , any person owning , operating , or chartering by demise , the vessel ; ( ii ) in the case of an onshore or offshore facility , any person owning or operating such facility ; ( iii ) in the case of any abandoned offshore facility , the person who owned or operated such facility immediately prior to such abandonment ; ( iv ) in the case of any facility , title or control of which was conveyed due to bankruptcy , foreclosure , tax delinquency , abandonment , or similar means to a unit of state or local government , any person who owned , operated , or otherwise controlled activities at such facility immediately beforehand ; ( v ) notwithstanding subparagraph ( b ) ( i ) , and in the same manner and to the same extent , both procedurally and substantively , as any nongovernmental entity , including for purposes of liability under section 1002 , any state or local government that has caused or contributed to a discharge or substantial threat of a discharge of oil from a vessel or facility ownership or control of which was acquired involuntarily through — ( i ) seizure or otherwise in connection with law enforcement activity ; ( ii ) bankruptcy ; ( iii ) tax delinquency ; ( iv ) abandonment ; or ( v ) other circumstances in which the government involuntarily acquires title by virtue of its function as sovereign ; ( vi ) notwithstanding subparagraph ( b ) ( ii ) , a person that is a lender and that holds indicia of ownership primarily to protect a security interest in a vessel or facility if , while the borrower is still in possession of the vessel or facility encumbered by the security interest , the person — ( i ) exercises decision making control over the environmental compliance related to the vessel or facility , such that the person has undertaken responsibility for oil handling or disposal practices related to the vessel or facility ; or ( ii ) exercises control at a level comparable to that of a manager of the vessel or facility , such that the person has assumed or manifested responsibility — ( aa ) for the overall management of the vessel or facility encompassing day - to - day decision making with respect to environmental compliance ; or ( bb ) over all or substantially all of the operational functions ( as distinguished from financial or administrative functions ) of the vessel or facility other than the function of environmental compliance ; and ( b ) does not include — ( i ) a unit of state or local government that acquired ownership or control of a vessel or facility involuntarily through — ( i ) seizure or otherwise in connection with law enforcement activity ; ( ii ) bankruptcy ; ( iii ) tax delinquency ; ( iv ) abandonment ; or ( v ) other circumstances in which the government involuntarily acquires title by virtue of its function as sovereign ; ( ii ) a person that is a lender that does not participate in management of a vessel or facility , but holds indicia of ownership primarily to protect the security interest of the person in the vessel or facility ; or ( iii ) a person that is a lender that did not participate in management of a vessel or facility prior to foreclosure , notwithstanding that the person — ( i ) forecloses on the vessel or facility ; and ( ii ) after foreclosure , sells , re - leases ( in the case of a lease finance transaction ) , or liquidates the vessel or facility , maintains business activities , winds up operations , undertakes a removal action under section 311 ( c ) of the federal water pollution control act ( 33 u.s.c .

§ 1321 ( c ) ) or under the direction of an on - scene coordinator appointed under the national contingency plan , with respect to the vessel or facility , or takes any other measure to preserve , protect , or prepare the vessel or facility prior to sale or disposition , if the person seeks to sell , re - lease ( in the case of a lease finance transaction ) , or otherwise divest the person of the vessel or facility at the earliest practicable , commercially reasonable time , on commercially reasonable terms , taking into account market conditions and legal and regulatory requirements ; ( 27 ) " person " means an individual , corporation , partnership , association , state , municipality , commission , or political subdivision of a state , or any interstate body ; ( 28 ) " permittee " means a person holding an authorization , license , or permit for geological exploration issued under section 11 of the outer continental shelf lands act ( 43 u.s.c .

§ 1340 ) or applicable state law ; ( 29 ) " public vessel " means a vessel owned or bareboat chartered and operated by the united states , or by a state or political subdivision thereof , or by a foreign nation , except when the vessel is engaged in commerce ; ( 30 ) " remove " or " removal " means containment and removal of oil or a hazardous substance from water and shorelines or the taking of other actions as may be necessary to minimize or mitigate damage to the public health or welfare , including , but not limited to , fish , shellfish , wildlife , and public and private property , shorelines , and beaches ; ( 31 ) " removal costs " means the costs of removal that are incurred after a discharge of oil has occurred or , in any case in which there is a substantial threat of a discharge of oil , the costs to prevent , minimize , or mitigate oil pollution from such an incident ; ( 32 ) " responsible party " means the following: ( a ) vessels .

in the case of a vessel , any person owning , operating , or demise chartering the vessel .

 ( b ) onshore facilities .

in the case of an onshore facility ( other than a pipeline ) , any person owning or operating the facility , except a federal agency , state , municipality , commission , or political subdivision of a state , or any interstate body , that as the owner transfers possession and right to use the property to another person by lease , assignment , or permit .

 ( c ) offshore facilities .

in the case of an offshore facility ( other than a pipeline or a deepwater port licensed under the deepwater port act of 1974 ( 33 u.s.c .

§ 1501 et seq .

 ) ) , the lessee or permittee of the area in which the facility is located or the holder of a right of use and easement granted under applicable state law or the outer continental shelf lands act ( 43 u.s.c .

§§ 1301-1356 ) for the area in which the facility is located ( if the holder is a different person than the lessee or permittee ) , except a federal agency , state , municipality , commission , or political subdivision of a state , or any interstate body , that as owner transfers possession and right to use the property to another person by lease , assignment , or permit .

 ( d ) deepwater ports .

in the case of a deepwater port licensed under the deepwater port act of 1974 ( 33 u.s.c .

§§ 1501-1524 ) , the licensee .

 ( e ) pipelines .

in the case of a pipeline , any person owning or operating the pipeline .

 ( f ) abandonment .

in the case of an abandoned vessel , onshore facility , deepwater port , pipeline , or offshore facility , the persons who would have been responsible parties immediately prior to the abandonment of the vessel or facility .

 ( 33 ) " secretary " means the secretary of the department in which the coast guard is operating ; ( 34 ) " tank vessel " means a vessel that is constructed or adapted to carry , or that carries , oil or hazardous material in bulk as cargo or cargo residue , and that — ( a ) is a vessel of the united states ; ( b ) operates on the navigable waters ; or ( c ) transfers oil or hazardous material in a place subject to the jurisdiction of the united states ; ( 35 ) " territorial seas " means the belt of the seas measured from the line of ordinary low water along that portion of the coast which is in direct contact with the open sea and the line marking the seaward limit of inland waters , and extending seaward a distance of 3 miles ; ( 36 ) " united states " and " state " mean the several states of the united states , the district of columbia , the commonwealth of puerto rico , guam , american samoa , the united states virgin islands , the commonwealth of the northern marianas , and any other territory or possession of the united states ; ( 37 ) " vessel " means every description of watercraft or other artificial contrivance used , or capable of being used , as a means of transportation on water , other than a public vessel ; ( 38 ) " participate in management " — ( a ) ( i ) means actually participating in the management or operational affairs of a vessel or facility ; and ( ii ) does not include merely having the capacity to influence , or the unexercised right to control , vessel or facility operations ; and ( b ) does not include — ( i ) performing an act or failing to act prior to the time at which a security interest is created in a vessel or facility ; ( ii ) holding a security interest or abandoning or releasing a security interest ; ( iii ) including in the terms of an extension of credit , or in a contract or security agreement relating to the extension , a covenant , warranty , or other term or condition that relates to environmental compliance ; ( iv ) monitoring or enforcing the terms and conditions of the extension of credit or security interest ; ( v ) monitoring or undertaking one or more inspections of the vessel or facility ; ( vi ) requiring a removal action or other lawful means of addressing a discharge or substantial threat of a discharge of oil in connection with the vessel or facility prior to , during , or on the expiration of the term of the extension of credit ; ( vii ) providing financial or other advice or counseling in an effort to mitigate , prevent , or cure default or diminution in the value of the vessel or facility ; ( viii ) restructuring , renegotiating , or otherwise agreeing to alter the terms and conditions of the extension of credit or security interest , exercising forbearance ; ( ix ) exercising other remedies that may be available under applicable law for the breach of a term or condition of the extension of credit or security agreement ; or ( x ) conducting a removal action under 311 ( c ) of the federal water pollution control act ( 33 u.s.c .

§ 1321 ( c ) ) or under the direction of an on - scene coordinator appointed under the national contingency plan , if such actions do not rise to the level of participating in management under subparagraph ( a ) of this paragraph and paragraph ( 26 ) ( a ) ( vi ) ; ( 39 ) " extension of credit " has the meaning provided in section 101 ( 20 ) ( g ) ( i ) of the comprehensive environmental response , compensation and liability act of 1980 ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 9601 ( 20 ) ( g ) ( i ) ) ; ( 40 ) " financial or administrative function " has the meaning provided in section 101 ( 20 ) ( g ) ( ii ) of the comprehensive environmental response , compensation and liability act of 1980 ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 9601 ( 20 ) ( g ) ( ii ) ) ; ( 41 ) " foreclosure " and " foreclose " each has the meaning provided in section 101 ( 20 ) ( g ) ( iii ) of the comprehensive environmental response , compensation and liability act of 1980 ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 9601 ( 20 ) ( g ) ( iii ) ) ; ( 42 ) " lender " has the meaning provided in section 101 ( 20 ) ( g ) ( iv ) of the comprehensive environmental response , compensation and liability act of 1980 ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 9601 ( 20 ) ( g ) ( iv ) ) ; ( 43 ) " operational function " has the meaning provided in section 101 ( 20 ) ( g ) ( v ) of the comprehensive environmental response , compensation and liability act of 1980 ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 9601 ( 20 ) ( g ) ( v ) ) ; and ( 44 ) " security interest " has the meaning provided in section 101 ( 20 ) ( g ) ( vi ) of the comprehensive environmental response , compensation and liability act of 1980 ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 9601 ( 20 ) ( g ) ( vi ) ) .

appendix b .

oil pollution act of 1990: limitations on liability the oil pollution act of 1990 establishes limitations on the liability of responsible parties for certain damages caused by a discharge of oil into the navigable waters of the united states .

for the reader's convenience , this appendix provides the liability limitation language as it appears in 33 u.s.c .

§ 2704 .

limits on liability ( a ) general rule .

except as otherwise provided in this section , the total of the liability of a responsible party under section 1002 [33 uscs § 2702] and any removal costs incurred by , or on behalf of , the responsible party , with respect to each incident shall not exceed — ( 1 ) for a tank vessel , the greater of — ( a ) with respect to a single - hull vessel , including a single - hull vessel fitted with double sides only or a double bottom only , $3,000 per gross ton ; ( b ) with respect to a vessel other than a vessel referred to in subparagraph ( a ) , $1,900 per gross ton ; or ( c ) ( i ) with respect to a vessel greater than 3,000 gross tons that is — ( i ) a vessel described in subparagraph ( a ) , $22,000,000 ; or ( ii ) a vessel described in subparagraph ( b ) , $16,000,000 ; or ( ii ) with respect to a vessel of 3,000 gross tons or less that is — ( i ) a vessel described in subparagraph ( a ) , $6,000,000 ; or ( ii ) a vessel described in subparagraph ( b ) , $4,000,000 ; ( 2 ) for any other vessel , $950 per gross ton or $800,000 , whichever is greater ; ( 3 ) for an offshore facility except a deepwater port , the total of all removal costs plus $75,000,000 ; and ( 4 ) for any onshore facility and a deepwater port , $350,000,000 .

 ( b ) division of liability for mobile offshore drilling units .

 ( 1 ) treated first as tank vessel .

for purposes of determining the responsible party and applying this act and except as provided in paragraph ( 2 ) , a mobile offshore drilling unit which is being used as an offshore facility is deemed to be a tank vessel with respect to the discharge , or the substantial threat of a discharge , of oil on or above the surface of the water .

 ( 2 ) treated as facility for excess liability .

to the extent that removal costs and damages from any incident described in paragraph ( 1 ) exceed the amount for which a responsible party is liable ( as that amount may be limited under subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) ) , the mobile offshore drilling unit is deemed to be an offshore facility .

for purposes of applying subsection ( a ) ( 3 ) , the amount specified in that subsection shall be reduced by the amount for which the responsible party is liable under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( c ) exceptions .

 ( 1 ) acts of responsible party .

subsection ( a ) does not apply if the incident was proximately caused by — ( a ) gross negligence or willful misconduct of , or ( b ) the violation of an applicable federal safety , construction , or operating regulation by , the responsible party , an agent or employee of the responsible party , or a person acting pursuant to a contractual relationship with the responsible party ( except where the sole contractual arrangement arises in connection with carriage by a common carrier by rail ) .

 ( 2 ) failure or refusal of responsible party .

subsection ( a ) does not apply if the responsible party fails or refuses — ( a ) to report the incident as required by law and the responsible party knows or has reason to know of the incident ; ( b ) to provide all reasonable cooperation and assistance requested by a responsible official in connection with removal activities ; or ( c ) without sufficient cause , to comply with an order issued under subsection ( c ) or ( e ) of section 311 of the federal water pollution control act ( 33 u.s.c .

§ 1321 ) , as amended by this act , or the intervention on the high seas act ( 33 u.s.c .

§ 1471 et seq . ) .

 ( 3 ) ocs facility or vessel .

notwithstanding the limitations established under subsection ( a ) and the defenses of section 1003 [33 u.s.c .

§ 2703] , all removal costs incurred by the united states government or any state or local official or agency in connection with a discharge or substantial threat of a discharge of oil from any outer continental shelf facility or a vessel carrying oil as cargo from such a facility shall be borne by the owner or operator of such facility or vessel .

 ( 4 ) certain tank vessels .

subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) shall not apply to — ( a ) a tank vessel on which the only oil carried as cargo is an animal fat or vegetable oil , as those terms are used in section 2 of the edible oil regulatory reform act [33 u.s.c .

§ 2720] ; and ( b ) a tank vessel that is designated in its certificate of inspection as an oil spill response vessel ( as that term is defined in section 2101 of title 46 , united states code ) and that is used solely for removal .

 ( d ) adjusting limits of liability .

 ( 1 ) onshore facilities .

subject to paragraph ( 2 ) , the president may establish by regulation , with respect to any class or category of onshore facility , a limit of liability under this section of less than $350,000,000 , but not less than $8,000,000 , taking into account size , storage capacity , oil throughput , proximity to sensitive areas , type of oil handled , history of discharges , and other factors relevant to risks posed by the class or category of facility .

 ( 2 ) deepwater ports and associated vessels .

 ( a ) study .

the secretary shall conduct a study of the relative operational and environmental risks posed by the transportation of oil by vessel to deepwater ports ( as defined in section 3 of the deepwater port act of 1974 ( 33 u.s.c .

§ 1502 ) ) versus the transportation of oil by vessel to other ports .

the study shall include a review and analysis of offshore lightering practices used in connection with that transportation , an analysis of the volume of oil transported by vessel using those practices , and an analysis of the frequency and volume of oil discharges which occur in connection with the use of those practices .

 ( b ) report .

not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this act [enacted aug. 18 , 1990] , the secretary shall submit to the congress a report on the results of the study conducted under subparagraph ( a ) .

 ( c ) rulemaking proceeding .

if the secretary determines , based on the results of the study conducted under [this] subparagraph ( a ) , that the use of deepwater ports in connection with the transportation of oil by vessel results in a lower operational or environmental risk than the use of other ports , the secretary shall initiate , not later than the 180 th day following the date of submission of the report to the congress under subparagraph ( b ) , a rulemaking proceeding to lower the limits of liability under this section for deepwater ports as the secretary determines appropriate .

the secretary may establish a limit of liability of less than $350,000,000 , but not less than $50,000,000 , in accordance with paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 3 ) periodic reports .

the president shall , within 6 months after the date of the enactment of this act [enacted aug. 18 , 1990] , and from time to time thereafter , report to the congress on the desirability of adjusting the limits of liability specified in subsection ( a ) .

 ( 4 ) adjustment to reflect consumer price index .

the president , by regulations issued not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of the delaware river protection act of 2006 [enacted july 11 , 2006] and not less than every 3 years thereafter , shall adjust the limits on liability specified in subsection ( a ) to reflect significant increases in the consumer price index .

