the economic growth and tax relief act of 2001 ( egtrra ; p.l .

107-16 ) , among other tax cuts , provided for a gradual reduction in the estate tax .

the estate tax applies to wealth transferred at death and had , at that time , a unified exemption for both lifetime gifts and the estate of $675,000 .

under egtrra , the estate tax exemption rose from $675,000 in 2001 to $3.5 million in 2009 , and the top tax rate fell from 55% to 45% .

although combined estate and gift tax rates are graduated , the exemption is effectively in the form of a credit that eliminates tax due at lower rates so there is a flat rate on taxable assets under 2009 law .

the gift tax exemption was , however , restricted to $1 million .

for 2010 , egtrra scheduled the elimination of the estate tax , although it retained the gift tax and its $1 million exemption .

egtrra also provided for a carryover of basis for assets inherited at death , so that , in contrast with prior law , heirs who sold assets would have to pay tax on gains accrued during the decedent's lifetime .

this provision has a $1.3 million exemption for gain ( plus $3 million for a spouse ) .

as with other provisions of egtrra , the tax revisions expire in 2011 , returning the tax provisions to their pre - egtrra levels .

the exemption would revert to $1 million ( a value that had already been scheduled for pre - egtrra law ) and the rate to 55% ( with some graduated rates ) .

the carryover basis provision effective in 2010 would be eliminated ( so that heirs will not be taxed on gain accumulated during the decedent's life when they inherit assets ) .

during debate on the estate tax , most agreed that the 2010 provisions would not be continued , and , indeed , could be repealed retroactively .

president obama proposed a permanent extension of the 2009 rules ( a $3.5 million exemption and a 45% tax rate ) , and the house provided for that permanent extension on december 3 , 2009 ( h.r .

4154 ) .

the senate democratic leadership has indicated a plan to retroactively reinstate the 2009 rules for 2010 and beyond .

senate minority leader mcconnell proposed an alternative of a 35% tax rate and a $5 million exemption .

a similar proposal for a $5 million exemption and a 35% rate , which also includes the ability of the surviving spouse to inherit any unused exemption of the decedent , is often referred to as lincoln - kyl after the two senators who have supported it .

proposals have also been to begin with the $3.5 million / 45% rate and phase in the $5 million / 55% rate .

others have argued for a permanent estate tax repeal .

at the end of 2010 , a temporary extension for two years , with a $5 million exemption , a 35% rate , and inheritance of unused spousal exemptions was enacted in p.l .

111-312 .

at the end of 2012 , absent legislation , the provisions will revert to the pre - egtrra rules ( $1 million exemption , 55% top rate ) .

to address abuses and tax avoidance , president obama has included proposals in his 2011 budget outline .

one of these proposals , to reform the grantor retained annuity trust ( grat ) , is included in h.r .

4849 .

this provision is discussed in detail below .

after a brief description of the estate and gift tax and of options , this report compares the alternatives , focusing largely on a $1 million exemption and 55% rate , a $3.5 million exemption and a 45% rate , and a $5 million exemption and a 35% rate .

several policy effects and issues are analyzed: the share of decedents subject to tax ; revenue effects ; distributional effects ; and effects on savings , charitable contributions , and compliance and administration .

the report also considers other aspects of the proposals , such as whether the exemptions are indexed for inflation , a proposed inheritance of the exemption for spouses ( which applies under the new rules to 2011 and 2012 ) , and proposals to address perceived abuses .

this section describes the estate tax as it existed in 2009 and will exist in future years , absent legislative change .

for 2010 , there is no estate tax , although the gift tax remains and there is a tax on gains accumulated during the decedent's lifetime when assets are sold by heirs ( with a $1.3 million exemption plus $3 million for a spouse ) .

an election can be made for 2010 to apply either 2010 or 2011 rules .

because the exemption from gains is smaller than the overall estate tax exemption for 2011 , some estates would have lower tax liability by electing the 2011 rules .

the principal components of any policy that continues the estate tax are the amount of the exemption and the tax rate .

as indicated earlier , the exemption in 2009 was $3.5 million , the exemption is scheduled at $5 million for 2011 and 2012 , and in 2013 the estate tax will revert to an exemption of $1 million , absent a change in the statute .

thus , while any level of exemption might be considered , the two most common levels mentioned are $3.5 million and $5 million .

the level of the exemption affects not only the revenue but the number of estates that are subject to the tax .

the second principal component of a continued estate tax is the rate , which will return to 55% in 2013 absent legislative change ; rates of 45% applied in 2009 and a 35% rate applies in 2011-2012 .

some proposals would apply the capital gains tax rate ( currently 15% but scheduled to go to 20% in 2013 ) or some multiple of it .

another issue is whether to index the exemption for inflation .

some components of the income tax , such as rate brackets and standard deductions , are indexed , while others ( such as child credits ) are not .

over time , as prices rise , a fixed exemption causes more estates to be subject to tax .

without indexation , congress may return from time to time to reconsider the exemption .

a final issue is the potential carryforward of an unused estate tax exemption to the surviving spouse .

the provision , adopted in recent legislation for 2011 and 2012 , would allow spouses to inherit unused estate tax exemptions .

since bequests to the spouse are excluded from the estate , the couple together can have a larger total exemption if the first spouse to die leaves assets to the children or other heirs large enough to absorb his or her estate exemption .

this action will reduce the size of the estate subject to tax when the second spouse dies .

there are reasons , however , that the taxpayer may prefer to leave more assets to a spouse ( for example , if there are concerns about having enough assets to live in comfort or cover emergencies ) .

the proposed change is to permit the second spouse to inherit any unused exemption and add it to his or her own future exemption .

proposals have also been made to increase the percentage or dollar limits of special use valuations and conservation easements .

at the same time , there are proposals , including those in president obama's budget , to restrict practices considered as abuses .

one proposal , relating to a certain type of trust ( a grantor retained annuity trust or grat ) was adopted in h.r .

4849 , the small business and infrastructure jobs tax act of 2010 .

another proposal would restrict minority discounts for estates that are sometimes allowed by courts when no one heir has a controlling interest in the property .

a third provision would require estates and heirs use the same fair market value in determining the valuation for purposes of the estate tax and for determining basis in the hands of the heir .

data , other empirical evidence , and economic theory can help address proposals to revise the estate tax .

relevant economic issues include the scope and effect of the tax on the total population and the distribution of the tax , the revenue yield , and the potential effects on family businesses , savings , administration and compliance , and charitable giving .

to the extent possible , different options are compared in the context of these issues .

other issues are perhaps more philosophical or , as gale and slemrod discuss in their article on the estate tax , rhetorical .

for example , some people oppose the estate tax because they hold a philosophical view that the estate tax is a death tax and death should not be taxed .

arguments are also made that estate taxes result in a double tax , because assets have already been taxed under the income tax and should not be taxed again .

gale and slemrod do point out , however , the complexity of the rhetorical questions .

for example , they point out that for the vast majority of people ( at the time they were writing , 98% ) death actually brings potential tax benefits through the forgiveness of tax on accrued but unrealized gains ( gains on assets that have not been sold ) .

they also note that income from unrealized appreciation in assets is not taxed during the lifetime and so is not subject to double taxation .

they indicate that 36% of estate assets and 80% of the wealth in closely held business and farm estates is from unrealized appreciation .

supporters of the estate tax may believe it is important to constrain the accumulation of wealth generation after generation .

while empirical evidence can demonstrate that the estate tax is highly progressive , the degree to which taxes should be applied to large amounts of wealth in pursuit of reducing inequality in society , much like the question of whether it is wrong for death to trigger a tax , is a value judgment .

the analysis indicates that the estate tax is relatively small , in revenues , in coverage , and in its effects on family businesses , savings , charitable contributions , and tax administration and compliance .

one - fourth of 1% or less of all estates and of family businesses are expected to be subject to tax under an exemption of $3.5 million or $5 million .

this share would grow slightly over the 10-year budget horizon , but indexing the exemption would not be very important over this short time period .

the estate tax is a small , but highly progressive , element of the tax system .

under the proposals under consideration ( the $3.5 million exemption and the $5 million exemption ) , the majority of the tax falls on estates of $20 million or more , which in turn constitute only three - hundredths of 1% of decedents .

for the $3.5 million exemption , 45% rate effective in 2009 , 96% of the tax falls on the top quintile of the income distribution , 72% falls in the top 1% , and 42% in the top 0.1% .

effects on savings are uncertain in direction but likely small .

based on empirical evidence , a decline of 1% to 2% in charitable contributions from increasing the estate tax relative to the current law baseline of a $1 million exemption with a 55% rate would be expected .

costs of estate planning and administration are relatively small as a percentage of estate tax revenue .

because transfers between spouses are exempt , allowing spouses to inherit the exemption can increase the combined couples' exemption , and simplify estate planning .

this change could cost increasing amounts of revenue over time , however , and lead to certain administrative complications .

several provisions to deal with perceived abuses might be considered , with the most important one relating to the use of discounts when assets are left to a family partnership and no one heir controls the property .

