the president signed into law h.r .

3590 , the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 ) , on march 23 , 2010 .

seven days later , a second bill , h.r .

4872 , was signed into law by the president to modify aca .

this second law , the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( the reconciliation act or hcera ; p.l .

111-152 ) , was signed into law on march 30 , 2010 .

together these measures constitute what is referred to as the health care reform law , which makes many significant changes to the private and public markets for health insurance , as well as modifies aspects of the publicly financed health care delivery system .

it also represents the most significant reform to the medicaid program since its establishment in 1965 .

this report highlights some of the major changes to the medicaid and chip programs and provides a timeline of effective dates for these provisions .

in general , the medicaid law ( 1 ) raises medicaid income eligibility levels for certain people up to 133% of the federal poverty level , ( 2 ) adds both mandatory and optional benefits to medicaid , ( 3 ) increases the federal matching payments for certain groups of beneficiaries and for particular services provided , ( 4 ) provides new requirements and incentives for states to improve quality of care and encourage more use of preventive services , and ( 5 ) makes a number of other medicaid program changes .

regarding chip , the law includes a new requirement for states to maintain their current program structures through fy2019 and extends additional chip funding through fy2015 .

to help explain the most important medicaid and chip changes , provision descriptions are grouped into the following six major issue areas: eligibility , benefits , financing , program integrity , demonstrations and grant funding , and miscellaneous .

appendix a provides a detailed implementation timeline of the medicaid and chip provisions .

appendix b is a crosswalk between the provision titles and the amending sections of p.l .

111-148 and p.l .

111-152 for all of the medicaid and chip provisions .

finally , appendix c is a list of abbreviations used in this report and their definitions .

key medicaid and chip provisions included in the health reform law are summarized below .

eligibility - related reforms .

beginning in 2014 , or sooner at state option , the law requires states to expand medicaid to certain individuals who are under age 65 with income up to 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) .

this reform not only expands eligibility to a group that is not currently eligible for medicaid ( low income childless adults ) , but also raises medicaid's mandatory income eligibility level for certain existing groups to 133% of the fpl .

this represents the single largest eligibility expansion since the start of the program in 1965 .

the law also modifies income counting rules when determining medicaid eligibility for certain populations .

from 2014 to 2016 , the federal government will cover 100% of the medicaid costs of these "newly eligible" individuals , with the percentage dropping to 90% by 2020 .

states cover the percentage not paid by the federal government .

maintenance of effort provisions .

the law requires states to maintain current medicaid and chip eligibility levels through 2013 ( or when the secretary determines that the state exchange is fully operational ) for adults and 2019 for children .

outreach and enrollment provisions .

the law includes provisions to encourage states to improve outreach , streamline enrollment , and coordinate with the proposed american health benefit exchanges ( exchanges ) .

benefit reforms .

the law adds new mandatory and optional benefits to medicaid .

such mandatory benefits include coverage of free - standing birth clinics , and tobacco cessation services for pregnant woman .

the law also authorizes states to offer new optional benefits such as preventive services for adults and health homes for persons with chronic conditions .

additional options for states to expand home and community - based services as an alternative to institutional care are also included .

payment and financing reforms .

some of the law's reforms affecting payments and financing include ( 1 ) increases in federal matching payments for the "newly eligible" individuals in the eligibility expansions up to 133% fpl , ( 2 ) reductions in medicaid disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) allotments , ( 3 ) expenditure reductions for prescription drugs including revising the definition of the average manufacture's price ( amp ) to help make amp more closely reflect prices retail community pharmacies pay for prescription drugs , ( 4 ) reductions in inappropriate hospital expenditures for health care - acquired conditions , and ( 5 ) increases in primary care physician payment rates for selected services .

increased funding for the territories .

the law permits the territories to establish exchanges and provides federal funds for premium and cost - sharing assistance for individuals who obtain health insurance coverage through an exchange .

territories that do not opt to establish an exchange will receive their share of the appropriations earmarked for the state exchanges in addition to an increase in their medicaid spending caps also established under the law .

the law also increases the medicaid fmap rate available to all of the territories from 50% to 55% beginning with the fourth quarter of fy2011 .

program integrity reforms .

the law creates enforcement and monitoring tools and imposes new data reporting and oversight requirements on states and providers .

states will also be required to implement initiatives used by the medicare program , such as a national correct coding initiative and a recovery audit contract program for their medicaid programs .

the law provides additional program integrity funding through indexing of the medicaid integrity program for fiscal years beginning with fy2010 .

nursing home accountability .

the law adds a number of requirements to improve the transparency of information within facilities and chains , and provides long - term care ( ltc ) consumers with information on the quality and performance of nursing homes .

demonstrations , pilot programs , and grants .

the law provides the secretary of the department of health and human services ( the secretary ) and state medicaid and chip programs with opportunities to test models for improving the delivery , quality , and cost of services .

chip - related provisions .

the law requires states to maintain the current chip structure through fy2019 , but does not provide federal chip appropriations beyond fy2015 , at which point , if future appropriations are insufficient , chip children will obtain comparable coverage through the exchanges or medicaid , as applicable .

if new funding is made available , states will receive higher federal matching rates for chip services beginning in fy2016 .

upon enactment , states are required to maintain chip eligibility levels through fy2019 as a condition of receiving federal matching funds for medicaid expenditures ( notwithstanding the lack of corresponding federal chip appropriations for fy2016 through fy2019 ) .

miscellaneous medicaid and chip reforms .

the law adds several offices within the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) to better coordinate care across the medicare and medicaid / chip programs .

one of these offices will be dedicated to improving coordination for beneficiaries eligible for both medicare and medicaid ( dual eligibles ) .

another will add a medicare and medicaid innovation center to develop and test new payment and service delivery models to reduce medicare , medicaid , and chip expenditures , while preserving and enhancing quality of care for beneficiaries .

medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program operated by states within broad federal guidelines .

to qualify , an individual must meet both categorical ( i.e. , must be a member of a covered group , such as children , pregnant women , families with dependent children , the elderly , or the disabled ) and financial eligibility requirements .

of the approximately 50 different eligibility "pathways" into medicaid , including those that existed even before the health reform law was enacted , some are mandatory while others are offered at state option .

examples of groups that states must provide medicaid to include pregnant women and children below specified income levels and poor individuals with disabilities or poor individuals over age 64 who qualify for cash assistance under the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program .

examples of groups that states may choose to cover under medicaid include pregnant women and infants with family income between 133% fpl and 185% fpl , and "medically needy" individuals who meet categorical requirements with income up to 133% of the maximum payment amount applicable under states' former aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) programs based on family size .

under prior law , "childless adults" ( nonelderly adults who are not disabled , not pregnant and not parents of dependent children ) were generally not eligible for medicaid , regardless of their income .

the health reform law makes several changes to medicaid eligibility .

aca adds two new mandatory eligibility groups , and several new optional eligibility groups .

in addition , it makes several modifications to existing eligibility groups , changes the way income is counted for certain groups to determine if an individual meets medicaid's income eligibility requirements , and adds provisions to facilitate outreach and enrollment in medicaid , chip , and the health insurance exchanges .

in their march 20 , 2010 , final cost estimate for aca and hcera , cbo and jct estimated that coverage expansion provisions in the health reform law would result in a medicaid enrollment increase over the baseline of approximately 16 million by fy2019 .

traditional medicaid benefits are identified in federal statute and regulations , and include a wide range of acute and long - term care services and supports .

additional benefits include premium payments for coverage provided through medicaid managed care arrangements or for employer - sponsored insurance , and medicare premium and cost - sharing support for persons dually eligible for both medicare and medicaid .

financing for medicaid is shared by the federal government and the states .

the federal share for most medicaid expenses for benefits is determined by the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) .

fmap rates are based on a formula that provides higher federal reimbursement to states with lower per capita income relative to the national average ( and vice versa ) .

fmaps have a statutory minimum of 50% and a maximum of 83% , although some medicaid services receive a higher federal match rate .

fy2010 fmaps ranged from a high of 75.67% in mississippi to a low of 50.00% in 10 other states .

in february 2009 , with passage of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) , states received temporary enhanced fmap rates for nine quarters beginning with the first quarter of fy2009 and running through the first quarter of fy2011 ( december 31 , 2010 ) .

state expenditures to administer medicaid programs are generally matched by federal funding at 50% .

federal matching rates for administrative expenditures are the same for all states , although some activities are matched at higher rates .

program integrity ( pi ) initiatives are designed to combat fraud , waste , and abuse .

this includes processes directed at reducing improper payments , as well as activities to prevent , detect , investigate , and ultimately prosecute health care fraud and abuse .

more specifically , pi ensures that correct payments are made to legitimate providers for appropriate and reasonable services for eligible beneficiaries .

the federal government and states contribute equally to fund most medicaid and chip activities to combat waste , fraud , and abuse , although for some activities , the federal government provides additional funds through enhanced matching rates .

all states receive the same federal match rate for administrative expenditures , including most pi activities , which is generally 50% .

states receive higher federal matching rates for selected administrative activities such as 90% for the design , development , and installation of required claims processing and information retrieval systems — medicaid management information systems ( mmis ) ; 75% for the operation of approved mmis ; 90% for the start up of medicaid fraud control units ( mfcus ) ; and 75% for ongoing mfcu operation .

congress provided additional dedicated funding for medicaid program integrity activities in the deficit reduction act of 2005 , ( dra , p.l .

109-171 ) .

under dra , among many other changes , congress established a medicaid integrity program ( mip ) that included annual appropriations reaching $75 million .

this mip funding was to support and enhance state pi efforts by expanding and sustaining national pi activities in the areas of provider audits , overpayment identification , and payment integrity and quality of care education .

aca created additional requirements to increase uniformity , and bolster medicare , medicaid and chip pi activities .

for instance , aca introduced additional provider screening requirements that are applicable to medicare , medicaid , and chip .

aca creates an integrated medicare and medicaid data repository to enhance pi data sharing to be available to federal and state agencies and law enforcement officials .

moreover , aca established a recovery audit contractor ( rac ) requirement for medicaid ( described below ) , similar to medicare's rac program .

chip provides health care coverage to low - income , uninsured children in families with income above medicaid income standards .

states may also extend chip coverage to pregnant women when certain conditions are met .

in designing their chip programs , states may choose to expand medicaid , create a stand - alone program , or use a combined approach .

federal chip appropriations are currently provided through fy2013 .

like medicaid , chip is a joint federal - state program .

for each dollar of state spending , the federal government makes a matching payment drawn from chip allotments .

a state's share of program spending for medicaid is the percentage not paid by the federal government through the fmap .

but for chip , the federal share is higher .

that is , the enhanced fmap ( e - fmap ) for chip lowers the state's share of chip expenditures by 30% compared to the regular medicaid fmap .

although uncommon , certain types of chip expenditures are reimbursed at a rate different than the e - fmap , and certain types of medicaid expenditures are reimbursed at the e - fmap rate .

for fy2010 , the e - fmap for chip ranges from 65% to 83% .

beneficiary cost - sharing varies depending upon how a state designs its chip program .

for chip medicaid expansions , nominal amounts may apply as specified under the medicaid program .

for chip stand - alone programs , higher amounts may apply based on income level .

in both cases , preventive services are exempt from all cost - sharing , and aggregate cost - sharing for all individuals is capped at 5% of family income .

p.l .

111-148 makes a number of changes to chip for future years .

these changes are described below .

 ( other provisions affecting both medicaid and chip are described in other sections of this report. ) .

 ( p.l .

111-148 : §2007 ) in the supplemental appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-252 ) , congress directed the secretary to establish a medicaid improvement fund ( mif ) to be used by cms to improve the management of the medicaid program , including improved oversight of contracts and contractors and evaluation of demonstration projects .

mif funding was to be available in addition to existing cms budget authority and was to total $100 million in fy2014 , and $150 million in each fy2015-fy2018 .

the medicare , medicaid , and schip extension act of 2007 ( mmsea , p.l .

110-173 ) revised funding for physician assistance and quality initiative and these funds were to be used for mif activities .

in december 2009 , the department of defense appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-118 ) was passed .

p.l .

111-118 reduced the amount of funding available for mif in 2014 from $22.3 billion to $20.7 billion .

aca rescinds any unobligated mif funds ( as of the date of enactment ) for fys 2014 through 2018 .

 ( p.l .

111-148 : §2402 ) secretary is required to promulgate regulations to ensure that all states develop service systems designed to ( 1 ) allocate resources for services in a manner that is responsive to the changing needs of long - term care beneficiaries receiving home and community - based services and that maximizes their independence ; ( 2 ) provide the support for such beneficiaries to design an individualized self - directed , community - supported life ; and ( 3 ) improve coordination among providers to achieve more consistent administration of policies and procedures across federally and state - funded programs , among others .

 ( p.l .

111-148 : §2405 ) established under the older americans act ( oaa ) , aging and disability resource centers ( adrcs ) provide information and assistance to elderly persons and individuals with physical disabilities , serious mental illness , and / or developmental / intellectual disabilities .

adrcs also serve as a single point of entry for enrollment in publicly administered ltc services , including those funded by medicaid and oaa .

out of any funds in the treasury not otherwise appropriated , the law appropriates to the secretary , acting through the assistant secretary of aging , $10 million for each of fy2010 through fy2014 to carry out adrc initiatives .

 ( p.l .

111-148 : §2406 ) the law expresses the sense of the senate that the 111 th congress should comprehensively address long - term services and supports in a way that guarantees elderly and disabled individuals the care they need , and that makes long - term services and supports available in the community as well as in institutions .

 ( p.l .

111-148 : §2601 ) some elderly and disabled individuals , referred to as dual eligibles , qualify for health insurance under both medicare and medicaid .

these dual eligible individuals qualify for medicare part a and / or parts b and d and are eligible for medicaid because they have limited income and assets .

previous federal law gives the secretary authority to waive selected medicaid and medicare requirements , as well as approve waivers to reach individuals who otherwise would be ineligible for medicaid .

some projects have been approved that waive both medicare and medicaid rules to implement statewide initiatives to coordinate service delivery , benefit packages , and reimbursement for dual eligibles .

initially , waivers can be approved for periods ranging from two - to five - year periods and renewed for additional periods of up to five years .

aca authorizes the secretary to initially approve medicaid waivers for up to five years .

this authority applies to demonstrations as well as home and community - based waivers for coordinating care of dual eligibles ( and for non dual eligible beneficiaries if they were included under the waiver ) .

in addition , the secretary has authority to approve medicaid waiver extensions for additional five - year periods when requested by states , unless the waivers did not meet the conditions for the previous period , or the waiver was no longer cost effective , efficient , or consistent with medicaid policy .

 ( p.l .

111-148 : §2602 ) there are no specific requirements under previous medicare and medicaid law or regulations for the programs to coordinate care for dual eligible individuals .

aca requires the secretary to establish a federal coordinated health care office ( chco ) within cms by march 1 , 2010 .

cms's administrator will appoint the chco director , who also will report to the cms administrator .

the chco's purpose is to "bring together" medicare and medicaid program staff at cms for purpose of ( 1 ) integrating benefits and ( 2 ) improving care coordination for dual eligible beneficiaries .

the chco established under aca has the following goals: 1. to provide dual eligible individuals full access to the benefits to which they are entitled under the medicare and medicaid programs ; 2. to simplify the processes for dual eligible individuals to access the items and services they are entitled to under the medicare and medicaid programs ; 3. to improve the quality of health care and long - term care services for dual eligible individuals ; 4. to increase beneficiaries' understanding of , and satisfaction with , coverage under the medicare and medicaid programs ; 5. to eliminate regulatory conflicts between rules under the medicare , and medicaid programs ; 6. to improve care continuity and ensure safe and effective care transitions ; 7. to eliminate cost - shifting between the medicare and medicaid programs and among related health care providers ; and 8. to improve the quality of performance of providers of services and suppliers under the medicare and medicaid programs .

aca also assigns the chco the following specific responsibilities: 1. to provide states , medicare advantage plans for special needs individuals , physicians , and other entities or individuals qualified to develop programs , with the education and tools necessary to develop programs that align benefits for duals under medicare and medicaid ; 2. to support state efforts to coordinate contracting and oversight by states and cms on the integration of medicare and medicaid programs consistent with chco goals ; 3. to support state and cms efforts to coordinate contracting and oversight for integrating medicare and medicaid programs ; 4. to consult with the medpac and macpac on enrollment and benefit policies for dual eligible individuals ; and 5. to study the provision of drug coverage for new full - benefit dual eligibles and to monitor and report on total annual expenditures , health outcomes , and access to benefits for all dual eligibles .

under aca , the secretary is required to submit a report to congress under the annual budget transmittal .

the report is required to contain recommendations for legislation that could improve care coordination and benefits for dual eligible individuals .

 ( p.l .

111-148 : §2701 ) p.l .

111-148 adds a federal initiative to collect and report quality of care data for adults enrolled in medicaid .

among several activities , the secretary will publish a recommended core set of adult health quality measures , including such measures in use under public and privately sponsored health care coverage arrangements , or that are part of reporting systems that measure both the presence and duration of health insurance coverage over time .

the secretary is required to publish an initial core set of measures by january 1 , 2012 .

also , no later than january 1 , 2013 , the secretary , in consultation with the states , is required to develop a standardized format for reporting information based on this initial core measurement set .

states will be encouraged to use these measures to voluntarily report such data .

as with existing law regarding quality of care reporting for medicaid children , before january 1 , 2014 , and every three years thereafter , the secretary is required to submit a report to congress that describes the secretary's efforts to improve , for example , the duration and stability of coverage for adults under medicaid , the quality of care of different services for such individuals , the status of voluntary state reporting of such data , and any recommendations for legislative changes needed to improve quality of care provided to medicaid adults .

within one year after the release of the recommended core set of adult health quality measures , the secretary is required to establish a medicaid quality measurement program ( mqmp ) .

to this end , the secretary is required to award grants and contracts for developing , testing , and validating emerging and innovative evidence - based measures applicable to medicaid adults .

not later than two years after the establishment of the mqmp , the secretary is required to publish recommended changes to the initial core set of adult health quality measures based on the results of testing , validation , and the consensus process for development of these measures .

p.l .

111-148 does not restrict coverage under medicaid or chip to only those services that are evidence - based .

the new law also includes annual state reporting requirements to include , for example , state - specific adult health quality measures , including information collected as part of external quality reviews of managed care organizations and through benchmark plans ( if applicable ) .

the secretary will be required to collect , analyze , and make publicly available the information reported by states , before september 30 , 2014 , and annually thereafter .

finally , to carry out these activities , p.l .

111-148 appropriates $60 million for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014 .

these funds will remain available until expended .

 ( p.l .

111-148 : §2801 , and §10607 ) chipra established a new federal commission called the medicaid and chip payment and access commission , or macpac .

this commission will review program policies under both medicaid and chip affecting children's access to benefits , including ( 1 ) payment policies , such as the process for updating fees for different types of providers , payment methodologies , and the impact of these factors on access and quality of care ; ( 2 ) the interaction of medicaid and chip payment policies with health care delivery generally ; and ( 3 ) other policies , including those relating to transportation and language barriers .

the commission will make recommendations to congress concerning such payment and access policies .

macpac is similar to medpac which reviews medicare program policies .

beginning in 2010 , the commission will submit an annual report to congress containing the results of these reviews and macpac's recommendations regarding these policies .

the commission will also submit annual reports to congress containing an examination of issues affecting medicaid and chip , including the implications of changes in health care delivery in the united states and in the market for health care services .

macpac must also create an early warning system to identify provider shortage areas or other problems that threaten access to care or the health care status of medicaid and chip beneficiaries .

p.l .

111-148 makes a number of changes to the federal statute that established macpac .

first , the original focus on children will be expanded to include all medicaid beneficiaries .

in addition , macpac's review and assessment of payment policies under medicaid and chip will be expanded to include , for example , how factors affecting expenditures and payment methodologies enable beneficiaries to obtain services , affect provider supply , and affect providers that serve a disproportionate share of low - income and other vulnerable populations .

additional topics that macpac will be required to review and assess include policies related to eligibility , enrollment and retention , benefits and coverage , quality of care , and interactions between medicaid and medicare and how those interactions affect access to services , payments and dual eligibles .

macpac is also required to report to congress on any medicaid and chip regulations that affect access , quality and efficiency of health care .

macpac must also conduct an independent review of the alternatives to current tort litigation under new state demonstration grants established for this purpose under this new law .

this review will assess the impact of such alternatives on the medicaid and chip programs and their beneficiaries , including an analysis of the impact of these alternatives on the efficiency and effectiveness of these two programs .

a report on these tort reform activities , including findings and recommendations , is due to congress no later than december 31 , 2016 .

in carrying out its duties , macpac is authorized to obtain necessary data from any state agency responsible for administering medicaid or chip .

the provision of these state data is a condition for receiving federal matching funds under either program .

p.l .

111-148 requires macpac to seek state input and review state data , and to consider state information in its recommendations and reports .

both macpac and medpac are required to coordinate and consult with the federal coordinated health care office ( established under section 2081 of this new law ) before making recommendations regarding medicare beneficiaries who are dually eligible .

changes to medicaid policy affecting dual eligibles are the responsibility of the macpac .

for fy2010 , p.l .

111-148 appropriates $11 million for macpac .

of this total , $9 million will come from the treasury out of any funds not otherwise appropriated , and $2 million will come from fy2010 chip funds , and will remain available until expended .

funding in subsequent years is not addressed in this provision .

this provision is effective upon enactment .

 ( p.l .

111-148 : §2901 ) the indian health service ( ihs ) , an agency in hhs , provides health care for eligible american indians / alaska natives through a system of programs and facilities located on or near indian reservations and in certain urban areas .

these programs , which may be operated by indian tribes ( its ) or tribal organization ( tos ) , are eligible to receive reimbursements from medicare , medicaid , chip , state programs , and third parties such as private insurance .

facilities are permitted to retain these reimbursements and use them to increase available services .

prior to aca , ihs , an it , or a to was only considered the payor of last resort for contract health services — services that these facilities purchase through contract , with providers in instances where the facility or program cannot provide the needed care .

aca designates programs operated by ihs , an it , to , or an urban indian organization ( uio ) as the payer of last resort for services provided to eligible american indians and alaska natives , including services covered by medicaid and chip .

ihs funds are limited and tribal members have raised concerns about which program is considered the payor of last resort .

this provision will clarify such issues , and , as a result , may provide additional funding to programs operated by the ihs , its , tos , or uios .

under a newly permitted option enacted under the children's health insurance reauthorization act ( chipra , p.l .

111-3 ) , states may facilitate medicaid enrollment — including under certain conditions , automatically enrolling those eligible — by relying on a finding of eligibility from specified "express lane" agencies ( eg , those that administer programs such as temporary assistance for needy families , medicaid , chip , and food stamps ) ; however , ihs , its , tos , and uios were not among the specified "express lane" agencies in chipra .

american indians and alaska natives face a number of barriers to enrolling in medicaid and chip .

gao found that some tribes have the ability to determine medicaid eligibility for some of their tribal members , which can facilitate medicaid enrollment .

aca permits ihs , its , tos , and uios to serve as "express lane" agencies ; this may increase medicaid and chip enrollment among american indians and alaska natives .

american indians and alaska natives receiving services through ihs programs or at ihs facilities may not be charged premiums , cost - sharing or similar charges in medicaid .

aca also prohibits cost - sharing for american indians and alaska natives enrolled in a qualified health plan offered through the newly established exchanges .

american indians and alaska natives are not charged for services provided by ihs , an it , or a to .

given this , there may be few incentives to enroll in a private health insurance plan that charges premiums or copayments .

this exclusion should facilitate american indian and alaska native enrollment in private health insurance offered through the exchanges .

 ( p.l .

111-148 : §3021 as modified by §10306 ) under medicaid and medicaid law , the secretary has broad authority to develop research and demonstration projects that test new approaches to paying providers , deliver health care services , or provide benefits to medicare and medicaid beneficiaries .

this section of aca requires the secretary to establish a cmi within cms by january 1 , 2011 .

the cmi is to test innovative payment and service delivery models to reduce medicare , medicaid , and chip program expenditures , while preserving or enhancing the quality of care furnished to beneficiaries .

the secretary is required to identify and select payment and service delivery models that also improve the coordination , quality , and efficiency of health care services .

in addition , the secretary is required to select models that address a defined population for which there are deficits in care leading to poor clinical outcomes , and may include models which allow states to test and evaluate fully integrating care for beneficiaries eligible for both medicare and medicaid ( dual eligibles ) , including the management and oversight of all funds , as well as to test and evaluate all - payer payment systems that include dual eligibles .

under aca , the secretary has authority to limit the testing of models to selected geographic areas .

further , the secretary is required to conduct an evaluation of each model tested , and make the results of these evaluations available publicly .

aca appropriated $5 million for the design , implementation , and evaluation of models for fy2010 ; $10 billion for fy2011 through fy2019 ; and $10 billion for each subsequent 10 fiscal year period beginning with 2020 .

beginning in 2012 , and at least every other year thereafter , the secretary is required to submit a report to congress on the cmi .

 ( p.l .

111-148 : §3512 ) under this provision , gao is required to conduct a study to determine if the development , recognition , or implementation of guidelines or other standards under selected provisions in the law might result in new causes of action or claims .

the gao study will include three medicaid - related and 11 other non - medicaid - related provisions in the law as shown in table 2 .

gao is required to submit the study on causes of action to appropriate congressional committees within two years of enactment of aca ( march 23 , 2012 ) .

 ( p.l .

111-148 : §4004 ( i ) ) the health reform law requires the secretary to provide guidance and relevant information to states and health care providers regarding preventive and obesity - related services that are available to medicaid enrollees , including obesity screening and counseling for children and adults .

each state will be required to design a public awareness campaign to educate medicaid enrollees regarding availability and coverage of such services .

the secretary is required to report to congress on these efforts , beginning no later than january 1 , 2011 , and every three years thereafter , through january 1 , 2017 .

the provision authorizes to be appropriated such sums as necessary to carry out these activities .

 ( p.l .

111-148 : §10201 ) section 1115 of the social security act authorizes the secretary to waive certain statutory requirements for conducting research and demonstration projects that further the goals of titles medicaid and chip .

states submit proposals outlining the terms and conditions of the demonstration program to the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) for approval prior to implementation .

in 1994 , cms issued program guidance that impacts the waiver approval process and includes the procedures states are expected to follow for public involvement in the development of a demonstration project .

states were required to provide cms a written description of their process for public involvement at the time their proposal was submitted .

public involvement requirements for the waiver approval process continued through the early 2000s .

in a letter to state medicaid directors issued may 3 , 2002 , cms listed examples of ways a state may meet requirements for public involvement ( eg , public forums , legislative hearings , a website with information and a link for public comment ) .

the health reform law imposes statutory requirements regarding transparency in the application and renewal of medicaid and chip section 1115 demonstration programs that impact eligibility , enrollment , benefits , cost - sharing , or financing .

not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this subsection , the secretary is required to promulgate regulations that provide for ( 1 ) a process for public notice and comment at the state level , including public hearings , sufficient to ensure a meaningful level of public input ; ( 2 ) requirements relating to ( a ) the goals of the program to be implemented or renewed under the demonstration project ; ( b ) the expected state and federal costs and coverage projections of the demonstration project ; and ( c ) the specific plans of the state to ensure that the demonstration project is in compliance with ssa titles xix and xxi ; ( 3 ) a process for providing public notice and comment after the application is received by the secretary , that is sufficient to ensure a meaningful level of public input ; ( 4 ) a process for the submission to the secretary of periodic reports by the state concerning the implementation of the demonstration project ; and ( 5 ) a process for the periodic evaluation by the secretary of the demonstration project .

the secretary is required to submit an annual report to congress concerning actions taken by the secretary with respect to applications for demonstration projects under this section .

appendix a. timeline this appendix is a timeline of relevant start , end , and deadline dates pertinent to each of the medicaid and chip provisions in p.l .

111-148 and p.l .

111-152 .

some of the dates describe activities that are to be performed by the secretary , others are for implementation by states , and still others are relevant to medicaid and chip providers .

the organization of this timeline parallels the organization of this report .

thus , provisions are categorized into six tables , table a - 1 through table a - 6 , that match the major issue areas described above .

they are eligibility , benefits , financing , program integrity , demonstrations and grant funding , and miscellaneous .

within each table , provisions are ordered by relevant date , with the earliest start , end , and deadline dates presented toward the beginning of each table and the latest start , end , and deadline dates presented toward the end of each table .

appendix b. statutory references for medicaid and chip provisions table b - 1 through table b - 7 track statutory changes made to the social security act by titles ii , iv , vi , and x in p.l .

111-148 and p.l .

111-152 .

the provision descriptions in the tables are grouped by subject matter into the following categories: eligibility , benefits , financing , program integrity , demonstrations and grant funding , chip , and miscellaneous .

appendix c. list of abbreviations and their definition .

