the teams of the national football league ( nfl or league ) formed nfl properties ( nflp ) in 1963 to aid in the promotion of the nfl brand , including the manufacture , licensing , and marketing of team - and league - logoed , trademarked clothing and merchandise .

originally , the licenses granted by nflp were non - exclusive ( i.e. , granted simultaneously to several parties ) ; american needle , a headwear manufacturer , was one of the non - exclusive licensees for several years .

in 2000 , the teams authorized nflp to solicit bids for , and then grant , a single , exclusive license for the manufacture of headwear ; when the license was awarded to reebok , american needle , one of the non - renewed , non - exclusive licensees , sued the nfl , nflp , the individual teams , and reebok , alleging , in pertinent part , that the teams' actions in creating nflp violated section 1 of the sherman act .

the nfl / team response was the assertion that as subsidiary members of an unincorporated association , the teams were legally incapable of conspiring either with each other or with the league .

american needle was rebuffed in both the u.s district court for northern illinois and in the u.s. court of appeals for the seventh circuit .

although the nfl was successful in those courts , it did not oppose american needle's petition for certiorari in the supreme court .

the case had been carefully watched , given that a supreme court ruling endorsing the nfl's "single entity" argument would likely have had an impact on the application of the antitrust laws not only to other ( professional ) sports leagues and their decisions concerning , for example , player services , ticket pricing , stadium parking fees , and merchandise sales ; but also to any business entity — especially those in such areas as financial services , real estate services , or health care — participating or contemplating participation in joint activities .

a unanimous supreme court , per justice stevens , defined the issue: as the case comes to us , we have only a narrow issue to decide: whether the nfl respondents are capable of engaging in a "contract , combination … or conspiracy" as defined by § 1 of the sherman act … , or , as we have sometimes phrased it , whether the alleged activity by the nfl respondents "must be viewed as that of a single enterprise for purposes of § 1. .

copperweld … , 467 u.s. 752 , 771 … .

the ruling answered "yes" to the first "whether" and "no" to the second , deciding against the successful - in - the - lower - federal - courts nfl and in favor of the position taken by american needle .

summarizing the cases — ending with copperweld — in which the court had addressed the "now - defunct doctrine known as the 'intraenterprise conspiracy doctrine,'" justice stevens noted that the court had previously concluded that the doctrine "was inconsistent with the 'basic distinction between concerted and independent action.' .

but he also noted that the court has always looked at the functional ( as opposed to the formal , legal ) relationships among the entities litigating before it in order to determine whether competition had been , unlawfully , adversely affected: we have long held that concerted action under § 1 does not turn simply on whether the parties involved are legally distinct entities .

instead , we have eschewed such formalistic distinctions in favor of a functional consideration of how the parties involved in the alleged anticompetitive conduct actually operate .

as a result , we have repeatedly found instances in which members of a legally single entity violated § 1 when the entity was controlled by a group of competitors and served , in essence , as a vehicle for ongoing concerted activity .

accordingly , the opinion proceeded to look at the "competitive reality" existing in the nfl and its member teams , and to the purpose of section 1 to determine whether their concerted actions are of the kind that the provision was enacted to deter and punish .

the teams , albeit related by virtue of their status in the nfl , "compete with one another , not only on the playing field , but to attract fans , for gate receipts and for contracts with managerial and playing personnel. .

especially relevant to the case before the court , the teams can and do compete in the market for intellectual property ( team - logoed or otherwise trademarked merchandise , etc .

 ) : "[t]o a firm making hats , the saints and the colts are two potentially competing suppliers of valuable trademarks .

in the words of copperweld , therefore , "'their general corporate actions are guided or determined by 'separate corporate consciousness,' and 'their objectives are' not 'common.' .

the court was not unmindful of the fact that there may be a common interest in the joint licensing of team / nfl trademarks , or in other cooperative action: other features of the nfl may also save agreements amongst the teams .

we have recognized , for example , "that the interest in maintaining a competitive balance" among "athletic teams is legitimate and important," ncaa [v. board of regents ] , 468 u.s. 85,117 … .

while that same interest applies to the teams in the nfl , it does not justify treating them as a single entity for § 1 purposes when it comes to the marketing of the teams' individually owned intellectual property .

it is , however , unquestionably an interest that may well justify a variety of collective decisions made by the teams .

nevertheless , justice stevens was constrained to point out that "illegal restraints often are in the common interests of the parties to the restraint," and that "[t]he justification for cooperation is not relevant to whether that cooperation is concerted or independent action. .

having thus made clear that substance versus form will determine whether collective action is the kind of concerted action appropriately analyzed under section 1 of the sherman act , and that the nfl / team intellectual - property licensing activities would continue to be analyzed under that section , justice stevens sought to reassure the nfl that "[f]ootball teams that need to cooperate are not trapped by antitrust law. .

he emphasized the court's view that "collective decisions" by the league and its teams are "perfectly sensible" given the "special characteristics" of the football industry .

therefore , although the antitrust analysis will generally occur under section 1 , the appropriate mode of analysis will almost certainly be the "flexible" rule of reason rather than the more rigid per se analysis .

the need to examine the league / team collective action in licensing their respective and common trademarks under section 1 led the court to remand the case to the u.s. court of appeals for the seventh circuit , which will , in turn , likely remand to the u.s. district court for northern illinois for trial .

