created with the enactment of the public works and economic development act of 1965 ( pweda ; p.l .

89-136 ) , the economic development administration has a 46-year history of supporting job creation and long - term economic recovery efforts in the nation's economically distressed areas .

the 112 th congress may consider legislation reauthorizing the eda , the authorizations of which expired at the end of fy2008 .

at least one bill , s. 782 , which would reauthorize the agency and its programs through fy2015 , has been reported out of the senate environment and public works committee and placed on the senate calendar .

also , congress is expected to consider funding for the agency and its programs as part of the commerce , justice , science appropriations bill .

as the 112 th congress considers these and other legislative proposals that may reauthorize , amend , and fund the agency and its programs , a review of the evolution of the agency's statutory authority may inform congress in its deliberations .

in considering the reauthorization of the agency and its programs , congress will do so within the larger policy context regarding other competing national issues , including efforts to reduce federal spending in order to address federal budget deficits and the national debt , concerns about duplication and fragmentation of federal economic development assistance , and efforts to support economic recovery and job creation following the worst economic recession since the great depression .

congress authorized the creation of eda with the aim of addressing the problems confronting rural regions experiencing long - term economic depression .

eda and its programs were part of a larger effort to address the causes of job loss and economic decline , including physical and technological deficiencies , that hindered or detracted from an area's economic competitiveness and employment potential .

when creating eda , congress drew on the lessons learned from three other federal economic development laws that preceded it: the area redevelopment act of 1961 ( ara ; p.l .

87-27 ) ; the public works acceleration act of 1963 ( pwaa ; p.l .

87-658 ) ; and the appalachian regional development act of 1965 ( arda ; p.l .

89-4 ) .

collectively , the three predecessor acts targeted assistance to projects in areas experiencing long - term economic stagnation as well as projects providing temporary public works employment as an anti - recessionary measure in response to rising unemployment .

dominant themes and lessons of each of these acts became integral parts of eda's mission of job creation and poverty reduction in economically disadvantaged regions .

among the themes and issues that framed the debates authorizing eda and its predecessor agencies and programs were the following: the centralization of federal aid in contrast to decentralization and devolution of responsibilities to state and local governments , the allocation of funds to infrastructure development versus direct aid to the unemployed and underemployed , the targeting of federal funds to the most economically depressed areas versus allocation of resources geographically throughout the country , the use of public works as an anti - recession job creation tool , the use of unemployment as the dominant factor to identify counties eligible for assistance in contrast to a matrix of elements , and the level of aid necessary to affect job growth and economic development .

building upon the experience gained under the previously enacted statutes , congress approved the pweda to address the economic development needs of distressed areas .

president johnson , when submitting his legislative proposal calling for the creation of eda , outlined several basic principles that would guide the federal effort concerning these needs .

the legislation would provide the financial support needed to improve the physical deficiencies of distressed areas ; it would encourage private sector job creation in underdeveloped rural areas ; and it would encourage state and local government economic development planning , including supporting multi - county regional planning entities .

as passed by congress , the pweda reflected the lessons learned from previous legislation , including many of the elements of the three previously cited statutes .

the act affirmed congress's commitment to placed - based economic development policies by tying eligibility to an area's unemployment rate and funding public works projects linked to commercial and industrial development as a means of creating jobs and combating poverty .

the act also established economic development districts ( edds ) comprising two or more redevelopment areas ( ras ) as a means of promoting regional coordination and cooperation in the formulation and execution of overall economic development plans ( oedps ) .

the creation of edds was a significant departure from the single - county approach under ara and mirrored the role of local development districts created under arda .

the legislation limited the federal share of a project's cost , thus requiring local participating entities to share the risk .

in addition , the act relied heavily on the use of unemployment data to define eligible ras , but included alternative criteria such as median income that had the net effect of expanding the number of eda - eligible counties .

one of the criticisms of eda that has endured since its inception is the high percentage of communities that continue to qualify as economically distressed .

over the life of the program , according to estimates included in a rutgers university study , 60% - 90% of counties met the qualifications for designation as economically distressed .

as passed by congress , the pweda included grants to public agencies and nonprofit entities for public works projects , loans to businesses , and technical assistance and grants to redevelopment areas to be used to develop oedps .

title v of the act authorized the creation of five regional commissions modeled after the arc .

during its 46-year history , eda has remained relatively unchanged in its mission and the means of achieving it .

the agency's mission is still the promotion of economic development in the nation's distressed areas , and the means of achieving that mission are primarily still regional planning and the shared financing of public works , public facilities , and technology enhancements in support of private sector commercial and industrial development projects .

congress has acted to refine the programs' components and focus .

originally targeted to rural areas experiencing long - term economic depression associated with the decline in manufacturing and mining jobs accompanied by the outmigration of population , eda assistance today is directed to rural and urban areas experiencing long - term economic deterioration or sudden economic dislocation caused by the loss of a major employer ; foreign competition ; disasters ; and federal actions , including base closures and environmental actions .

the context in which eda has carried out its mission has changed .

at its inception , eda was focused on addressing regional inequities and promoting balanced regional growth .

today , eda views its mission as strengthening the competitiveness of regional economies and creating jobs in a global context , and as part of a larger effort involving other elements such as job training and workforce development .

