the 2010 review conference for the nuclear non - proliferation treaty ( npt ) will take place in new york from may 3-28 , 2010 .

the npt is considered to be the cornerstone of the international nuclear nonproliferation regime .

many analysts and observers believe the regime is under great stress at this time , and that the 2010 review conference will , therefore , hold major implications for future efforts to stem the proliferation of nuclear weapons .

some review conferences , such as those in 1995 and 2000 , have been viewed as successes ; others , like the one on 2005 , have been seen as failures .

a number of factors affect these assessments , but many analysts agree that the treaty may suffer irrevocable harm if the parties do not agree on a range of measures that will strengthen the treaty and address growing concerns about nuclear proliferation .

the obama administration has emphasized in strategy documents that it views the npt as the "centerpiece" of the nonproliferation regime and has pledged to strengthen the treaty .

the administration sees a linkage between arms control and disarmament policies and progress in improving the nuclear nonproliferation measures .

the 2010 nuclear posture review , for example , says that progress on arms control is "a means of strengthening our ability to mobilize broad international support for the measures needed to reinforce the non - proliferation regime and secure materials worldwide. .

the nuclear posture review also says that the conditions for nuclear disarmament will not be possible without stronger proliferation controls .

over the years , npt states without nuclear weapons , particularly from developing countries , have cited lack of progress on disarmament as the reason they do not support further tightening of nonproliferation rules .

the ability of the administration to garner international support for its proposals to strengthen the nonproliferation regime may be tested at the 2010 npt review conference .

this report provides background information and analysis for members of congress and staff who are interested in following the discussions and debate at the review conference .

the report includes a short summary of the provisions and goals of the npt and a brief history of past review conferences .

it also discusses the key issues that the participants are likely to address during the 2010 conference .

npt member states are to "review the operation of the treaty" every five years , as required by article viii of the treaty .

npt states parties have met to review implementation of the treaty every five years since 1970 , so this will be the eighth such meeting .

npt preparatory committee ( prepcom ) meetings are held annually in the three years prior to the review conference .

states have attempted to negotiate a consensus "final declaration" at each review conference .

consensus documents were adopted in 1975 , 1985 , 1995 , and 2000 .

in 1980 , 1990 , and 2005 no document was agreed upon mainly due to disagreements between the non - aligned movement states and nuclear - weapon states over progress on nuclear disarmament ( 1980 , 1990 , 2005 ) , access to peaceful nuclear technology ( 1980 ) or cases of non - compliance and the middle east resolution ( 2005 ) .

however , adoption of a final document is not required , nor is adopting it by consensus .

the treaty does not specify what the review conferences should accomplish , other than the 1995 conference , which was to decide on extension of the treaty .

as part of the compromise package that approved indefinite extension of the npt in 1995 and again in the 2000 final document , states agreed to a strengthened review process .

the 1995 decision created prepcoms where states were to make recommendations to the review conferences and decide on procedural issues .

the review conferences are traditionally structured by issue areas: main committee i discusses nonproliferation , disarmament and negative security assurances ; main committee ii examines nonproliferation and safeguards compliance as well as nuclear - weapon - free zones ; and main committee iii looks at access to the peaceful use of nuclear energy , universality of the treaty ( meaning all countries joining the npt ) and other issues .

the 1995 decision also allowed for subsidiary bodies within each main committee for a focused look at particular issues .

the 2010 npt review conference will be held from may 3 to 28 at the united nations in new york .

ambassador libran cabactulan of the philippines will serve as president of the conference .

the npt does not have its own secretariat , but un staff support the meeting .

the 2009 prepcom agreed to an agenda for the review conference based on the main committee structure of past review conferences .

it also discussed , but did not reach final agreement on , establishing subsidiary bodies on three issues: nuclear disarmament and security assurances ; regional issues , including with respect to the middle east and the implementation of the 1995 resolution on the middle east ; and "other provisions of the treaty," including article x which covers treaty withdrawal .

the key controversies and challenges for u.s. policy makers during the review conference are discussed below in categories similar to the main committee structure of the review conference: disarmament , nonproliferation , and the peaceful use of nuclear energy , with separate sections devoted to non - npt parties and the issue of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the middle east .

it is worth noting that the ability of the united states to obtain some non - nuclear - weapon states' cooperation on some u.s. - supported initiatives could be complicated by the nuclear suppliers group's ( nsg's ) 2008 decision regarding india .

that decision exempted new delhi from the portions of the nsg guidelines requiring new delhi to have full - scope iaea safeguards .

since india obtained this benefit without joining the npt or giving up its nuclear weapons , some countries may question the fairness of additional nonproliferation demands .

many experts see the npt 2010 review conference as a chance to renew obligations under the treaty — both the non - nuclear - weapons states' pledge to remain non - nuclear , and nuclear - weapon states' commitment to further disarmament steps .

this could happen with or without a final consensus document , although observers tend to place importance on achieving consensus agreement .

former npt preparatory committee chairman henrik salander described a dilemma concerning the pursuit of consensus: it is difficult to judge whether it is good to have a consensus outcome that governments can just barely accept .

are principled substantive positions better in the long run , even with failed conferences and no agreements , than pragmatic and practical compromises ? .

countries will likely have a higher degree of skepticism of any new promises coming out of the review conference because many pledges made at 1995 and 2000 review conferences remain unfulfilled .

in general , however , the united states is likely to face an npt membership that is largely cynical about u.s. intentions toward the npt and fiercely defensive of its own right to access the full range of peaceful applications of nuclear energy .

despite a common view in washington that progress has been made in improving the political climate in advance of the npt meeting , according to some international observers , optimism after president obama's prague speech last spring has somewhat dissipated in the international diplomatic arena .

after all , the ctbt has not been submitted to the senate while the new start treaty has only just been concluded and is not yet in force .

these are two key indicators of progress on article vi for many npt parties .

more states may take the issue of noncompliance by iran , and possibly syria , more seriously following revelations in fall of 2009 about undisclosed an iranian centrifuge plant as well as iaea reports regarding the lack of cooperation by iran and syria with iaea investigations .

however , because iran and syria both participate in the review conference as member states , a consensus document that deals with these issues may be difficult to reach .

dr. william potter has written about this dilemma: i worry that the mistaken tendency to equate achievement of a consensus final document with a successful review outcome means shunting aside the most serious proliferation challenges , including but not limited to dprk and iranian nuclear brinkmanship , the indian and pakistani nuclear arms race , the threat of non - state actors and nuclear terrorism , and the continuing emphasis given to nuclear weapons in the security postures of the nuclear - weapon states .

if a consensus review document is adopted , it could contain new forward - looking nonproliferation and disarmament proposals .

some analysts recommend that instead of measuring implementation of the treaty , a contentious point , states should pursue agreement on forward - looking objectives .

daryl kimball of the arms control association , for example , has called for an "action plan to strengthen and reaffirm the npt. .

jean du preez wrote that a forward - looking document could "serve as a lodestar to regain confidence in the treaty's core bargains. .

agreement on many u.s. proposals or those contained in un security council resolution 1887 may be difficult to reach .

however , it is also possible that a consensus document would reflect the status of agreement and disagreement on various npt issues .

ambassador susan burk seems to be prepared for just such an outcome: we are looking forward to working with our treaty partners to try to identify areas where agreement on concrete measures to reinforce the global nuclear nonproliferation regime can be reached now , and on areas where further work and deliberation are needed so that agreement might be possible in the future .

other important aspects of the nuclear nonproliferation regime will not likely be discussed in detail at the npt review conference .

they were , however , addressed to some extent at the recent global nuclear security summit .

the npt does not address proliferation of nuclear weapons to non - state actors .

some states have proposed that in the post - 9 / 11 security environment , nuclear security issues should be a part of npt discussions .

uk foreign minister millibrand proposed that nuclear security become the "fourth pillar" of the npt .

also , eu nonproliferation representative annalisa giannella has said that since the npt requires states to prevent proliferation , "one can argue that this obligation also implies the obligation to protect nuclear or radiological material. .

iaea safeguards agreements under the npt do require physical protection measures at declared facilities .

nuclear material security as well as efforts to detect or interdict illicit transfers may be discussed at the review conference , but some developing states prefer to address these issues in other fora such as iaea meetings .

senate resolution 446 , "commemorating the 40 th anniversary of the treaty on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons," originally introduced by senator casey , was reported out of the foreign relations committee and placed on the senate legislative calendar on april 13 , 2010 .

the resolution reaffirms congressional support for the npt ; urges the president to work toward universality of the treaty ; encourages the president to work with international partners on establishing the additional protocol as "the global standard for safeguards and a requirement for nuclear commerce" ; calls for the iaea to be provided the necessary resources , personnel and technology to conduct npt oversight responsibilities ; and encourages the strengthening of enforcement mechanisms and "collective responses" to any withdrawal from the npt .

appendix a .

text of the treaty on the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons ( npt ) the states concluding this treaty , hereinafter referred to as the "parties to the treaty" , considering the devastation that would be visited upon all mankind by a nuclear war and the consequent need to make every effort to avert the danger of such a war and to take measures to safeguard the security of peoples , believing that the proliferation of nuclear weapons would seriously enhance the danger of nuclear war , in conformity with resolutions of the united nations general assembly calling for the conclusion of an agreement on the prevention of wider dissemination of nuclear weapons , undertaking to co - operate in facilitating the application of international atomic energy agency safeguards on peaceful nuclear activities , expressing their support for research , development and other efforts to further the application , within the framework of the international atomic energy agency safeguards system , of the principle of safeguarding effectively the flow of source and special fissionable materials by use of instruments and other techniques at certain strategic points , affirming the principle that the benefits of peaceful applications of nuclear technology , including any technological by - products which may be derived by nuclear - weapon states from the development of nuclear explosive devices , should be available for peaceful purposes to all parties to the treaty , whether nuclear - weapon or non - nuclear - weapon states , convinced that , in furtherance of this principle , all parties to the treaty are entitled to participate in the fullest possible exchange of scientific information for , and to contribute alone or in co - operation with other states to , the further development of the applications of atomic energy for peaceful purposes .

declaring their intention to achieve at the earliest possible date the cessation of the nuclear arms race and to undertake effective measures in the direction of nuclear disarmament , urging the co - operation of a1l states in the attainment of this objective , recalling the determination expressed by the parties to the 1963 treaty banning nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere , in outer space and under water in its preamble to seek to achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions of nuclear weapons for all time and to continue negotiations to this end , desiring to further the casing of international tension and the strengthening of trust between states in order to facilitate the cessation of the manufacture of nuclear weapons , the liquidation of an their existing stockpiles , and the elimination from national arsenals of nuclear weapons and the means of their delivery pursuant to a treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control , recalling that , in accordance with the charter of the united nations , states must refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state , or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the united nations , and that the establishment and maintenance of international peace and security are to be promoted with the least diversion for armaments of the world's human and economic resources , have agreed as follows: article i each nuclear - weapon state party to the treaty undertakes not to transfer to any recipient whatsoever nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices or control over such weapons or explosive devices directly , or indirectly ; and not in any way to assist , encourage , or induce any non - nuclear - weapon state to manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices , or control over such weapons or explosive devices .

article ii each non - nuclear - weapon state party to the treaty undertakes not to receive the transfer from any transferor whatsoever of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices or of control over such weapons or explosive devices directly , or indirectly ; not to manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices ; and not to seek or receive any assistance in the manufacture of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices .

article iii 1 .

each non - nuclear - weapon state party to the treaty undertakes to accept safeguards , as set forth in an agreement to be negotiated and concluded with the international atomic energy agency in accordance with the statute of the international atomic energy agency and the agency's safeguards system , for the exclusive purpose of verification of the fulfillment of its obligations assumed under this treaty with a view to preventing diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful uses to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices .

procedures for the safeguards required by this article shall be followed with respect to source or special fissionable material whether it is being produced , processed or used in any principal nuclear facility or is outside any such facility .

the safeguards required by this article shall be applied on all source or special fissionable material in all peaceful nuclear activities within the territory of such state , under its jurisdiction , or carried out under its control anywhere .

2 .

each state party to the treaty undertakes not to provide: ( a ) source or special fissionable material , or ( b ) equipment or material especially designed or prepared for the processing , use or production of special fissionable material , to any non - nuclear - weapon state for peaceful purposes , unless the source or special fissionable material shall be subject to the safeguards required by this article .

3 .

the safeguards required by this article shall be implemented in a manner designed to comply with article iv of this treaty , and· to avoid hampering the economic or technological development of· the parties or international co - operation in the field of peaceful nuclear activities , including the international exchange of nuclear material and equipment for the processing , use or production of nuclear material for peaceful purposes in accordance with the provisions of this article and the principle of safeguarding set forth in the preamble of the treaty .

4 .

non - nuclear - weapon states party to the treaty shall conclude agreements with the international atomic energy agency to meet the requirements of this article either individually or together with other states in accordance with the statute of the international atomic energy agency .

negotiation of such agreements shall commence within 180 days from the original entry into force of this treaty .

for states depositing their instruments of ratification or accession after the 180-day period , negotiation of such agreements shall commence not later than the date of such deposit .

such agreements shall enter into force not later than eighteen months after the date of initiation of negotiations .

article iv 1 .

nothing in this treaty shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all the parties to the treaty to develop research , production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with articles i and ii of this treaty .

2 .

all the parties to the treaty undertake to facilitate , and have the right to participate in , the fullest possible exchange of equipment , materials and scientific and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy .

parties to the treaty in a position to do so shall also co - operate in contributing alone or together with other states or international organizations to the further development of the applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes , especially in the territories of non - nuclear - weapon states party to the treaty , with due consideration for the needs of the developing areas of the world .

article v each party to the treaty undertakes to take appropriate measures to ensure that , in accordance with this treaty , under appropriate international observation and through appropriate international procedures , potential benefits from any peaceful applications of nuclear explosions will be made available to non - nuc1ear - weapon states party to the treaty on a non - discriminatory basis and that the charge to such parties for the explosive devices used will be as low as possible and exclude any charge for research and development .

non - nuclear - weapon states party to the treaty shall be able to obtain such benefits , pursuant to a special international agreement or agreements , through an appropriate international body with adequate representation of non - nuclear - weapon states .

negotiations on this subject shall commence as soon as possible after the treaty enters into force .

non - nuclear - weapon states party to the treaty so desiring may also obtain such benefits pursuant to bilateral agreements .

article vi each of the parties to the treaty undertakes to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament , and on a treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control .

article vii nothing in this treaty affects the right of any group of states to conclude regional treaties in order to assure the total absence of nuclear weapons in their respective territories .

article viii 1 .

any party to the treaty may propose amendments to this treaty .

the text of any proposed amendment shall be submitted to the depositary governments which shall circulate it to all parties to the treaty .

thereupon , if requested to do so by one - third or more of the parties to the treaty , the depositary governments shall convene a conference , to which they shall invite all the parties to the treaty , to consider such an amendment .

2 .

any amendment to this treaty must be approved by a majority of the votes of all the parties to the treaty , including the votes of all nuclear - weapon states party to the treaty and all other parties which , on the date the amendment is circulated , are members of the board of governors of the international atomic energy agency .

the amendment shall enter into force for each party that deposits its instrument of ratification of the amendment upon the deposit of such instruments of ratification by a majority of all the parties , including the instruments of ratification of all nuclear weapon states party to the treaty and all other parties which , on the date the amendment is circulated , are members of the board of governors of the international atomic energy agency .

thereafter , it shall enter into force for any other party upon the deposit of its instrument of ratification of the amendment .

3 .

five years after the entry into force of this treaty , a conference of parties to the treaty shall be held in geneva , switzerland , in order to review the operation of this treaty with a view to assuring that the purposes of the preamble and the provisions of the treaty are being realized .

at intervals of five years thereafter , a majority of the parties to the treaty may obtain , by submitting a proposal to this effect to the depositary governments , the convening of further conferences with the same objective of reviewing the operation of the treaty .

article ix 1 .

this treaty shall be open to all states for signature .

any state which does not sign the treaty before its entry into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article may accede to it at any time .

2 .

this treaty shall be subject to ratification by signatory states .

instruments of ratification and instruments of accession shall be deposited with the governments of the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland , the union of soviet socialist republics and the united states of america , which are hereby designated the depositary governments .

3 .

this treaty shall enter into force after its ratification by the states , the governments of which are designated .

depositaries of the treaty , and forty other states signatory to this treaty and the deposit of their instruments of ratification .

for the purposes of this treaty , a nuclear - weapon state is one which has manufactured and exploded a nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device prior to 1 january , 1967 .

4 .

for states whose instruments of ratification or accession are deposited subsequent to the entry into force of this treaty , it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit of their instruments of ratification or accession .

5 .

the depositary governments shall promptly inform all signatory and acceding states of the date of each signature , the date of deposit of each instrument of ratification or of accession , the date of the entry into force of this treaty , and the date of receipt of any requests for convening a conference or other notices .

6 .

this treaty shall be registered by the depositary governments pursuant to article 102 of the charter of the united nations .

article x 1 .

each party shall in exercising its national sovereignty have the right to withdraw from the treaty if it decides that extraordinary events , related to the subject matter of this treaty , have jeopardized the supreme interests of its country .

it shall give notice of such withdrawal to all other parties to the treaty and to the united nations security council three months in advance .

such notice shall include a statement of the extraordinary events it regards as having jeopardized its supreme interests .

2 .

twenty - five years after the entry into force of the treaty , a conference shall be convened to decide whether the treaty shall continue in force indefinitely , or shall be extended for an additional fixed period or periods .

this decision shall be taken by a majority of the parties to the treaty .

article xi this treaty , the english , russian , french , spanish and chinese texts of which are equally authentic , shall be deposited in the archives of the depositary governments .

duly certified copies of this treaty shall be transmitted by the depositary governments to the governments of the signatory and acceding states .

appendix b .

resolution on the middle east ( 1995 ) the conference of the parties to the treaty on the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons , reaffirming the purpose and provisions of the treaty on the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons , recognizing that , pursuant to article vii of the treaty , the establishment of nuclear - weapon - free zones contributes to strengthening the international non - proliferation regime , recalling that the security council , in its statement of 31 january 1992 , a / affirmed that the proliferation of nuclear and all other weapons of mass destruction constituted a threat to international peace and security , recalling also general assembly resolutions adopted by consensus supporting the establishment of a nuclear - weapon - free zone in the middle east , the latest of which is resolution 49 / 71 of 15 december 1994 , recalling further the relevant resolutions adopted by the general conference of the international atomic energy agency concerning the application of agency safeguards in the middle east , the latest of which is gc ( xxxviii ) / res / 21 of 23 september 1994 , and noting the danger of nuclear proliferation , especially in areas of tension , bearing in mind security council resolution 687 ( 1991 ) and in particular paragraph 14 thereof , noting security council resolution 984 ( 1995 ) and paragraph 8 of the decision on principles and objectives for nuclear non - proliferation and disarmament adopted by the conference on 11 may 1995 , bearing in mind the other decisions adopted by the conference on 11 may 1995 , 1 .

endorses the aims and objectives of the middle east peace process and recognizes that efforts in this regard , as well as other efforts , contribute to , inter alia , a middle east zone free of nuclear weapons as well as other weapons of mass destruction ; 2 .

notes with satisfaction that , in its report ( npt / conf.1995 / mc.iii / 1 ) , main committee iii of the conference recommended that the conference "call on those remaining states not parties to the treaty to accede to it , thereby accepting an international legally binding commitment not to acquire nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices and to accept international atomic energy agency safeguards on all their nuclear activities" ; 3 .

notes with concern the continued existence in the middle east of unsafeguarded nuclear facilities , and reaffirms in this connection the recommendation contained in section vi , paragraph 3 , of the report of main committee iii urging those non - parties to the treaty on the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons that operate unsafeguarded nuclear facilities to accept full - scope international atomic energy agency safeguards ; 4 .

reaffirms the importance of the early realization of universal adherence to the treaty , and calls upon all states of the middle east that have not yet done so , without exception , to accede to the treaty as soon as possible and to place their nuclear facilities under full - scope international atomic energy agency safeguards ; 5 .

calls upon all states in the middle east to take practical steps in appropriate forums aimed at making progress towards , inter alia , the establishment of an effectively verifiable middle east zone free of weapons of mass destruction , nuclear , chemical and biological , and their delivery systems , and to refrain from taking any measures that preclude the achievement of this objective ; 6 .

calls upon all states party to the treaty on the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons , and in particular the nuclear - weapon states , to extend their cooperation and to exert their utmost efforts with a view to ensuring the early establishment by regional parties of a middle east zone free of nuclear and all other weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems .

appendix c. "13 practical steps" ( 2000 ) the conference agrees on the following practical steps for the systematic and progressive efforts to implement article vi of the treaty on the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons and paragraphs 3 and 4 ( c ) of the1995 decision on "principles and objectives for nuclear non - proliferation and disarmament": 1 .

the importance and urgency of signatures and ratifications , without delay and without conditions and in accordance with constitutional processes , to achieve the early entry into force of the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty .

2 .

a moratorium on nuclear - weapon - test explosions or any other nuclear explosions pending entry into force of that treaty .

3 .

the necessity of negotiations in the conference on disarmament on a non - discriminatory , multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices in accordance with the statement of the special coordinator in 1995 and the mandate contained therein , taking into consideration both nuclear disarmament and nuclear non - proliferation objectives .

the conference on disarmament is urged to agree on a program of work which includes the immediate commencement of negotiations on such a treaty with a view to their conclusion within five years .

4 .

the necessity of establishing in the conference on disarmament an appropriate subsidiary body with a mandate to deal with nuclear disarmament .

the conference on disarmament is urged to agree on a program of work which includes the immediate establishment of such a body .

5 .

the principle of irreversibility to apply to nuclear disarmament , nuclear and other related arms control and reduction measures .

6 .

an unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear - weapon states to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament to which all states parties are committed under article vi .

7 .

the early entry into force and full implementation of start ii and the conclusion of start iii as soon as possible while preserving and strengthening the abm treaty as a cornerstone of strategic stability and as a basis for further reductions of strategic offensive weapons , in accordance with its provisions .

8 .

the completion and implementation of the trilateral initiative between the united states of america , the russian federation and the international atomic energy agency .

9 .

steps by all the nuclear - weapon states leading to nuclear disarmament in a way that promotes international stability , and based on the principle of undiminished security for all: ( a ) further efforts by the nuclear - weapon states to reduce their nuclear arsenals unilaterally .

 ( b ) increased transparency by the nuclear - weapon states with regard to the nuclear weapons capabilities and the implementation of agreements pursuant to article vi and as a voluntary confidence - building measure to support further progress on nuclear disarmament .

 ( c ) the further reduction of non - strategic nuclear weapons , based on unilateral initiatives and as an integral part of the nuclear arms reduction and disarmament process .

 ( d ) concrete agreed measures to further reduce the operational status of nuclear weapons systems .

 ( e ) a diminishing role for nuclear weapons in security policies to minimize the risk that these weapons ever be used and to facilitate the process of their total elimination .

 ( f ) the engagement as soon as appropriate of all the nuclear - weapon states in the process leading to the total elimination of their nuclear weapons .

10 .

arrangements by all nuclear - weapon states to place , as soon as practicable , fissile material designated by each of them as no longer required for military purposes under iaea or other relevant international verification and arrangements for the disposition of such material for peaceful purposes , to ensure that such material remains permanently outside of military programs .

11 .

reaffirmation that the ultimate objective of the efforts of states in the disarmament process is general and complete disarmament under effective international control .

12 .

regular reports , within the framework of the npt strengthened review process , by all states parties on the implementation of article vi and paragraph 4 ( c ) of the 1995 decision on "principles and objectives for nuclear non - proliferation and disarmament," and recalling the advisory opinion of the international court of justice of 8 july 1996 .

13 .

the further development of the verification capabilities that will be required to provide assurance of compliance with nuclear disarmament agreements for the achievement and maintenance of a nuclear - weapon - free world .

