retiring justice john paul stevens has not authored many opinions relating to intellectual property law , but those he has written reflect his interest in striking an appropriate balance between the protection of intellectual property rights and public access to the products of creative and inventive minds .

his intellectual property opinions seek to serve the central purposes of the copyright and patent clause of the constitution — ( 1 ) encourage and reward the creativity of authors and inventors by offering them exclusive legal rights to their respective writings and discoveries , and ( 2 ) promote the progress of science and useful arts by requiring that the monopoly privileges last only for a limited period , after which the public gains free access to such work .

this report examines justice stevens' opinions involving copyright law , patent law , and state sovereign immunity and patent infringement lawsuits .

a brief summary of the basic principles and provisions of copyright and patent law precedes each section describing these opinions .

copyright is a federal grant of legal protection for certain original works of creative expression , including books , movies , photography , art , and music .

the copyright act refers to the creator of such works as an "author ; " ownership of a copyright initially vests in the author , but the author may transfer ownership of the copyright to another person or company .

a copyright holder possesses several exclusive legal entitlements under the copyright act , which together provide the holder with the right to determine whether and under what circumstances the protected work may be used by third parties .

the grant of copyright permits the copyright holder to exercise , or authorize others to exercise , the following exclusive rights: the reproduction of the copyrighted work ; the preparation of derivative works based on the copyrighted work ; the distribution of copies of the copyrighted work ; the public performance of the copyrighted work ; and the public display of the copyrighted work , including the individual images of a motion picture .

therefore , a party desiring to reproduce , adapt , distribute , publicly display , or publicly perform a copyrighted work must ordinarily obtain the permission of the copyright holder , which is usually granted in the form of a voluntarily negotiated license agreement that establishes conditions of use and an amount of monetary compensation known as a royalty fee .

there are , however , other ways a third party may legally use a copyrighted work in the absence of affirmative permission from the copyright holder , including the use of statutory licenses or reliance upon the "fair use" doctrine .

the doctrine of "fair use" recognizes the right of the public to make reasonable use of copyrighted material , under particular circumstances , without the copyright holder's consent .

for example , a teacher may be able to use reasonable excerpts of copyrighted works in preparing a scholarly lecture or commentary , without obtaining permission to do so .

the copyright act mentions fair use "for purposes such as criticism , comment , news reporting , teaching , scholarship , or research. .

however , a determination of fair use by a court considers four factors: the purpose and character of the use including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes , the nature of the copyrighted work , the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole , and the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work .

because the language of the fair use statute is illustrative , determining what constitutes a fair use of a copyrighted work is often difficult to make in advance — according to the u.s. supreme court , such a determination requires a federal court to engage in "case - by - case" analysis .

violation of one of the exclusive rights of the copyright holder constitutes infringement , and the copyright holder may bring a civil lawsuit against the alleged infringer to collect monetary damages and / or to obtain an injunction to prevent further infringement .

the direct infringer is not the only party potentially liable for infringement ; the federal courts have recognized two forms of secondary copyright infringement liability: contributory and vicarious .

the concept of contributory infringement has its roots in tort law and the notion that one should be held accountable for directly contributing to another's infringement .

for contributory infringement liability to exist , a court must find that the secondary infringer "with knowledge of the infringing activity , induces , causes or materially contributes to the infringing conduct of another. .

vicarious infringement liability is possible where a defendant "has the right and ability to supervise the infringing activity and also has a direct financial interest in such activities. .

according to section 101 of the patent act , one who "invents or discovers any new and useful process , machine , manufacture , or any composition of matter , or any new and useful improvement thereof , may obtain a patent therefore , subject to the conditions and requirements of this title. .

thus , the subject matter that is eligible for patent protection may be divided into four categories: processes , machines , manufactures , and compositions of matter .

the statutory scope of patentable subject matter under § 101 of the patent act is quite expansive — the u.s. supreme court once observed that the legislative history describing the intent of § 101 was to make patent protection available to "anything under the sun that is made by man. .

notwithstanding the breadth of patentable subject matter , the supreme court has articulated certain limits to § 101 , stating that "laws of nature , natural phenomena , and abstract ideas" may not be patented .

the court has elaborated on this restriction in several cases , including the following explanation: [a] new mineral discovered in the earth or a new plant found in the wild is not patentable subject matter .

likewise , einstein could not patent his celebrated law that e=mc 2 ; nor could newton have patented the law of gravity .

such discoveries are "manifestations of ... nature , free to all men and reserved exclusively to none. .

process patents ( also called method patents ) involve an act , or series of steps , that may be performed to achieve a given result .

the patent act defines a "process" to mean a "process , art , or method , and includes a new use of a known process , machine , manufacture , composition of matter , or material. .

however , this statutory definition is not particularly illuminating "given that the definition itself uses the term 'process.' .

it has thus been up to the courts to interpret the scope of patentable processes under § 101 of the patent act .

the patent act grants patent holders the right to exclude others from making , using , offering for sale , or selling their patented invention throughout the united states , or importing the invention into the united states .

whoever performs any one of these five acts during the term of the invention's patent , without the patent holder's authorization , is liable for infringement .

defendants who may be sued for patent infringement include private individuals , companies , and also the federal government .

yet when state governments and state institutions ( such as state - owned universities ) infringe patents , the patent holder currently has very limited legal recourse because of the u.s. supreme court's jurisprudence concerning the eleventh amendment to the u.s. constitution .

the eleventh amendment , with limited exceptions , bars an individual from suing a state under federal law without the state's consent .

while states may consent to suit by waiving the privilege of sovereign immunity , in limited circumstances congress may also abrogate , or overrule , that immunity by passing a statute pursuant to the enforcement power under § 5 of the fourteenth amendment .

congress passed the patent and plant variety protection remedy clarification act ( patent remedy act ) in 1992 .

the language of the statute specifically and unequivocally abrogated state sovereign immunity and subjected the states to suits for monetary damages brought by individuals for violation of federal patent law .

the validity of this statute was challenged in florida prepaid v. college savings bank .

college savings bank held a patent for its financing methodology , based on certificates of deposit and annuity contracts , designed to guarantee investors funds for future college expenses .

the state of florida soon adopted college savings bank's methodology and created the florida prepaid postsecondary education expense board ( the board ) to issue similar financing options to its own residents .

consequently , college savings bank filed a claim for patent infringement against the board under the patent remedy act .

the principal issue in florida prepaid was whether the patent remedy act had legitimately abrogated state sovereign immunity from suit for patent infringement .

college savings bank argued that congress had lawfully done so pursuant to the due process clause by ensuring an individual an adequate remedy in the case of a deprivation of property perpetrated by the state in the form of patent infringement .

the district court agreed with college savings bank , and the federal circuit court affirmed .

however , the supreme court , in a 5-4 decision , overturned the federal circuit decision , holding that the prca was not a valid use of the § 5 enforcement power of the fourteenth amendment and therefore not a legitimate abrogation of state sovereign immunity .

justice stevens filed a dissenting opinion , joined by three other justices .

he first observed that the constitution vested congress with plenary authority over patents , and that congress had passed laws providing federal courts with exclusive jurisdiction of patent infringement litigation .

he noted that there is "a strong federal interest in an interpretation of the patent statutes that is ... uniform," and that such federal interest is "threatened ... by inadequate protection for patentees. .

in justice stevens' view , it was "appropriate for congress to abrogate state sovereign immunity in patent infringement cases in order to close a potential loophole in the uniform federal scheme , which , if undermined , would necessarily decrease the efficacy of the process afforded to patent holders. .

he believed that the patent remedy act was a proper exercise of congress's power under §5 of the fourteenth amendment to prevent state deprivations of property without due process of law .

supporting the concern for potential due process violations , he referred to the legislative history of the patent remedy act that included congressional findings that state remedies would be insufficient to compensate inventors whose patents had been infringed , and also that state infringement of patents was likely to increase .

justice stevens argued that the patent remedy act "merely puts" states in the same position as the federal government and private users of the patent system when it comes to the possibility of being held accountable for patent infringement .

at the conclusion of his dissent , justice stevens criticized the majority opinion's "aggressive sovereign immunity jurisprudence" that "demonstrates itself to be the champion of states' rights. .

