this report provides an overview of the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) budget and operations .

the report chronicles congressional action on the fy2011 commerce , justice , science ( cjs ) , and related agencies appropriations bills , as well as an fy2010 supplemental appropriations bill , that have included funding for atf .

on april 14 , 2011 , congress passed the department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( h.r .

1473 ; p.l .

112-10 ) .

under this act , for fy2011 congress has funded the atf salaries and expenses account at slightly below its fy2010 enacted level of funding ( reduced by two - tenths of a percent ) .

hence , atf's fy2011 appropriation is $1.113 billion .

in addition , during consideration of a full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( h.r .

1 ) on february 19 , 2011 , the house adopted an amendment that would have prohibited funds provided under that act from being used to require federally licensed gun dealers in the four southwest border states to submit multiple rifle or shotgun sales reports .

the house went on to pass h.r .

1 , but the senate rejected this bill on march 9 , 2011 , for budgetary considerations that went well beyond concerns about this policy rider .

nevertheless , congress did not include a similar rider as part of p.l .

112-10 .

besides atf's multiple rifle sales reporting proposal , another emerging issue related to the atf budget and operations includes the agency's conduct of a phoenix , az - based investigation known as "operation fast and furious. .

located in doj , the atf is the lead federal law enforcement agency charged with administering and enforcing federal laws related to the manufacture , importation , and distribution of firearms and explosives .

as part of the homeland security act , congress transferred atf's enforcement and regulatory functions for firearms and explosives to doj from the department of the treasury ( treasury ) , adding "explosives" to atf's title .

atf is also responsible for investigating arson cases with a federal nexus , as well as criminal violations of federal laws governing the manufacture , importation , and distribution of alcohol and tobacco .

the regulatory aspects of those alcohol and tobacco laws are the domain of the tax and trade bureau ( ttb ) , which was established at treasury following atf's transfer to doj .

as a law enforcement agency within doj , atf's first priority is preventing terrorist attacks within the united states .

atf is responsible for countering the illegal use and trafficking of firearms and explosives , and the criminal diversion of alcohol and tobacco products as an illegal source of funding for terrorist activities .

in criminal investigations , atf agents have reportedly uncovered foreign terrorists and their supporters bootlegging cigarettes as part of larger terrorist - financing operations in the united states .

with those responsibilities , atf special agents are partners on doj's joint terrorism task forces .

as shown below , however , the lion's share of atf's resources are allocated to its firearms compliance and investigations program .

while the atf periodically checks the records of federally licensed gun dealers , the major focus of the firearms program is the reduction of firearms - related violence .

in the 10-year period from fy2001 through fy2010 , congress increased direct appropriations for the atf by 50.2% , from $771.0 million to $1.158 billion .

moreover , over three fiscal years , fy2008 through fy2010 , congress provided atf with about $86.5 million in program increases to address firearms trafficking , or the diversion of firearms from legal to illegal markets .

most of this funding has been dedicated to atf efforts to reduce firearms trafficking from the united states to mexico .

to these ends , under the mérida initiative atf released a spanish - language version of its firearms trace request software ( e - trace 4.0 ) to mexico , guatemala , and costa rica and established a u.s. - mexico ballistic evidence exchange capability under the national integrated ballistic imaging network ( nibin ) program .

for fy2010 , congress also provided atf with nearly $30 million for the construction of a national center for explosives training and research ( ncetr ) .

in the 110 th congress , the house passed a bill ( h.r .

6028 ) that would have authorized increasing atf appropriations over three years , for fy2008 through fy2010 , by nearly $74 million to address southwest border gun trafficking .

as a doj bureau , the atf authorization of appropriations expired for fy2010 .

previously , congress provided annual appropriations authorizations , for fy2006 through fy2009 , in the department of justice authorization act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-162 ) ( see appendix ) .

in the 111 th congress , no action was taken on bills to reauthorize or increase atf appropriations .

however , the 111 th congress granted atf greater authority to inspect the businesses and records of "cigarette deliverers" in the prevent all cigarette trafficking act ( p.l .

111-154 ) .

for oversight purposes , it is also notable that in the fall of 2009 the doj office of inspector general ( oig ) released three reports on atf operations .

the first examined project gunrunner , an atf initiative to reduce illegal gun trafficking from the united states to mexico .

the second examined atf's efforts to investigate contraband cigarette trafficking .

the third examined atf's concurrent jurisdiction with the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) for explosives - related investigations .

in november 2010 , moreover , the oig released another review of project gunrunner , recommending among other things that atf ought to work with doj to explore options to require reporting of multiple long gun sales from federally licensed gun dealers in the four southwest border states .

on march 4 , 2010 , the house cjs appropriations subcommittee held a hearing on the administration's fy2011 atf budget request .

as in past hearings , the subcommittee chair , representative alan mollohan , observed that the request did not include any additional positions dedicated to regulation writers , despite a regulatory backlog .

he observed that 15 of 16 atf positions previously associated with such duties had remained at treasury , following atf's transfer to doj in january 2003 .

 ( with the exception of two positions , those positions have not been backfilled. ) .

if atf previously needed anywhere near 16 positions for such purposes , representative mollohan asked rhetorically , was not the atf request "woefully inadequate ? .

atf deputy director kenneth melson did not comment on the regulatory backlog , but conceded that the agency needed additional "regulation writers. .

with regard to the regulatory backlog , it is significant to note that , in most cases , atf iois serve as the "subject area experts," who are usually tasked with drafting regulations .

atf's capabilities to regulate u.s. firearms and explosives commerce adequately and deter the illegal use of these commodities is undergirded by its ability to promulgate clear and concise regulations .

although most of the atf subject area experts on alcohol and tobacco remained with the department of treasury's alcohol and tobacco tax and trade bureau ( ttb ) , atf is still responsible for the bulk of enforcement of criminal statutes related to these commodities .

other issues raised by subcommittee members included the scope of gun trafficking on the southwest border , the effectiveness of violent crime impact teams , and inter - agency coordination on gang violence .

these issues are discussed below .

atf's firearms budget program funds activities related to administering and enforcing federal laws related to the manufacture , importation , and distribution of firearms .

the principal focus of atf's firearms - related activities , however , is the reduction of firearms - related violence .

as part of this focus , the atf has dedicated increased resources in recent years toward investigating the criminal activities of violent street gangs , ensuring that federally licensed gun dealers comply with the law , and suppressing gun trafficking .

atf's authority to regulate firearms commerce in the united states is derived generally from three statutes: ( 1 ) the national firearms act of 1934 ( nfa ) , ( 2 ) the gun control act of 1968 ( gca ) , and ( 3 ) the arms export control act of 1976 .

the proposed fy2011 firearms program allocation accompanying the administration's budget request is $837.4 million , or 72% of the fy2011 budget request ( $1.163 billion ) .

the proposed allocation includes an increase of $12.7 million over base ( $11.8 million for project gunrunner and $854 thousand for emergency support function #13 ) .

atf's arson and explosives budget program covers activities related to administering and enforcing federal laws governing the manufacture , importation , and distribution of explosives , as well as investigating arson cases with a federal nexus .

the federal statutory provisions regulating explosives commerce in the united states were enacted under title xi of the organized crime control act of 1970 ( often referred to as the explosives control act of 1970 ) .

the anti - arson act of 1982 amended this act to create a federal crime of arson .

the act was amended further by the safe explosives act , which was included in the homeland security act of 2002 .

the proposed fy2011 allocation for the atf arson and explosives program is $302.4 million , or about 26% of the fy2011 budget request ( $1.163 billion ) .

the proposed fy2011 allocation includes a program increase of $320,000 for emergency support function #13 .

among law enforcement agencies , the atf is recognized for its investigative expertise in responding to both arson and explosive incidents .

the attorney general ( ag ) , for example , made the atf responsible for maintaining a consolidated database of all arson and explosive incidents that occur in the united states .

reportedly , as part of the department's law enforcement information - sharing program , this and other databases are to be linked and made web - accessible , and first responders anywhere in the united states are to have access to critical information about arson and explosive cases nationwide .

nevertheless , as described below , both atf and the fbi share concurrent jurisdiction over federal criminal investigations involving explosives , and both bureaus have maintained separate databases on explosives incidents .

at times , this shared jurisdiction appears to have resulted in an inter - agency rivalry .

the atf alcohol and tobacco budget program covers expenses related to agency efforts to counter a rising trend in the illegal diversion of tobacco products , as well as the illegal movement of distilled alcohol products .

the fy2010 allocation for the alcohol and tobacco program totals $22.3 million , or about 2% of atf's direct appropriation ( $1.115 billion ) for salaries and expenses , which is in line with historical budget trends ( fy2004 through fy2010 ) .

the proposed fy2011 allocation accompanying the administration's budget request is $23.3 million , or again about 2% of the request ( $1.163 billion ) .

in addition , through doj's asset forfeiture authority , atf also has "churning budget authority," or the authority to obligate the proceeds of seized assets to fund tobacco diversion and other long - term , complex undercover investigations .

notwithstanding this additional funding authority , in september 2009 , the doj oig issued a report on atf's efforts to prevent tobacco diversion , which includes contraband cigarette trafficking .

in this report , the inspector general found that tobacco diversion investigations , along with alcohol diversion investigations , are accorded a low priority at atf , as compared to its other mission areas , such as investigating firearms - and explosives - related crime , particularly violent crime , and arson .

this low priority is partly the result of the view that tobacco diversion is largely a nonviolent crime , despite its connections with terrorist financing and organized crime .

between fy2004 and fy2008 , atf conducted 645 alcohol and tobacco diversion investigations , or about 1% of atf's investigative caseload .

of these cases , 566 investigations ( 88% ) involved tobacco and 79 ( 12% ) involved alcohol .

with regard to the greater number of tobacco cases than alcohol cases , atf observed that tobacco diversion is much more lucrative to criminal enterprises than is alcohol , as the latter is much more difficult to transport in large quantities .

alcohol diversion , moreover , is also limited to certain geographic areas and generally such cases today are handled by state and local authorities .

the fy2011 budget request includes a program increase of $24,000 for emergency support function #13 .

it is significant to note that the oig reported that the fy2010 departmental budget request to the office of management and budget ( omb ) included $28.3 million for tobacco diversion , but this request was denied by omb and was not included in the atf's fy2010 congressional budget submission ( request ) .

the federal statutes that address the diversion of distilled spirits ( alcohol ) are many .

they include , but are not limited to , the internal revenue code ( irc ) , the federal alcohol administration ( faa ) act , the 21 st amendment , the webb - kenyon act , the federal criminal code , and federal indian laws .

although atf has primary jurisdiction for illegal interstate transportation of liquor and related racketeering activities , the regulatory statutes underlying those violations are found in the irc .

in addition , the department of the treasury has primary jurisdiction over the irc , as well as the faa and webb - kenyon act .

while historically atf traces its roots back to eliot ness and other treasury agents who battled organized crime during the era of prohibition and illegal liquor production ( moonshining ) , since its transfer to doj , atf's role in enforcing liquor laws has been diminished , as is evident in part by its small investigative caseload .

most of the atf personnel dedicated to the regulation of alcohol and tobacco remained at treasury within the alcohol and tobacco tax and trade bureau ( ttb ) .

according to atf , it has primary jurisdiction over criminal provisions related to tobacco in the contraband cigarette trafficking act ( ccta ) of 1978 .

in may 2004 , the general accounting office ( now the government accountability office ) reported that the illegal diversion and smuggling of cigarettes in the united states results in an unknown but significant loss in tax revenues .

atf criminal intelligence indicates that cigarette bootlegging is a lucrative criminal venture that terrorist groups have used and would possibly use to finance their future criminal activities , including drug and weapons trafficking , identity theft , and various types of fraud .

atf has investigated armenian , chinese , middle eastern , russian , taiwanese , ukrainian , and native american organized crime groups engaged in diverting large quantities of contraband and counterfeit cigarettes and counterfeit tax stamps .

these activities have become increasingly lucrative as states and the federal government have raised excise taxes on cigarettes .

according to the inspector general , transporting contraband cigarettes from low - tax states to high - tax states , and reselling those cigarettes on the black market , can yield high profits: a car load of 10 cases can yield an estimated $18,000 to $23,000 ; a van load of 50 cases , an estimated $90,000 to $115,000 ; and a small truck load of 200 cases , an estimated $360,000 to $465,000 .

nonetheless , the inspector general described the atf's tobacco diversion efforts as "ad hoc," and underscored that there is no systematic method within the agency to share intelligence and information between field divisions .

the inspector general reported , moreover , that atf headquarters is not facilitating information sharing between its field agents and personnel at treasury's ttb , which maintains a database on tobacco licensees , and had not coordinated with tobacco companies , which often provide cigarettes for undercover operations .

the 110 th and 111 th congresses considered legislation to strengthen federal laws that address contraband cigarette trafficking .

representative anthony weiner introduced the prevent all cigarette trafficking ( pact ) act ( h.r .

1676 ) .

the house judiciary committee reported this measure ( h.rept .

111-117 ) on may 18 , 2009 , and the house passed it on may 21 , 2009 , by a recorded vote ( two - thirds required ) : 397-11 ( roll no .

287 ) .

senator herb kohl introduced a similar measure ( s. 1147 ) .

the senate judiciary committee amended the bill with substitute language and reported it without a written report on november 11 , 2009 .

it was passed by the senate on march 11 , 2010 .

it was passed by the house on march 17 , 2010 , by a recorded vote ( two - thirds required ) : 387-25 ( roll no .

124 ) .

on march 31 , 2010 , president obama signed s. 1147 into law ( p.l .

111-154 ) .

the house - passed h.r .

1676 included two sections that addressed atf's tobacco diversion mission , but only one of these sections ( section 5 ) was included in the senate - and house - passed bill ( s. 1147 ) that was signed into law by the president .

section 7 of the house - passed h.r .

1676 , which was not included in p.l .

111-154 , would have authorized atf to establish six regional contraband tobacco trafficking teams over a three - year period in new york city ; washington , dc ; detroit ; los angeles ; seattle ; and miami ; a tobacco intelligence center to serve as the "nerve center" for all ongoing tobacco diversion investigations ; a covert national warehouse for undercover operations ; and a computer database to track the retail sale of tobacco products through the internet , by mail - order , or in any other non - face - to - face transaction .

for these purposes , section 7 would have also authorized to be appropriated $8.5 million for five years beginning with fy2010 .

by comparison , the other section , which was included in p.l .

111-154 , authorizes atf to enter the business premises of "delivery sellers" and inspect their records and information and any cigarettes or smokeless tobacco stored at such premises .

it also authorizes federal district courts to compel such inspections , and imposes a civil penalty for failure to comply with inspections .

in the 110 th congress , the house passed a similar bill ( h.r .

4081 ) on september 10 , 2008 , by a recorded vote ( two - thirds required ) : 379 to 12 ( roll no .

584 ) .

this bill was reported by the house judiciary committee on the previous day ( h.rept .

110-836 ) .

the senate judiciary committee reported a similar bill on september 11 , 2007 ( s. 1027 ; s.rept .

110-153 ) , but the senate took no further action on this bill .

congress last provided authorizations for atf's annual appropriation in the violence against women and department of justice reauthorization act of 2005 .

this act authorized appropriations for doj as a whole and atf as a doj agency for fy2006 through fy2009 .

congress did not associate authorized dollar amounts with fte or permanent positions .

the annual authorization for appropriations lapsed for fy2010 , as the 110 th and 111 th congresses have not considered legislation to reauthorize appropriations for either doj or atf .

as table a - 1 shows , congress has generally appropriated more money for atf than has been authorized .

