successive u.s. presidents tended to support the roc , or taiwan , as an ally against communist movements in mainland china and elsewhere .

if there was u.s. pressure on the kmt dictatorship to alleviate authoritarian abuses under martial law , the messages were largely quiet and unpublicized .

the u.s. military worked with taiwan's military , with a military assistance agreement , mutual defense treaty ( from 1954 to 1979 ) , and assignment of a military assistance advisory group ( maag ) .

the maag included officers from the u.s. army's judge advocate general ( jag ) corps .

one officer assigned to the maag in taiwan from 1973 to 1976 believed that the military justice system of the taiwan garrison command was generally fair .

he recounted that most u.s. personnel stationed in taiwan were happy under martial law .

for local citizens , the taiwan garrison command tried defendants for alleged civilian crimes , including executing 12 people for robbery in two months , from december 1975 to january 1976 .

at a congressional hearing on human rights in taiwan held by the house subcommittee on international organizations in june 1977 , driven in part by concerns about the taiwan garrison command , the state department's witness testified that taiwan's situation had improved but acknowledged problems .

those problematic practices of the government , police , or security forces included: torture , harsh treatment , and psychological pressure on detainees ; surveillance and harassment of relatives and other associates of dissidents ; sentencing of an average of ten years for several hundred political prisoners ; use of martial law to try a variety of crimes in military courts ; limited freedom of speech , political assembly , freedom of the press , and labor strikes ; lengthy detentions incommunicado and without charges or trials of those suspected of sedition and critics of the kmt ; military trials without adequate due process ; and unrepresentative elections for the legislature and national assembly .

a foundation in taiwan estimated by 2010 that there were about 9,000 political prisoners during the martial law era .

a civilian american staying in taiwan in 1984 offered an eye - witness view of an example of the oppression .

he observed a disproportionate deployment of massive security forces armed with grenade launchers and clubs in response to a meeting that was not a protest or rally .

security forces cordoned off some streets for three days and even interrogated the american ( a bystander ) .

partly stemming from the shock and shame of the killing of henry liu in the united states , president chiang ching - kuo began in 1985 to plan to implement political reforms .

in addition to sustaining u.s. support for taiwan's security , chiang likely had other considerations that included providing for the kmt's political legitimacy .

in 1986 , opposition forces could hold rallies against martial law in taipei .

the security forces did not crack down on at least one political meeting in taipei at which banned books about chiang kai - shek and chiang ching - kuo were sold , and some taiwanese demanded that politicians speak in the majority , local taiwanese language ( not mandarin ) .

president chiang allowed the opposition democratic progressive party ( dpp ) to form on september 28 , 1986 , even before he ended martial law in july 1987 .

more milestones on the road of democratization included the following events .

in 1991 , the dpp amended its party platform to state its objective of establishing a "republic of taiwan" and the use of a referendum on taiwan's future status .

the kmt government did not crack down on the dpp .

representative solarz urged the government's restraint , stating that "to crack down on parties that advocate taiwan independence would be a violation of fundamental principles of human rights .

it would also betray a distressing lack of confidence in the political wisdom of the people of taiwan. .

in december 1992 , taiwan's people elected a new legislative yuan , without the kmt returning the same old members who had run for election on mainland china in the 1940s and stayed in the legislature without elections for decades .

in march 1996 , the government held the first direct , democratic election for the presidency .

the kmt's lee teng - hui , who had succeeded chiang ching - kuo when he died in january 1988 , won the election to continue as president .

that election took place just after the prc's military threats and president clinton's response by deploying two aircraft carrier battle groups near taiwan .

thus , congress has a long record of oversight of the human rights aspect of the executive branch's foreign policy toward taiwan , external pressure on the kmt moderates to end authoritarian abuses including activities on u.s. soil , and support for advancement of taiwan's democracy .

congressional influence has implied the strength of u.s. government support for taiwan .

that congressional role even included a statement on september 28 , 1986 , the day the opposition set up the dpp .

the four key members ( solarz , leach , pell , and kennedy ) called on the kmt regime not to crack down on the new party and to allow genuine multiparty politics .

since then , the congressional role has shifted with taiwan's evolution into a fellow democracy .

congress has looked at whether reforms resulted in faster and fuller democracy .

an added question has been whether the prc's rising military power or coercion could undermine taiwan's democracy .

the united states demonstrated its interest in taiwan's democracy and security , when the prc's military , the people's liberation army ( pla ) , carried out missile tests and other military exercises in the taiwan strait crisis from july 1995 to march 1996 ( the month of taiwan's first direct , democratic presidential election ) .

on march 19 and 21 , 1996 , the house and senate passed h.con.res .

148 to support taiwan's democracy and security .

less than two weeks before the election , president clinton deployed two aircraft carrier battle groups near taiwan , in response to the pla's provocations .

also , after the achievement of democracy in taiwan , taiwanese - american advocates and the dpp have stressed the other objective of taiwan's separate independence or identity ( vs. the kmt's view of a sovereign roc since 1912 and the cpc's view of taiwan as a part of the prc ) .

the legislative history of the tra showed that the definition of human rights for section 2 ( c ) referred to the helsinki declaration of 1975 .

the helsinki declaration included not only respect for human rights but also the right of self - determination in accordance with the u.n. charter .

still , some members have considered whether such a goal would be compatible with the u.s. "one china" policy .

it does not "oppose" taiwan's independence , because the more hands - off u.s. interest stated since the u.s - prc "shanghai communique" of 1972 has been the "peaceful settlement of the taiwan question by the chinese themselves. .

more neutral u.s. policy "does not support" taiwan's independence .

just after president chen's re - election , at a hearing on april 21 , 2004 , on the 25 th anniversary of tra , representative leach , chairman of the house international relations subcommittee on asia and the pacific , pointed out that taiwan has the unique situation in which it can have de facto self - determination only if it does not attempt to be recognized with de jure sovereignty .

he urged taiwan's people to recognize that they have greater security in "political ambiguity" and called for continuity , saying that "together with our historic 'one china' policy," the tra has contributed to ensuring peace and stability in the taiwan strait. .

moreover , some members have exercised oversight of the executive branch on the issue of whether it has interfered in taiwan's electoral politics in favor of one party .

for example , on june 18 , 2007 , president chen shui - bian called for a referendum on whether to join the u.n. using the name "taiwan" to be held at the time of the upcoming presidential election in march 2008 .

on december 19 , representatives tom tancredo and dana rohrabacher wrote a letter to secretary of state condoleezza rice asking her department to "cease its repeated efforts to affect the outcome of the upcoming elections in taiwan , and specifically , the outcome of the planned referendum on membership in the united nations. .

but at a press conference two days later , secretary rice still criticized the largely symbolic referendum as "provocative. .

further , the u.s. role has entailed a balance in supporting universal freedoms while respecting taiwan's democratic outcomes .

this question has been complicated by the highly partisan political disputes in taiwan after the detention of ex - president chen amid corruption charges and restrictions against protestors during the visit of a prc official in 2008 .

u.s. policymakers have faced the issue of whether to examine judicial reforms to advance rule of law in taiwan .

in any case , even while taiwan increasingly has depended on u.s. support ( particularly arms sales for its self - defense ) , there has been the added concern that u.s. influence in taiwan has declined since the 1970s , given taiwan's partisan polarization and dominance in discourse about the prc .

the bases for the arguments for u.s. actions to show concern about taiwan's democracy include implementation of section 2 ( c ) of the tra , advancement of human rights worldwide without an exception for taiwan's people who are left out of the u.n. system , and preservation of taiwan as a political model as the only democracy with historical roots in china , particularly for the prc's people .

over the decades , arguments against actions critical of the political situation in taiwan have cited support for an "ally" against communist china , absence of diplomatic recognition , lack of an "official" relationship , non - interference in independent judicial processes , and deference to the will of taiwan's voters and their elected leaders in a fellow democracy .

nonetheless , u.s. roles remain relevant .

while there is no longer a diplomatic relationship , the tra does not specify the relationship as official or unofficial .

also , there is a distinction between a president's supervision of the appointed justice minister and accountability of prosecutors , versus interference in the impartial and independent work of judges ( in the judicial part of government ) .

in september 2009 , jerome cohen implicitly criticized president ma for the government's failure to rebuke his justice minister who attended a skit put on by prosecutors to mock the detention of ex - president chen .

cohen also wrote in january 2010 that under taiwan's adversarial legal system , prosecutors cannot be considered as members of the judiciary .

also , president george w. bush and his officials rebuked taiwan's president chen , including publicly , for perceived pro - independence referendums and changes for names of companies .

moreover , as seen from representative leach's warning to the kmt against a crackdown after the kaohsiung incident , public congressional concerns strengthen the executive branch's position that is sometimes communicated in closed channels .

congress also has spurred more sustained and stronger actions .

in addition , the state department has continued to report on taiwan and other democracies that include allies in the annual report to congress on human rights ( to cover rights set forth in the u.n.'s universal declaration of human rights of 1948 ) .

furthermore , concerning taiwan's presidential elections , foreign delegations have observed them ( including the one in march 2008 ) , foreign capitals including washington have congratulated the winner ( implying a legitimizing role ) , and foreign leaders have sent envoys to the inaugurations .

after president chen shui - bian's close re - election on march 20 , 2004 , the white house did not issue its congratulation until march 26 , waiting until after the results were certified in taiwan .

representative leach represented the united states at president chen's second inauguration in may 2004 in taipei .

members of congress enjoy greater flexibility than other officials in the executive branch in communicating directly with taiwan's officials , including the president .

even if there is a view that the united states should not support one party over another out of respect for taiwan's democracy , there is a strong consensus that u.s. interests are served by a strong multi - party system with at least one viable , loyal opposition party .

moreover , when taiwan's minister of the interior in september 2009 criticized uighur leader rebiya kadeer in washington for "terrorist" ties , that unfounded attack involved the united states as her supporting host and raised questions about taiwan's approach toward minorities oppressed by the prc .

also , a congressional role has persisted partly by request .

both taiwan's government and taiwanese - american activists have at times come to congress for confirmation or criticism of taiwan's policies .

after taiwan's president ma ying - jeou delivered via videoconference speeches to the united states in 2009 and 2010 ( cited above ) , his officials asked that his remarks be inserted into the congressional record ( excerpt in remarks of representative phil gingrey on april 30 , 2009 ; text in remarks of representative dan burton on april 26 and senator james inhofe on april 29 , 2010 ) .

on february 25 , 2010 , representatives scott garrett and kenny marchant issued statements in the congressional record to commemorate the 63 rd anniversary of taiwan's "228 massacre" of february 28 , 1947 .

finally , secretary of state hillary clinton issued a statement to support google on january 12 , 2010 , when it warned against cyber attacks originating from china .

clinton pointed specifically to the prc government for an explanation .

taiwan's information technology ( it ) companies are major players in global business and internet freedom .

taiwan also has extensive experience in facing suspected prc cyber attacks .

however , in july 2009 , taiwan's acer and asustek it firms voluntarily submitted to the prc ministry of industry and information technology's demand for installation of its green dam internet filter in products in china .

thus , the executive and legislative branches have u.s. policy interests , relevant roles , and options concerning taiwan .

congress or the administration continue to have a number of options concerning taiwan's democracy , human rights , and rule of law , including remaining a more passive observer .

the executive branch , including the state department , largely has refrained from speaking out against taiwan's government after ma ying - jeou took office as president in may 2008 .

but there were a couple of mentions .

at a news conference on november 12 , 2008 , that coincided with the day that ex - president chen shui - bian was first detained , stephen young , the director of ait in taipei , said that "not only taiwan but also your friends around the world will be watching this process very closely , and we believe it needs to be transparent , fair , and impartial. .

when the new ait director , william stanton , met with taiwan's justice minister in september 2009 and mentioned that some people in the united states have commented on chen's case , he nonetheless encountered controversy in taiwan's government and media for supposed u.s. interference .

there are other policy options .

the state department has the options of making statements from washington , dc , and adding critical concerns in the annual reports to congress on human rights around the world .

the state department could expand contact with taiwan under the assistant secretary for democracy , human rights , and labor , including voicing u.s. concerns about the conditions of tibetan and uighur minorities in the prc .

taiwan has hosted the dalai lama .

the state and justice departments have considered an extradition treaty with taiwan , at its request .

the administration , u.s. firms , and human rights organizations could encourage taiwan and its it companies to support internet freedom .

u.s. agencies , including the agency for international development ( usaid ) , could coordinate closely with the taiwan foundation for democracy ( tfd ) and taiwan's international cooperation and development fund ( icdf ) on foreign assistance programs , including to promote democracy and governance .

u.s. and taiwan programs could promote the international freedom and professionalism of the press .

congress could enact legislation or take other actions to implement section 2 ( b ) of the tra and promote human rights and legal reform in taiwan .

members as well as staff could intensify inter - parliamentary exchanges with taiwan's legislative yuan and its staff to build up that democratic institution .

congressional and staff delegations could further observe taiwan's elections and attend presidential inaugurations .

delegations could specifically visit the tfd as well as the museum in taipei dedicated to the victims of the "228 incident. .

in contrast to the executive branch which is restricted by the state department's guidelines on contact with taiwan's officials , congress could use its greater flexibility in communicating with taiwan's officials up to the president to enhance engagement that promotes u.s. values , democracy , and rule of law .

