president obama has nominated his solicitor general , elena kagan , to be the next supreme court justice .

if confirmed , she would fill the seat being vacated by justice john paul stevens upon his retirement at the end of the 2009 / 2010 term .

prior to her term as solicitor general , ms. kagan , in her capacity as an academic and scholar , wrote influential pieces analyzing free speech jurisprudence .

this report will discuss some of her most significant scholarly articles related to the first amendment guarantee of freedom of speech .

in her first amendment scholarship , ms. kagan seems primarily concerned with developing an understanding of the evolution of the supreme court's first amendment jurisprudence .

ms. kagan does not appear to be arguing for a change in first amendment analysis , or hinting towards how she believes cases would be better analyzed .

rather , ms. kagan argues that first amendment case law is designed to prevent the government from enacting laws that are more likely to spring from improper motives .

in another article , she offers suggestions for developing statutes that would be consonant with her understanding of first amendment case law , and , therefore , more likely to be upheld as constitutional .

it is unclear how this scholarship would apply or even if it would apply in the context of her position as a supreme court justice , if she is confirmed .

the most comprehensive article ( over 100 pages ) ms. kagan has written on the first amendment is "private speech , public purpose: the role of governmental motive in first amendment doctrine. .

this article argues that , at bottom , first amendment doctrine is concerned with using objective tests to accomplish indirectly what it cannot do directly: revealing and rejecting ( "flushing out" in kagan's words ) laws that may have , at their core , an improper government motive .

she calls it the motive - based theory of first amendment doctrine .

ms. kagan hypothesizes that the court cannot directly inquire into government motive to enact a particular law , because , among other things , the government is likely able to advance a legitimate interest in enacting virtually any law .

therefore , her argument continues , the court has developed a schema that more closely scrutinizes laws that are at a greater risk of being improperly motivated in their enactment .

and , as would be logically expected , the court also scrutinizes less closely laws that carry less risk of improper motive .

in the course of building this argument , ms. kagan analyzes many aspects of first amendment law including campaign finance cases , indecency cases , fighting words cases , and the logic of the secondary effects doctrine .

it is a complex article and every aspect of it cannot be addressed here .

it is also important to note that the article was published in 1996 .

many developments in first amendment jurisprudence have occurred since then .

to the extent possible , recent developments will be mentioned and compared to ms. kagan's arguments .

as a result of the article's age , it is not clear how ms. kagan's view of first amendment doctrine may have changed , if it has at all .

ms. kagan begins her analysis by recognizing that the supreme court has said that "the purpose of congress ... is not a basis for declaring a law unconstitutional. .

courts instead are to focus on the effects of a particular speech restriction on first amendment freedoms .

consequently , most analysis of first amendment doctrine focuses on the potential effects of the restrictions to attempt to create coherent theories .

ms. kagan believes these effects - focused theories are ultimately unsatisfying on their own to explain first amendment doctrine .

she argues instead that first amendment doctrine , in spite of the supreme court's protestations , is primarily ( though perhaps not solely ) motivated by a desire to discover improper government motive .

to explain why ms. kagan thinks her government motive theory is necessary to understand first amendment doctrine , she begins with an example of a case that , in her opinion , could only make sense in the context of first amendment doctrine if the court is primarily concerned with improper government motive .

in r.a.v .

v. city of st. paul , the supreme court invalidated a statute that prohibited fighting words based upon race , color , etc .

the outcome of this case is strange , ms. kagan notes , because fighting words have been identified as a category of speech that falls outside the protections of the first amendment and can be prohibited completely .

thus , under an effects - based theory , it likely would not matter constitutionally if only a subset of this category of speech was prohibited .

the court nonetheless invalidated the statute despite the fact that it punished only a subset of a category of unprotected speech .

ms. kagan hypothesizes that this outcome can be best understood when viewed as an attempt by the court to guard against laws that have a greater likelihood of being motivated by an improper purpose .

even within the spheres of unprotected speech , the court will invalidate a statute if it appears that "official suppression of ideas [may be] afoot," because , under ms. kagan's theory , preventing the official suppression ( or support ) of particular ideas is the court's primary concern .

after explicating this example , ms. kagan embarks upon a methodical and thorough explanation and analysis of her theory .

she does so by offering other holistic and widely accepted theories of first amendment jurisprudence and attempting to fit aspects of first amendment jurisprudence with those theories as rigorously as she attempts to fit those aspects of doctrine with the government motive theory .

she ultimately concludes that , in general , her government motive theory does the best job of explaining first amendment doctrine , but in arriving at that conclusion she makes numerous observations where the other first amendment doctrine models may explain doctrine better than the theory she advances .

her analysis is rigorous , but she does not suggest that it is without its flaws .

she acknowledges room for disagreement with her theory , but appears to believe , nonetheless , that she has devised the best explanation for then - current first amendment jurisprudence possible .

three years prior to publishing her article described above , ms. kagan wrote a piece in the university of chicago law review on the implications of the court's decision in r.a.v .

some of the same themes as in the article above are evident , though possibly in their earlier stages of development , but her focus was different in writing this article as well .

here , she focused primarily on the design of laws that would restrict hate speech and pornography , with an eye towards designing restrictions that , in her view , would be more likely to be upheld by the supreme court .

like the article above , she does not appear to suggest changes in doctrine ( though she does make one statement about her opinion on the correctness of a particular decision ) .

instead , she appears to take the position that assuming her understanding of the court's doctrine is correct , statutes may be designed to comport with that doctrine and restrict some hate speech and pornography , though certainly not all .

in "when a speech code is a speech code: the stanford policy and the theory of incidental restrictions," kagan responds to a code of conduct that was put into place at stanford university ( stanford policy ) .

according to kagan , the stanford policy — which specifically applies to expression based upon sex , race , color , handicap , religion , sexual orientation , or national and ethnic origin — regulated speech despite all arguments to the contrary .

ms. kagan argues that a speech policy of this kind presents constitutional problems .

in her analysis , she concluded that stanford could have avoided these constitutional issues by enacting a policy that banned all forms of harassment , threats , and fighting words because such a policy would likely have been treated as an incidental restriction on speech .

however , the stanford policy at issue in her article singled out particular viewpoints for punishment , a defect kagan determined to be potentially fatal .

