child support is the cash payment that a noncustodial parent is obligated to pay for the financial support of his or her children .

all 50 states , the district of columbia , guam , puerto rico , and the u.s. virgin islands operate child support enforcement ( cse ) programs .

historically , states were required to provide cse services to members of indian tribes and tribal organizations who were part of their cse caseloads .

although tribes were not specifically included in the cse statute until the 1996 welfare reform law , several tribes had negotiated agreements ( eg , informal , cooperative , intergovernmental , and joint powers ) with some states in a mutual effort to serve native american children .

the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l .

104-193 ) allowed direct federal funding of approved tribal cse programs .

as of april 20 , 2016 , there were 61 tribal cse programs .

 ( see table b - 1 and table b - 2 . ) .

the indian tribes or tribal organizations with tribal cse programs are listed in the text box on the next page and are shown on the map in figure 1 .

in fy2014 , the 57 tribes or tribal organizations with comprehensive cse programs distributed over $36 million in total child support collections in fy2014 to 50,892 cases in the cse tribal program .

only federally recognized tribes and tribal organizations are eligible to operate tribal cse programs .

as of march 2016 , there are 566 federally recognized indian tribes .

although tribal cse programs do not have to have a court system per se , they are required to have either a judicial or administrative system to hear , establish , and enforce child support orders .

moreover , tribal cse programs are required to ensure that the due process rights of participants are protected .

according to the federal office of child support enforcement ( ocse ) in the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , it may be necessary to make adjustments to an existing court system or to develop an administrative process under a start - up tribal cse program .

however , according to ocse , when a tribe applies for funding to operate a comprehensive tribal cse program , it must demonstrate that the judicial or administrative process is sufficient to establish and enforce child support orders .

thus , the universe of tribes that are potentially eligible to operate a tribal cse program may not be as high as 566 because the tribe must have a court system ( which about 298 tribes have ) or an administrative system .

the number of potentially eligible tribes is further reduced because tribes must have at least 100 children under their jurisdiction , and many tribes do not meet this requirement .

because sufficient demographic and social statistics on indian tribal members are not collected by federal or other entities , it is difficult to estimate how many children under tribal jurisdiction are not covered by tribal cse programs .

most estimates are derived from census counts , which are based on race , not tribal membership .

 ( see the discussion under " data " below. ) .

one estimate based on american community survey ( acs ) racial data found that , in 2014 , about 53% of the 631,831 american indian and alaska native children ( i.e. , roughly 335,000 children ) were living with only one of their parents .

in 2014 , about 66% of american indian and alaska native children were born to unmarried women ( again , according to race ) .

this report provides a brief legislative history of cse provisions related to tribes , presents basic information on tribal cse programs , describes the information that tribal cse programs must contain in order to be approved for federal funding , displays data on current tribal cse programs , and discusses issues related to ensuring that native american children receive the child support to which they are entitled .

the report also includes three appendices .

appendix a includes six tables that arrange each tribe according to its ranking in fy2014 on several cse program features or indicators .

appendix b displays fy2016 information that shows the 57 comprehensive tribal cse programs .

it also names the four start - up tribal cse programs .

appendix c shows estimates of total population for each tribe that operates a tribal cse program .

the cse program was enacted in 1975 as a federal - state program ( title iv - d of the social security act ) to help strengthen families by securing financial support for children from their noncustodial parent on a consistent and continuing basis and by helping some families to remain self - sufficient and off public assistance .

the mission of the cse program has shifted and expanded over the years .

it has evolved from being a program primarily focused on welfare cost recovery to a program that focuses more on enhancing the well - being of children by obtaining child support from noncustodial parents and by emphasizing the personal responsibility of both parents to their children .

child support payments enable parents who do not live with their children to fulfill their financial responsibility to their children by contributing to the payment of childrearing costs .

the cse program currently provides seven major services on behalf of children: ( 1 ) parent location , ( 2 ) paternity establishment , ( 3 ) establishment of child support orders , ( 4 ) review and modification of child support orders , ( 5 ) enforcement / collection of child support payments , ( 6 ) distribution of child support payments , and ( 7 ) establishment and enforcement of medical support .

the cse program serves both families that receive temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) benefits and those who do not .

all 50 states and four jurisdictions ( the district of columbia , guam , puerto rico , and the u.s. virgin islands ) operate cse programs .

in addition , 61 tribes or tribal organizations have cse programs .

the cse program is administered by the federal office of child support enforcement ( ocse ) , which is in the administration for children and families ( acf ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

in the early days of child support enforcement , states were required to cooperate in interstate cse cases , but problems arose stemming from the autonomy of local courts .

family law traditionally had been under the jurisdiction of state and local governments , and citizens fell under the jurisdiction of the courts where they lived .

thus , when parents lived in different states , conflicts arose with regard to which state's rules applied to the case in question .

during the 1930s and 1940s , domestic / family law under the jurisdiction of state and local courts was used to establish and enforce child support obligations when the noncustodial parent , custodial parent , and child lived in the same state .

but when noncustodial parents lived out of state , enforcing child support was cumbersome and ineffective .

often , the only option in those cases was to extradite the noncustodial parent and , when successful , jail the person for nonpayment of child support .

this procedure , which was rarely used , generally punished the delinquent noncustodial parent , but it left the abandoned family without financial support .

even up until the late 1990s , many commentators and cse staff said that interstate cases were the most difficult child support orders to enforce .

others , however , noted that when a child support case involved a native american child , the case moved to another level of complexity .

before enactment of the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l .

104-193 ) , the cse statute placed the authority to administer the delivery of cse services solely with the states .

however , within much of indian country , the authority of state and local governments was very limited or nonexistent .

thus , states were limited in their ability to provide cse services on tribal lands and , vice versa , indian families had difficulty obtaining cse services from the state cse programs .

pursuant to the constitution , numerous court decisions , and federal law , indian tribes have the authority to make and enforce laws , to adjudicate civil and criminal disputes ( including domestic relations cases ) , to tax , and to license , regarding members and other indians within their jurisdictions .

state power is limited unless congress has authorized it .

therefore , prior to the 1996 welfare reform legislation , states that attempted to provide cse services on tribal lands were restricted in their authority to establish paternity and to establish and enforce child support orders .

during the pre - 1996 period , cooperative agreements between indian tribes and states were the primary method by which indian children ( especially those living on reservations ) received cse services .

part of the mission of the federal office of child support enforcement ( ocse ) is to provide direction , guidance , technical assistance , and oversight to state and tribal cse program offices .

the assistant secretary for children and families is the official director of ocse , but the deputy director / commissioner manages daily operation of the ocse .

ocse's division of special staffs works with tribal cse programs .

in addition , there are federal cse staff in each of the administration for children and families' 10 regional offices who are assigned to work on tribal matters .

regional office staff work directly with states and tribes on program implementation and operations .

central and regional offices collaborate to assess state and tribal needs , and to provide technical assistance , policy clarification , training , and support for cse programs .

indian tribes and tribal organizations that choose to operate a tribal cse program must run programs that conform to the objectives of the state cse program and are in compliance with the tribal cse program regulations .

however , federal regulations provide some flexibility that allows tribes and tribal organizations to develop and administer tribal cse programs that are consistent with the tribe's law and tradition .

moreover , some cse program documents indicate that tribes and tribal organizations should review the regulatory requirements to determine if a cse program is appropriate for their tribe or tribal organization .

this section presents data on the number of native americans living in the united states , tribal population estimates , the percentage of native american women who had children outside of marriage , living arrangements of native american children , and the percentage of native americans with child support orders .

it also provides statistical information on tribal cse programs .

nearly eight years after tribes officially became part of the cse program with the enactment of the 1996 welfare reform law , final regulations were established to implement direct funding to indian tribes and tribal organizations for tribal cse programs .

the final regulations require that all child support agencies accept applications for service from anyone and require that the tribal cse agency provides appropriate services .

this includes taking all applications , opening a case for each , determining what services are needed and may be provided by the tribal cse agency , and providing all of those services required by tribal cse regulations .

the tribe must provide , at a minimum , basic assistance , such as location , preparation of documents for intergovernmental processing , and case monitoring and distribution of collections forwarded from another jurisdiction .

there may be circumstances where the tribal agency's only appropriate service will be to request assistance from another tribal or state cse program with the legal authority to take actions on the case .

in these and other such instances , states and tribes must work together to ensure that families receive the child support that they deserve .

although tribes and tribal organizations can now operate cse programs , many problems have yet to be resolved .

even though there are rules related to whether a state or a tribe has jurisdiction over certain cases , in some instances there is concurrent jurisdiction and in some instances the complexity of the case blurs jurisdictional lines .

although federal regulations clarify that establishment of paternity under tribal cse programs does not infer tribal enrollment or membership , paternity is inextricably linked to tribal membership .

many tribes view tribal membership as a political and cultural issue and thereby do not want to rely on scientific technology to confer tribal membership .

a major difference between state cse programs and tribal cse programs is that tribal cse programs can authorize the use of noncash payments to satisfy child support orders .

some observers are concerned that requiring the tribe to place a dollar value on each type of noncash payment may prove to be administratively cumbersome and costly .

they argue that it is hard to predict and include a dollar amount for all of the kinds of noncash payments that members of the tribe may want to use to satisfy their child support obligations .

some child advocates are concerned that children who receive tribal cse services may be less likely to receive the child support to which they are entitled than their counterparts who receive state cse services , because tribal cse programs do not have access to the vast array of state collection methods .

although nonpayment of child support is likely to be a perennial issue , especially for low - income noncustodial parents , some observers assert that tribal cse programs that determine realistic and appropriate child support orders from the outset may improve the long - term success of their programs .

in addition , some observers are concerned that unequal resources may result in children within a tribes' jurisdiction not getting the child support they are due , while others contend that the individualized approach used by tribes may counterbalance reduced and / or inadequate resources .

this section examines the issues mentioned above .

the precept "it takes a village to raise a child" could have had its foundation in indian culture .

for many years , the majority of indian families maintained extended family relationships , usually living in groups that included the nuclear family plus grandparents , uncles , aunts , cousins , nephew , nieces , and other related individuals .

children were raised within this extended family network , which was responsible for their care , education , social well - being , cultural history , and traditions .

this situation does not exist nearly as much today ; native american families , like those in many other population groups , have drifted apart over the past decades .

just as in the early years of the state cse system when some noncustodial fathers moved from job to job or left the state where their children resided to avoid paying child support , it is surmised that some native american noncustodial parents are residing on reservations to avoid paying child support .

the principles of jurisdictional sovereignty , self - government , self - determination , and the government - to - government relationship that exists between tribes and the federal government were primary reasons why congress provided direct federal funding of tribal cse programs .

it was meant to enhance tribal self - determination and to support indian tribes and tribal organizations in their efforts to develop and implement their own programs to meet their particular and individual needs .

indian tribes were given the flexibility to design cse programs that would meet the often complex and unique traditions and needs of native american people .

nonetheless , new programs take time to mature .

the state cse program is now 41 years old , but during its early years , it faced many problems related to implementation , consistency of data , reporting of data , nonpayment of support , establishment of paternity , establishment of child support orders , distribution of support , and an antagonistic relationship with noncustodial parents .

many tribal cse programs may also face these same problems , as well as problems related to the placement of the tribal cse program within tribal government , reasonable salaries for workers , staffing , confidentiality of data , distribution of required notices , lack of reciprocity in enforcement , service of process , and poor communication .

perhaps the most important measure of the federal - state cse program is its impact on overall national rates of paying child support .

both congress and the american public view the cse program as a means of improving the nation's system of ensuring that all parents who no longer live with their children continue to provide for their financial support .

although child support alone is generally not enough to raise family income above the poverty level , poor families who received child support but remained in poverty had their standard of living improved by the child support payments .

similarly , incomes and standards of living were improved by child support payments of non - poor families as well .

on average , child support constitutes 14% of family income for households who receive it .

among poor households that receive it , child support constitutes about 49% of family income .

although the consistent and ongoing financial support of children by noncustodial parents is the main purpose of the cse program , the program provides many other benefits to children .

one such benefit , for many children , is the establishment of paternity .

social science research generally indicates that in most cases the social , psychological , emotional , and financial benefits of having one's father legally identified are irrefutable .

the research also overwhelmingly indicates that both parents are critical in building the self - esteem of their children and helping the children become self - sufficient , responsible members of society .

some commentators contend that except for their role as payers of child support , fathers generally have been given short shrift by federal , state , and local social welfare programs .

they assert that tribal cse programs are in the position of being able to recognize , right from the start , the importance of fathers ( who are usually the noncustodial parent ) in the lives of their children and to participate in cooperative , respectful communication with fathers .

it is generally agreed that an amenable relationship ( as opposed to an antagonistic relationship ) between noncustodial parents and the cse agency is more likely to result in more noncustodial parents paying their child support obligations .

some observers also encourage tribal cse programs to coordinate with state programs such as cse access and visitation programs , healthy marriage promotion programs , and responsible fatherhood programs to further foster productive relationships with fathers , with the ultimate goal of obtaining the child support to which indian children are entitled .

it has been noted that there are 566 federally recognized tribal governments , but only 61 tribal cse programs .

figures in appendix c suggest that the 61 tribal cse programs cover about 30% - 49% of the total population of tribal members ( as variously estimated ) .

some observers contend it is likely that gaps in the provision of cse services to native american children will remain a significant problem for many more years .

they question whether the needs of the universe of native american children can be met through the current configuration of tribal cse programs .

others assert that tribal cse programs are still in their early stages , that it is too soon to judge their effectiveness , and that the eventual universe of tribal cse programs is not yet knowable .

appendix a. tribal cse program indicators this appendix includes six tables that arrange each tribe according to its ranking on several cse program features or indicators .

the data shown in all six tables are for fy2014 .

the tables only include information on tribes with comprehensive cse programs .

if the data are not available , it is so indicated .

the appendix a tables highlight some important aspects of tribal cse programs , but they do not capture the complexity of individual programs .

a simple ranking of the tribal programs does not indicate a program's effectiveness .

for example , one would expect programs with larger caseloads to have more child support collections ( than other programs , all things being equal ) .

similarly , one would expect programs with larger caseloads to have higher program expenditures ( than other programs , all things being equal ) .

however , it may be less apparent that programs with smaller caseloads could have higher collections based on a tribe's access to casino profits and / or valuable mineral rights .

also , programs with smaller caseloads may have high program expenditures because a higher proportion of tribal members need paternity establishment services .

thus , broad generalizations about the data shown in the tables may prove to be inaccurate .

table a - 1 shows the amount of child support collected by each tribe .

cse administrators indicate that tribal cse program collections data may provide an inaccurate picture of how well some tribes are doing because some collections obtained by tribes are distributed to the states and are thereby not reflected in the data shown in the table .

table a - 2 shows the amount of cse expenditures for each of the tribes .

table a - 3 presents cse caseload data .

table a - 4 displays the number of paternities established by each tribe .

table a - 5 displays the number of child support orders established by each tribe .

table a - 6 shows cse collections per dollar of expenditures for each of the tribes .

 ( the data in this appendix are from the office of child support enforcement , fy2014 annual report to congress. ) .

appendix b .

comprehensive and start - up tribal cse programs this appendix includes two tables .

table b - 1 displays the 57 comprehensive tribal cse programs , arranged by the year in which they became comprehensive .

a tribal program is considered comprehensive if it has all of the 14 program components stipulated in the federal tribal cse regulations .

table b - 2 shows the four start - up tribal cse programs .

a start - up tribal cse program does not have to have all of the required program components .

in fy2001 through fy2006 , there were nine tribes or tribal organizations that had comprehensive cse programs .

in fy2007 , 12 tribes or tribal organizations had comprehensive cse programs .

in fy2008 , 13 additional tribes or tribal organizations ( for a total 25 ) were operating comprehensive cse programs .

in fy2009 , four additional tribes or tribal organizations ( for a total 36 ) were operating comprehensive cse programs .

in fy2010 , two additional tribes or tribal organizations ( for a total 38 ) were operating comprehensive cse programs .

in fy2011 , three additional tribes or tribal organizations ( for a total 41 ) were operating comprehensive cse programs .

in fy2012 , four additional tribes or tribal organizations ( for a total 45 ) were operating comprehensive cse programs .

in fy2013 , six additional tribes or tribal organizations ( for a total 51 ) were operating comprehensive cse programs .

in fy2014 , six additional tribes or tribal organizations ( for a total 57 ) were operating comprehensive cse programs .

appendix c. american indian and alaska native population figures for tribes with cse programs table c - 1 shows four population figures for each of the 61 tribal cse programs .

for a discussion of the problems in determining tribal populations , see the " data " section , above .

the second column is based on the 2005 indian population and labor force report .

the third column is based on the 2013 indian population and labor force report , which provides data for 2010 .

with regard to the bureau of indian affairs data ( columns 2 and 3 ) , the bolded data represent 2010 data and the unbolded data represent 2005 data .

the fourth and fifth columns are based on information from the decennial census , from the 2010 census .

the total for all tribes nationwide are from the 2010 census , except for tribal enrollment , which is 2005 data .

