securing the borders of the united states has long been a contentious political issue .

although the united states is often described as "a country of immigrants" and a "melting pot," highlighting the relative openness of its borders , the borders have also served as a line of protection against external security threats .

such threats can take many shapes , but in recent years they have mainly included illegal immigration , smuggling and trafficking , and terrorism .

with globalization producing increasing transnational threats to the united states , the pressure to use the border as a protection mechanism has grown .

since at least the 1980s , the border has played a central role in the debate over how to provide domestic security in the united states .

the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( and subsequent attempts on u.s. soil ) , the significant domestic population of unauthorized aliens , and recent concerns over drug - trafficking - related violence in mexico and the potential for spillover into the united states have all continued to fuel this debate .

policymakers have also had to cope with a tension between border protection issues and free market ideals .

market competitiveness and demands for efficiency create a push for more open borders to unencumber the flows of capital and labor .

security concerns , however , frequently impede the movement of goods and labor as they are screened to determine if they pose risks to the united states .

thus , the need for an effective strategy to manage this inherent tension and provide for border protection is ever present .

in the past decade , with the reorganization of homeland security and the national security focus on terrorism , several congresses , administrations , and the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( commonly known as the 9 / 11 commission ) have put forth proposals for how to secure the u.s. border .

what has emerged from these efforts has been a generally agreed upon framework of mission and goals .

however , while the recent publication of the quadrennial homeland security review ( qhsr ) lays the foundation for a cross - agency border protection strategy , some question whether a comprehensive strategy has been sufficiently mapped out .

the broad framework currently in place generally consists of a qhsr underpinning supported by a collection of agency or function specific strategic elements that show some commonalities .

thus , the current border protection framework can be summarized as securing and managing the u.s. border through obtaining effective control of the borders , safeguarding lawful trade and travel , and identifying and disrupting transnational criminal organizations .

the five strategic commonalities to achieve these goals consist of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) leadership , deployment of layered security , maximizing domain awareness , promotion of a shared agency culture , and expansion of the border through international and domestic partnerships .

for some policymakers , despite the existence of a border protection framework , questions remain as to whether border security officials respond to emerging threats in a sufficiently comprehensive fashion .

moreover , despite the fact that over $100 billion has been appropriated to border protection functions since the formation of dhs , it remains unclear whether border protection measures are being deployed that will ultimately provide for a comprehensive , strategically effective border protection effort without significantly disrupting the border region economy .

for congressional policymakers , the current state of border protection presents at least three questions: ( 1 ) what does the current border protection framework consist of ? .

 ( 2 ) is it working ? .

and ( 3 ) are there more effective alternatives to achieve border protection ? .

the answers to these questions are important for congress to conduct proper oversight of border protection functions , as well as to gauge its priorities .

moreover , such questions provide an opportunity for legislators to re - evaluate the policies that have been pursued in providing border protection , especially as these policies might impact other elements of the u.s. border , such as markets and communities .

this report provides an overview of the current border protection framework and its operationally oriented strategic elements and measures their effectiveness .

the report draws on documents from congress and the administration , as well as other publications , to pull together an overarching picture of protection at the border .

this overview includes a historical background and a definition of what "border protection" means in a contemporary context .

building on this definition , the report provides two theoretical models for border protection approaches based on unilateral and cooperative approaches , followed by an extended analysis of the major elements within the current border protection framework .

this analysis also includes discussions of how and why , certain strategic elements notwithstanding , many of the current border - related security policies focus on the physical border rather than conceptualizing the border in broader terms .

statistical analyses of some key indicators are used to evaluate the impact of the current framework .

lastly , this report offers some policy options — both short - term and long - term — for addressing the effectiveness of current border protection policies .

it is important to note that while this report deals only with the movement of people , the same principles discussed also apply to the cargo side of border protection .

while policymakers have wrestled with notions of what border protection should look like , for border enforcement agencies , the practical questions have remained similar for decades .

in essence , border agencies have attempted to develop agency - specific strategies that prevent activities which circumvent u.s. laws on cross - border activities .

although the framework for border protection has evolved , much of the current framework is rooted in traditional enforcement activities and deterrence - based principles as discussed below .

for critics and advocates of u.s. border protection policy , there are a host of competing policy alternatives for how to effectively protect the border .

while some individuals want more enforcement and stricter admission criteria , others want to lessen these restrictions on cross - border activity .

ultimately , while neither camp is seeking to make the u.s. population less secure , the policy choices for building border protection are rooted in competing visions of what u.s. border policy should look like .

these visions can be grouped into at least two camps: ( 1 ) a unilateral security model , based on a metaphorical "fortress," and ( 2 ) an interdependence ( or cooperation - based ) model , based on a metaphorical "complex organism. .

the basic premises of these visions are discussed below and subsequently placed in the context of current border security policy .

although most advocates of each model do not subscribe to a pure interpretation of either model , the models serve as useful guides for understanding and analyzing border security policy , as well as how these policies relate to interior activities and , in some cases , foreign affairs .

although most policymakers would argue that a comprehensive view of the border is necessary to achieve the most effective border protection , the conceptualization of the border remains significantly tied geographically to the physical perimeter of the united states .

in part , the more recent build - up of border - based resources largely the result of a confluence of interior effects being attributed to having external causes .

moreover , the assumption by numerous policymakers has been that by reinforcing the perimeter one can more effectively protect the interior .

the logic of such an approach is apparent , but it rests on assumptions that do not always hold .

for example , it assumes that a disproportionate amount of the threat comes from the exterior .

however , the high estimated proclivity of visa overstays , as well as the homegrown networks of drug dealers and terrorists , suggests that this notion is incomplete .

also , it assumes that the market forces generating demand for illegal behaviors can effectively be deterred or prevented largely by geo - focused enforcement efforts .

yet , what constitutes barriers for legal travelers usually constitutes a profitable opportunity for criminals ( eg , smuggling ) .

and the adage that "nature hates a vacuum" suggests that with enforcement actions against one set of illegal actors another group will step in to take their place , so long as the profit motive remains .

despite such problematic assumptions , the appeal of geo - focused approaches to illegal immigration , drug trafficking , and terrorism remain strong .

much of this appeal comes from the concentration of resources that can be built up along the border .

in table 1 , some of the advantages and disadvantages of focusing enforcement efforts at the border are mapped out against centering those efforts in the interior or abroad .

as table 1 shows , concentrating resources along the border is a low - cost / high - yield approach relative to enforcement actions in either the interior or abroad .

while all three elements are necessary under any enforcement - based border protection strategy , interior enforcement is more costly because of the large geographic area and the potential disruption to businesses ( eg , worksite enforcement ) .

in the exterior , the lack of compliance with agreements , the potential dissemination of untrustworthy information , and the variation in security strategies serve as potentially large security gaps that make centering enforcement efforts abroad impractical .

in other words , geographically focusing one's efforts at the border is likely to yield the lowest amount of security risk without requiring the cooperation of one's neighbor ( but does not preclude such cooperation either ) .

consequently , the border serves as the geographic focus — as well as the central policy focus — in many efforts to address what many perceive as externally generated threats to homeland security .

but in order to be able to assess the effectiveness of any border protection framework and its strategic elements , we must first map out present border protection efforts .

the section below discusses the various components of the current border protection framework and how they fit together .

in general terms , a strategy is a set of ways by which one attempts to achieve an advantage over one's adversaries to achieve one's interests or goals .

border officials and congress have worked to develop a comprehensive strategy for the border to achieve such an advantage over border violators .

as previously stated , what has emerged from these efforts has been a generally agreed upon framework of mission and goals , but some might question whether a comprehensive strategy has yet been sufficiently mapped out .

the broad framework currently in place generally consists of a qhsr underpinning supported by a collection of agency or function specific strategic elements that show some commonalities .

the section below identifies the broad framework currently in place and attempts to extract the strategic commonalities of various agency - and function - specific strategic plans relating to border protection .

subsequent sections delve further into the three strategic components of layered security , expanded zone of security , and domain awareness , due to the intrinsic connection of these framework elements to the geographic border itself .

the deployment of layered security has been the most visible aspect of the post - september 11 border protection framework .

in part , this visibility has stemmed from the significant resources that have been devoted to deploying these layers and from the objections of opponents to specific measures ( eg , fencing along the southwest border ) .

consequently , divisions have sprung up between supporters of visible , proactive tactics in layered security , and opponents who wish for more subtle and non - invasive tactics to achieve the same layered security .

the notion of expanding the border has been a fundamental component of the border protection framework .

from a practical standpoint , this means pushing information - gathering and traffic control abilities away from the geographic border to areas both in foreign countries and internally in the united states .

the most common example of a border extension policy is the issuance of visas at consulates abroad .

this practice allows for screening of individuals who wish to come to the united states and gate - keeping to control the traffic flows .

other practices that are becoming more visible are international law enforcement information - sharing efforts , as well as the development of pre - inspection points staffed by u.s. officials .

on the whole , these efforts provide the united states with a buffer zone for identifying traffic bound for the united states , which should allow greater accuracy in identifying potential threats , as well as facilitating and safeguarding legal flows of traffic .

generally , such outward border expansion efforts are achieved through bilateral or multilateral agreements with foreign governments .

the other side of border expansion is the broadening of enforcement activities into the interior of the united states .

to a small extent , this principle is reflected in the usbp's authority to patrol within a reasonable distance of the border , including on private lands with 25 miles of the border .

but the main way that such expansion is achieved is through the sister agency relationship between cbp and ice .

while cbp serves as a border enforcement agency , ice supports this mission by conducting investigations .

the tsa and uscg also provide some core border enforcement functions and work closely with cbp and ice .

one of the central ideas behind the development of dhs was that through a centralized leadership , the expansion of the border would become more seamless through information sharing and cooperation .

border threats have compelled policymakers and government agencies alike to look for additional solutions to enhance border expansion efforts .

as a result , numerous border expansion initiatives and partnerships have been pursued .

interagency partnerships have provided a largely seamless integration of border enforcement with interior enforcement .

these efforts have taken place at four different levels: ( 1 ) federal , ( 2 ) state and local , ( 3 ) international , and ( 4 ) community .

consequently , the strategic element of expanding the border is an effort to draw on the resources of mostly non - border specific entities to further enhance the efforts to achieve the goals of the border protection framework .

the sections below discuss some partnership efforts that have been made at each of these levels .

the lynchpin of the current border protection framework is maximizing domain awareness .

obtaining information on who individuals are , where they are , and what they intend to do offers the potential for border protection agencies to ( 1 ) prevent or intercept unlawful activities with advance notice , and ( 2 ) possibly identify networks and patterns to build intelligence .

domain awareness , therefore , is not merely the act of observing the environment , but also gaining knowledge on which actors represent threats and which constitute benign transit .

indeed , intelligence activities constitute the cornerstone of many homeland security activities , and intelligence lies at the center of the interdependence between government and private sector systems .

in essence , the intelligence system can be described as analogous to a central nervous system , where a network of data - gathering nodes ( or "nerves" ) send feedback to a more centralized center ( "brain" ) for analysis and information distribution .

as such , gathering information on travelers at the border serves a highly useful function , as it constitutes a natural and efficient collection point for information gathering and providing feedback to intelligence analysts .

the intelligence mechanism , in turn , can provide decision - making on which individuals to filter out and which individuals to allow through .

as with any set of policies that attempt to control human behavior , a shift in the border protection framework involves a certain set of trade - offs .

by attempting to change patterns of behavior , new side effects may be introduced , or previously minor problems may become amplified .

as with any framework , vulnerabilities do exist , and there are systemic challenges that may cause or exacerbate some vulnerabilities .

despite extensive planning , the introduction of new border policies may also introduce unforeseen activities that require monitoring and enforcement .

as a result , border protection agencies will require some period of time to learn these tradeoffs and adjust to their circumstances .

over time , as agency learning accumulates and tactical responses are honed , some of these side effects should theoretically be reduced .

some tradeoffs produce consequences that are indirectly related , or less adverse , to the border protection mission of the agencies involved ; yet , others have a direct impact on the success or failure of such a mission .

a number of these tradeoffs — both direct and indirect — can be thought of as vulnerabilities .

vulnerabilities constitute essentially those components of the border security framework that are prone to weakness or have the potential for exploitation by unlawful individuals .

moreover , these vulnerabilities can in some cases be caused by systemic challenges .

failure to adequately respond to such challenges can either cause or further amplify vulnerabilities in a strategic approach .

for border officials , some of the major systemic challenges may be characterized as follow: corruption: by using a funneling system toward ports of entry , dhs places a great amount of responsibility upon its inspection officers .

consequently , smugglers and other nefarious actors have attempted — sometimes successfully — to infiltrate cbp .

criminals and dhs alike are acutely aware that such corruption , when successful , renders most of the border security framework meaningless .

therefore , there have reportedly been extensive efforts by criminals to surreptitiously enroll cbp officers on their payrolls , particularly in the wake of drug supply chain interruptions by the ongoing mexican drug - related violence and the tactical measures implemented by dhs .

to counteract such efforts , dhs has ramped up its internal investigation efforts to root out any double agents .

these internal enforcement efforts have been accompanied by increased professionalization measures , such as the addition of law enforcement retirement benefits for cbp officers , that incentivize employees to resist corruption .

congestion and time pressures: the concentration of inspection activity at the border means that significant resources must be present in order to ensure efficient operations .

inefficiencies not only cause congestion , but can be costly to businesses , both at the border and in the interior .

thus , there is considerable pressure on cbp to provide for rapid processing .

yet , expedited processing can lead to missed opportunities for interdicting threats .

as a countermeasure to this vulnerability , cbp has promoted the use of registered traveler programs , although in some cases the lack of adequate port of entry infrastructure has prevented end users for reaping the promised benefits of such programs .

limited outbound screen / registration: the absence of outbound information on inbound travelers reduces the ability of border protection officials to track individuals and limit their ability to track visa overstays .

it also limits their ability to gather data that may be of added value for intelligence analysis .

although some vulnerabilities will become evident over time , several potential weaknesses may be identified under the present border security framework .

some of these vulnerabilities may be in tension with other vulnerabilities or systemic weaknesses .

examples of such vulnerabilities are discussed below .

circumvention of protection : as mentioned regarding layered security measures , the more one target is hardened , the greater the likelihood that law violators will shift their attention to a softer target and / or use different means .

moreover , as border protection increases , law violators tend to become more sophisticated in their methods for circumventing these measures ( thereby making detection and interdiction more difficult ) .

for the border region , this becomes especially salient , since frequently the goal of a border incursion is to reach a destination away from the border region .

thus , without a seamless interaction with interior enforcement agencies and law enforcement entities , the border serves as a metaphorical finish line , which once overcome serves as the final hurdle that is disconnected from the interior .

fraud / identity m isrepresentation : while cbp has made significant efforts to standardize and secure identity documents , having documents that pass inspection still constitutes the lowest - risk / highest - yield method of border incursions for many law violators .

even with biometric identifiers at the border , if an individual is able to misrepresent himself or herself to the agency issuing documents , the layered security of border protection has essentially been circumvented .

stakeholder resentment: while border protection officials serve the public with the best intentions , the tactics they employ in pursuit of border protection can foster resentment or ill will among community groups , state and local officials , and foreign entities .

if such stakeholders perceive the tactical decisions as being in bad faith or in direct contradiction to their community's betterment , these groups can pull their support or even actively work in opposition to border protection efforts .

tactics viewed as illegitimate or detrimental by stakeholders could undermine significant elements of the protection framework .

for example , if the use of information provided by foreign governments was perceived as being misused by cbp , those governments could cease to provide such information .

thus , stakeholder relations are crucial to mitigate this vulnerability .

for policymakers and for the public at large , the fundamental questions these vulnerabilities raise are: what vulnerabilities are unacceptable , and to what extent must each vulnerability be overcome ? .

depending on one's views on border protection , the answer may vary considerably .

but it is important to also assess how well the current border protection approach is doing in addressing these vulnerabilities and securing the border .

an analysis of the current framework's effectiveness is provided in the following section .

as previously discussed , the current border protection framework can be summarized as securing and managing the u.s. border through obtaining effective control of the borders , safeguarding lawful trade and travel , and identifying and disrupting transnational criminal organizations .

the five strategic commonalities to achieve these goals consist of the dhs leadership , deployment of layered security , maximizing domain awareness , promotion of a shared agency culture , and expansion of the border through international and domestic partnerships .

this section will examine the extent to which some of these policies are working and goals are being achieved , with a particular emphasis on the effective control of the border .

the border protection framework has come under study of several scholars and researchers regarding its effectiveness .

many of these studies have been critical — particularly in regard to immigration control .

for some academics , their criticism is based on what is sometimes referred as a "gap hypothesis," wherein "[a] significant and persistent gap exists between official immigration policies and actual policy outcomes. .

these gaps take two forms , according to academics: gaps caused by the unintended consequences of policy , and gaps caused by inadequate implementation or enforcement of policy .

although scholars and non - scholars alike tend to agree on the existence of this gap in relation to border policies , scholars tend to attribute the cause of the gap more toward the unintended consequences of such policies , while many supporters of such policies suggest the fault lies in the implementation or enforcement .

some scholars , such as peter andreas , have previously issued strong , negative conclusions on the border framework's effectiveness , particularly in regards to stemming the flow of unauthorized immigration .

and for a number of observers , one of his main conclusions of a decade ago still holds true: even though the border enforcement effort has failed to substantially reduce the flow of [unauthorized] migrants and has had the side effect of making organized migrant smuggling a much more profitable business , it has succeeded in making illegal border crossings less visible and more dispersed — and thus in projecting an image of a more secure and orderly border .

in spite of some of the strong conclusions ringing from academic circles on the ineffectiveness of the current border protection approach , analysis of open source data seems more ambiguous regarding notions of success or failure .

evidence both supporting and refuting the effectiveness of the border framework has emerged , painting an often ambiguous picture .

the sections below delve further into some of the more prominent pieces of data to illustrate this ambiguity by analyzing some of the available empirical evidence on unauthorized migration and related enforcement efforts .

if the border protection framework does indeed serve as a unified approach for combating terrorism , criminal smuggling , and illegal immigration , analyzing data on illegal migration can be used to determine the effectiveness of the border protection framework in at least one of its primary areas of concern .

the inconclusive results of studies on the effectiveness of current policies to control cross - border flows suggest that at least a partial reconceptualization of goals and strategies might be necessary .

perhaps central to any such evaluation would be a reexamination of the border's interconnected role relative to other systems , such as markets and immigration .

addressing immigration control in a broader context could represent a significant element of threat reduction .

while immigration incursions only constitute a "border control" element of the threat spectrum , many observers would argue that it represents the most constant source of border incursions .

achieving a greater level of immigration control at the border by addressing the underlying incentives for such migration could conceivably free up additional resources to combat other border threats .

this section presents certain policy options for potentially improving border protection efforts in the short run , as well as introducing long - term considerations for policymakers , with a special emphasis on addressing unauthorized immigration .

the border protection framework goals of obtaining operational control of the borders , safeguarding lawful trade and travel , and identifying and disrupting transnational criminal organizations are necessarily vague , as the breadth of the threats and activities at the border are wide .

but these goals are rooted in the notion that a strategy based on enforcement can ultimately prevent or deter most actions that are undesirable .

this assumption has been the source of much debate and continues to be the source of skepticism in certain circles .

as the empirical analysis above suggested , few conclusive claims about the effectiveness of the current border protection framework can be made .

yet , even if enforcement - only measures do provide some level of deterrence and prevention against border violations , these efforts are both costly and do not necessarily address the underlying causes of such activities .

moreover , they can have unintended consequences ; for example , introducing inefficiencies to market systems through enforcement efforts that in turn present profitable opportunities for criminal enterprises .

border protection is a system ; but similar to a complex organism , it is one system that overlaps and interacts with other systems to generate the whole .

and when threats to homeland security arise from any of these overlapping and interacting systems , the root causes of threats in those systems warrant attention aside from any enforcement - based border protection effort .

otherwise , the enforcement efforts could become similar to a dam without a spillway: some water is held back , but the rest continues to overflow .

for policymakers , the key issue in any border protection strategy is therefore how to address the underlying causes for some unlawful activities to release some of the pressures that are placed upon the border protection mechanism .

moreover , policymakers may wish to ask whether a unified view of tackling the different threats to homeland security is the appropriate avenue for achieving its desired effects .

while some threats should perhaps only be pursued with enforcement measures ( eg , terrorism ) , other activities may benefit from a more multifaceted approach .

if such discussions about amending policies do occur , policymakers will be confronted with the fundamental question that precedes pursuit of any comprehensive border protection strategy: what level of risk is acceptable to live with ? .

thus far , the answer has largely been that virtually no risk is acceptable , despite the fact that americans accept risks in all aspects of their lives on a daily basis .

yet , this answer entails costs to both businesses and communities .

simultaneously , less border protection could potentially produce negative consequences .

as such , these fundamental questions are ones that policymakers face continuously as circumstances change and risks are recalibrated .

appendix a .

strategic plans of key border protection entities appendix b. appropriations table b - 1 includes appropriations information for agencies with border protection - related functions , including those agencies whose functions are most directly tied to this mission .

these agencies include the customs and border protection ( cbp ) , immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , united states coast guard , transportation and security administration , drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , and the executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) .

despite these ties , of the agencies depicted in table b - 1 , only cbp has an exclusive focus on border security .

moreover , all of the agencies have additional missions and foci outside of illegal immigration .

therefore , the funding figures that are presented should not be construed to depict funding for combating illegal immigration and providing border security .

rather , these figures should be understood as being the aggregate funding of agencies whose missions compel them to play a significant role in combating illegal immigration and / or providing border security .

