in recent decades , latin america has played a central role in several major global illicit drug markets .

multiple aspects of the drug supply chain take place in the region , including drug crop cultivation , drug production , drug trafficking , and , ultimately , drug consumption .

today , south america is the sole producer of cocaine for the global market ; mexico and colombia are the primary sources of opiates in the united states ; mexico and the caribbean are major foreign sources of cannabis ( marijuana ) consumed in the united states ; and mexico is the primary source of foreign methamphetamine in the united states .

marijuana and methamphetamine are also produced domestically .

major drug crops in latin america include coca bush , used to produce cocaine , and opium poppy , used to produce opiates , including heroin .

source zones for coca bush cover the andean region of south america , particularly colombia , peru , and bolivia .

for more than a decade , colombia has been the largest producer of coca bush .

however , as colombia's coca cultivation has declined , there have been increases in the number of hectares under cultivation in peru and bolivia .

source zones for opium poppy include mexico , colombia , and to a lesser extent , guatemala .

cannabis is cultivated in virtually all countries in the region , mainly for local consumption , but notable cannabis exporters include mexico and jamaica .

drug processing and refining may take place in source zones as well as along transit routes .

according to u.s. estimates , peru now has the world's highest potential production of pure cocaine and the second - highest potential production of export quality cocaine .

production is also occurring in central america , as honduran officials discovered a large - scale cocaine processing plant in march 2011 , the first of its kind discovered in central america .

key chemical ingredients used to process coca bush and opium poppy into their refined , finished products , as well as those used to produce methamphetamine , are legally manufactured for legitimate industry purposes , but diverted clandestinely for use in the illegal drug trade .

precursor chemicals are also imported from third countries like india and china .

while overall drug consumption in latin america remains low , the prevalence of cocaine use in the region is now above the global average .

according to data from the u.n. office on drugs and crime ( unodc ) , increases in cocaine use have been reported in venezuela , ecuador , brazil , argentina , uruguay , guatemala , honduras , jamaica , and haiti .

these countries are notably located along major cocaine transit routes .

despite increases in cocaine usage , marijuana remains the most widely used drug in the region , particularly in the southern cone .

according to the state department , roughly 95 percent of andean cocaine flowing toward the united states transits the mexico - central america corridor .

 ( see figure 1 ) .

traffickers appear to be using overland smuggling , littoral maritime trafficking , and short - distance aerial trafficking to transport cocaine from south america .

some 79% of drug flights from south america land in honduras .

a large but unknown proportion of opiates , as well as foreign - produced marijuana and methamphetamine , also flow through the same pathways .

the overwhelming use of the central america - mexico corridor as a transit zone represents a major shift in trafficking routes .

in the 1980s and early 1990s , drugs primarily transited through the caribbean into south florida .

the caribbean - south florida route continues to be active , and although it is currently less utilized than the central america - mexico route , some observers have warned that activity along this route may surge once more in the near future .

as u.s. counternarcotics cooperation with venezuela has diminished since 2005 , venezuela has become a major transit point for drug flights through the caribbean into the united states as well as to europe .

elsewhere in the caribbean , jamaica is a transit country for cocaine and the bahamas is a major transit country for both jamaican marijuana and cocaine .

besides going to the united states , latin american drugs , particularly cocaine , are also shipped to europe .

drugs destined for europe mainly depart latin america via venezuela through the caribbean or via the eastern coast of brazil .

an increasing percentage of drug shipments from latin america to europe now transit west africa .

while europe has long been the second - largest cocaine consumption market after north america , the number of european users has been increasing over the last decade as the number of north american users has declined .

latin america's central role in the illicit drug market stems largely from the andean region's unique position as the world's only source region for coca and cocaine .

another major factor contributing to the region's prominence in today's drug trade is its proximity to the united states , a major drug consumption market .

underlying factors that have allowed drug trafficking to flourish include poverty , inequality , and a lack of viable economic opportunities for farmers and youth in many countries aside from emigration .

at the same time , underfunded security forces and the failure to complete institutional reform efforts have generally left police , prisons , and judicial systems weak and susceptible to corruption .

on average , fewer than 5% of murders committed in latin america result in criminal convictions , which gives drug traffickers the freedom to act with relative impunity .

the presence of insurgent groups involved in drug production and trafficking in some countries has impeded antidrug efforts .

uneven political support for counterdrug efforts may also fuel drug trafficking .

for at least 30 years , combating drug production and trafficking in latin america and the caribbean has been a major focus of u.s. international drug control efforts .

amid a broad array of policy tools available to combat drugs , the provision of u.s. counternarcotics assistance to foreign countries has been a key component of the u.s. counterdrug strategy .

the central premise of counternarcotics assistance has been to halt drug production and trafficking at the foreign source , both through assistance to eliminate drug crops or to interdict drug shipments , as well as through assistance to address related economic , social , and institutional vulnerabilities that made drug source and transit countries susceptible to the drug trade in the first place .

while the white house office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) oversees the overall strategy related to u.s. drug control efforts , both domestically and internationally , counterdrug assistance programs in the region are funded by the u.s. department of state , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and the u.s. department of defense ( dod ) .

the state department is responsible for coordinating all counterdrug assistance programs in the region and funding most aspects of those programs aside from alternative livelihood programs and some rule of law initiatives supported by usaid .

dod has its own legislative authorities to provide certain counterdrug assistance to train , equip , and improve the counternarcotics capacity and capabilities of relevant agencies of foreign governments .

additional agencies , including various aspects of the u.s. department of justice , as well as private contractors , implement the assistance programs .

from 1980 to 2010 , u.s. antidrug obligations ( actual expenditures ) from the state department , usaid , and dod to latin america and the caribbean totaled roughly $16.2 billion ( see figure 3 ) .

u.s. state department appropriations for programs identified under the "counternarcotics" budget objective totaled $425.2 million in fy2011 .

u.s. drug control programs in latin america and the caribbean were first authorized by congress in the mid - 1970s , coinciding with national policy debates on the so - called "war on drugs. .

at that time , u.s. assistance primarily focused on the drug source countries of colombia , bolivia , peru , and later mexico , with training and equipment to eradicate illicit drug crops and strengthen counternarcotics law enforcement capabilities .

calls by many policymakers , including by members of congress , for the inclusion of the u.s. military in foreign anti - drug efforts began in the 1970s , spurring a lively debate on dod's role and mission in counternarcotics that would continue decades later .

u.s. aid to the region increased gradually , albeit unevenly , through the 1980s , with increased funding provided for interdiction efforts in transit countries , particularly the caribbean and eastern pacific regions .

pressure for u.s. military involvement increased throughout the 1980s , as u.s. officials grew concerned that law enforcement personnel were ill - equipped to effectively combat well - armed drug cartels and operate in conflict situations in drug source countries .

despite objections from top dod officials , the u.s. military increasingly participated in interdiction operations in the early 1980s and became sporadically engaged in training , equipping , and transporting foreign anti - narcotics personnel in the mid - to late 1980s .

in the 1980s and 1990s under presidents ronald reagan and george h. w. bush , the threat of international drug trafficking , particularly drugs sourced in latin america , further emerged as a national security priority for the united states .

on april 8 , 1986 , president reagan issued national security decision directive 221 ( nsdd - 221 ) , which declared narcotics trafficking a u.s. national security concern , identifying the western hemisphere as particularly affected .

on august 21 , 1989 , president bush issued national security directive 18 ( nsd - 18 ) , which explicitly states that the "first priority of our international drug control strategy will be to enhance greatly our counternarcotics programs in the andean region. .

in addition , nsd - 18 directed the secretary of defense to redefine the pentagon's mission to include counternarcotics as one of its core priorities .

in the same year , president bush launched the "andean initiative" to bolster counternarcotics support to colombia , peru , and bolivia , and congress provided dod with its first major counternarcotics authority , identifying dod as the lead federal agency for the detection and monitoring of aerial and maritime transit of illegal drugs from abroad into the united states .

as u.s. counternarcotics engagement in the andean region continued through the 1990s , congress authorized dod to provide a broad range of counternarcotics support , as well as assistance to train and equip foreign governments .

in fy2000 , counterdrug assistance to south america increased significantly after the clinton administration proposed , and congress began funding , a multi - year assistance package to complement colombian president andres pastrana's counterdrug initiative , plan colombia .

that aid package , then called the andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) , aimed to provide a broad variety of counternarcotics assistance — manual and aerial eradication , alternative development , interdiction , and institutional capacity building and support to civilian and military institutions — for colombia and six neighboring countries .

through aci , colombia , along with peru and bolivia , received the bulk of u.s. counterdrug aid to the region until congress increased assistance for mexico through the mérida initiative beginning in fy2008 .

u.s. state department - funded drug control assistance programs in the western hemisphere are currently undergoing a period of transition .

counterdrug assistance to colombia and the andean region is in decline , after record assistance levels that began with u.s. support for plan colombia in fy2000 .

conversely , antidrug funding for mexico , central america , and the caribbean is significantly higher now than in the mid - 2000s as a result of the mérida initiative and two related programs that received initial funding in fy2010 , the central american regional security initiative ( carsi ) and the caribbean basin security initiative ( cbsi ) .

separately , dod counternarcotics assistance and support continues in the region ( see table a - 1 in the appendix ) .

the following sections provide broad overviews of the current major u.s. antidrug initiatives in latin america and the caribbean .

most sections contain appropriations figures through fy2012 , as well as the fy2013 budget requests for each program .

in addition to defining the authorities by which the state department and dod fund counterdrug efforts and determining the types and levels of funding to appropriate for those efforts , congress requires that the provision of that assistance be conditioned on certain counterdrug - related performance measures .

such aid conditions are intended to discourage aid recipients from shirking their commitments to combating drugs , as well as to ensure that they are cooperating with the u.s. government on related foreign policy priorities , including human rights and anti - corruption efforts .

congress is playing a role in shaping the design of u.s. antidrug programs in latin america at a time when regional support for u.s. counternarcotics policy appears to be at a crossroads .

the united states enjoys sustained counterdrug partnerships with countries like peru and colombia in south america and multilateral support from the u.n. and organization of american states , as well as expanding relationships on drug issues with mexico , central america , and the caribbean through the mérida initiative , carsi , and cbsi .

while many governments continue to support u.s. drug control efforts , some policymakers in the region have concluded that the current u.s. - led counterdrug approach needs to be re - evaluated .

criticism of u.s. drug activities has translated into a reduction in u.s. participation in counternarcotics efforts in certain countries , particularly bolivia and venezuela , as well as a growth in support in some countries for a range of alternative drug policy approaches , including drug decriminalization .

there has also been increasing criticism of u.s. drug policy coming from prominent observers , as well as former and , more recently , current leaders in countries that have been key partners in the struggle against illicit drug trafficking .

newly inaugurated guatemalan president otto perez molina recently asserted that the region needs to consider legalizing the use and transport of drugs .

he argues that the united states has failed to curb illegal drug consumption , and that his country has no choice but to seek alternatives to the current "war on drugs" in order to stem violence related to drug trafficking .

other leaders have agreed that a debate concerning the effectiveness of current efforts in the region is warranted .

perez molina's arguments echo the conclusions of a report issued by a group of prominent world leaders , including former presidents of brazil , colombia , and mexico , which argues that supply reduction and incarceration strategies are ineffective and that government resources would be better spent on demand and harm reduction efforts .

these recommendations are similar to some of the suggestions that have been made by u.s. drug policy experts .

during a recent visit to mexico , vice president biden reportedly stated that while alternative drug policies are worth discussing , "there is no possibility the obama / biden administration will change its policy on [drug] legalization. .

congress has influenced aspects of u.s. counterdrug assistance programs in latin america and related domestic efforts in oversight hearings , legislation , and through the appropriations process .

thus far , the 112 th congress has convened hearings on the president's requests for foreign assistance programs in latin america ( including regional security initiatives ) ; citizen security in the americas ; the mérida initiative , carsi , and cbsi ; and on bulk cash smuggling along the southwest border .

the senate has approved legislation that would create new penalties to deter the construction and use of border tunnels to smuggle drugs into the united states ( s. 1236 ) and to establish penalties for chemical producers from other countries that illegally ship precursor chemicals into the united states knowing these chemicals will be used to make illegal drugs ( s. 1612 ) .

congress is likely to consider several questions as it continues to fund , oversee , and evaluate u.s. drug control programs in latin america and the caribbean .

some of these questions might include what , if anything does the growing regional support for alternatives to the current counterdrug policy mix suggest in terms of u.s. drug policy priorities and strategies ? .

how might the u.s. government better plan , implement , and evaluate counterdrug assistance programs in latin america ? .

what should be the future of eradication and alternative development programs in the andes ? .

to what extent are u.s. domestic drug policy efforts complementing counterdrug assistance programs in latin america ? .

some members of congress have raised questions regarding whether there is the need for a more integrated approach to counternarcotics policies in the region .

members have expressed concern that the overall effectiveness of hemispheric counterdrug efforts has been hindered by "fragmented management , unclear reporting chains , and duplicative and overlapping agendas" among the agencies charged with implementing aspects of antidrug programs in the region .

some members have argued that a more integrated effort might include having the state department develop a multi - year drug strategy for the region that would seek to avoid the so - called "balloon effect" in which successful efforts in one area drive drug - related activities to another area .

members have also urged the administration to establish a coordinator within the state department to oversee the planning and implementation of the various counterdrug assistance programs in latin america .

the obama administration has taken steps to better coordinate the country and regional antidrug programs previously discussed , and to ensure that u.s. - funded efforts complement the efforts of partner governments and other donors .

the administration has appointed a coordinator within the state department to oversee the planning and implementation of the aforementioned regional security assistance packages .

the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) is also working with other federal agencies , as well as independent policy experts , to develop a western hemisphere counterdrug strategy that is scheduled to be published later this year .

according to ondcp , the strategy will emphasize "interdiction and disrupting transnational criminal organizations , institutional strengthening , building strong and resilient communities , and drug demand reduction. .

the administration is encouraging countries that have received u.s. assistance in the past — particularly colombia — to share technical expertise with other countries in the region , a strategy that analysts have recommended .

colombia and mexico are supporting the implementation of the central american security strategy adopted at a donor's conference in guatemala in june 2011 as part of the group of friends of central america .

another aspect of developing a more integrated approach to counterdrug efforts in latin america involves ensuring that non - aid programs related to drug policy complement the goals of u.s. counterdrug assistance programs .

those include: drug kingpin sanctions: the u.s. department of the treasury's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) targets and blocks financial assets , subject to u.s. jurisdiction , of drug kingpins and related associates and entities .

first instituted in 1995 to block assets owned by principal figures of the colombia's cali cartel ( e.o .

12978 ) , a second , expanded sanctions program was later introduced in 1999 , which has a global scope ( foreign narcotics kingpin designation act ) .

targets from latin america and the caribbean are a central focus of both programs , with traffickers centered in colombia constituting the entirety of e.o .

12978 and latin american and caribbean kingpins representing the majority of all listed kingpins since 2000. international trade incentives to the andes: through the 1991 andean trade preference act ( atpa ) and its subsequent replacement , the 2002 andean trade preference and drug eradication act ( atpdea ) , as amended , the u.s. government has historically sought to offer trade benefits to four partner nations in the andes — colombia , ecuador , peru , and bolivia — as part of a broader effort to combat drug production and trafficking in the region .

the program was suspended for bolivia in december 2008 , because it failed to meet one of the eligibility requirements for the program .

specifically , the president determined that bolivia "failed demonstrably" to make substantial efforts to uphold its international commitments to combat drugs .

the benefits to peru expired at the end of 2010 and were not renewed because peru has entered into a free trade agreement with the united states , which was implemented in february 2009 .

the most recent extension of atpa for colombia and ecuador took place on october 12 , 2011 , when the 112th congress enacted implementing legislation for the u.s. - colombia trade promotion agreement ( p.l .

112-42 ) .

as part of the free trade agreement implementing legislation , atpa was renewed for colombia and ecuador until july 31 , 2013 .

intelligence and law enforcement activities: u.s. efforts to identify and dismantle drug networks include intelligence and law enforcement activities that are not categorized as foreign assistance .

dod plays a key role in collecting , analyzing , and sharing intelligence on illegal drug flows through its regional operational assets , including the joint interagency task force - south ( jiatf - south ) , which coordinates multi - agency drug intelligence ; and cooperative security locations ( csls ) , where drug interdiction aircraft can be deployed close to drug production sources and transit zones .

international drug interdiction efforts in the western hemisphere account for approximately 81% of all cocaine interdictions worldwide .

the u.s. drug enforcement administration ( dea ) maintains 37 country or regional dea offices at u.s. embassies in latin america and the caribbean .

dea , with the support of other law enforcement agencies , use a variety of legal tools to ensure that international criminals are prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law , including extradition and extra - territorial law enforcement authorities to investigate and prosecute drug offenses overseas .

dea reportedly also provides training and operational support , in conjunction with foreign law enforcement units , for counternarcotics missions .

these non - foreign aid programs have figured prominently in u.s. counterdrug efforts in latin america for some time .

yet it remains a challenge for policymakers to evaluate how such programs — conducted by a variety of u.s. agencies and offices , with separate budgets , planning procedures , and priorities and missions — may improve , detract from , or prove ineffective in the overall u.s. approach to combating drugs in the region .

as congress evaluates u.s. drug policy towards latin america , it may choose to consider whether it is feasible and desirable to incorporate non - foreign assistance programs into a counterdrug strategy for the region .

the ability to monitor progress and make adjustments in programs that are not achieving their intended results has been identified as another key component of a well - integrated drug policy .

supply control programs have traditionally been evaluated by calculating the acreage of crops eradicated , drugs interdicted , or dto leaders arrested , or by examining the price and purity of drugs in the united states .

these measures , though important , can sometimes fail to capture progress that has taken place in terms of advancing bilateral or regional cooperation on anti - drug efforts and / or problems in existing policies .

measuring the effects of institution - building and development programs may prove to be even more difficult , particularly in the short term .

across the u.s. government , there has historically been a tendency to calculate the impact of particular programs by measuring "outputs," such as the number of individuals trained by a justice sector program or served by a particular development program .

the gao and others have urged u.s. officials , particularly those carrying out so - called "soft - side" institution - building and development programs , to develop performance indicators that attempt to measure the societal "outcomes" that occur as result of u.s. efforts .

congress may suggest new ways for the administration to assess the effectiveness of drug control programs across different agencies , funding streams , and jurisdictions .

congress might also consider including more funding for program evaluations in foreign appropriations measures .

in recent years , congress has increased funding for drug interdiction programs in mexico , central america and the caribbean , but has gradually reduced funding for eradication and alternative development programs in the andean region .

eradication has been a long - standing but often controversial u.s. drug control tool , particularly in latin america .

as recently as 2008 , the state department h ad asserted that "drug crops are the weakest link in the drug production chain" and that source - zone eradication remained "the cornerstone of u.s. supply reduction strategy. .

more recently , some u.s. officials have argued that there are certain situations , including in conflict or post - conflict environments like the current situation in afghanistan , in which eradication might be ineffective , or even counterproductive .

when the late ambassador richard holbrooke , then the obama administration's special representative for afghanistan and pakistan , halted u.s. - funded eradication programs in afghanistan , he echoed the arguments made by many andean drug policy experts regarding the importance of having "alternative livelihoods" and some level of security conditions in place before eradication programs are undertaken .

without those conditions in place , analysts have warned that eradication programs , particularly of an involuntary nature , risk alienating poor farmers and peasants and driving them into the hands of insurgent groups like the farc in colombia and the shining path in peru .

in some parts of colombia and peru , anti - government groups continue to provide security and protection to peasant farmers growing illicit drug crops , while in others , farmers have sought government assistance for alternative crop cultivation so as to free their communities from the influence of drug traffickers and allied criminal groups .

given these concerns , congress is likely to continue evaluating the amount of foreign assistance devoted to eradication in the andes and the circumstances under which eradication programs are carried out , as well as how eradication efforts should be sequenced with alternative development programs .

eradication of drug crops occurs through manual removal , which involves the physical up - rooting and destruction of crops , mechanical removal , which involves the use of tractors and all - terrain vehicles to harrow the fields , or by aerial spraying , which involves the spraying of fields with herbicide mixture .

eradication can be conducted with the voluntary agreement of growers , or involuntarily .

the united states supports programs to eradicate coca , opium , and marijuana in several countries in latin america , primarily in colombia , but also in bolivia , peru , guatemala , and mexico .

manual eradication is the preferred method for eradicating in areas where illicit plants have been interspersed with licit crops , such as in national parks .

aerial eradication is only permitted in colombia , where proponents of the practice say it remains the safest and most effective means to defoliate large areas being used for drug crop cultivation .

u.s. officials have credited years of repeated aerial spraying with reducing the productivity of coca plants and fields in colombia .

however , since 2006 , the percentage of illicit crops eradicated through aerial spraying in colombia has declined vis - à - vis the percentage eradicated by manual eradication .

despite eradication's perceived benefits , it has also been a subject of long - standing criticism .

manual eradication requires significant time and human resources and aerial application of herbicide is not legal or feasible in many countries and is expensive to implement where it is permitted .

eradication remains a high - risk activity , as spray planes and manual eradication crews are often targeted by drug traffickers .

critics have also asserted that aerial spraying in colombia has caused negative human , animal , and environmental damage .

however , a series of reports produced by the inter - american drug abuse control commission of the organization of american states have concluded that the herbicide chemical used for aerial fumigation in colombia has not caused damage to humans or wildlife .

the secretary of state has reported similar findings to congress .

in the case of eradication in colombia , results have been mixed .

crop eradication efforts provided short - term instances of success in the early 2000s when aerial spraying was first permitted .

in the following years , however , farmers adapted to eradication efforts through a variety of strategies that essentially involved farmers moving cultivation locations or growing practices , but not reducing the overall harvest size .

some of these coping strategies included replanting or pruning back coca plants after spraying and increasing the number of harvest cycles per season .

other coping strategies , such as interspersing licit crops with coca crops and growing coca plants under dense foliage as well as in national parks , proved to make detection much more difficult .

nevertheless , both u.s. and u.n. estimates since 2008 have shown declines in overall coca cultivation and cocaine production projections in colombia .

in the absence of the credible threat of eradication , critics question what alternative strategies exist to effectively deter drug producers from cultivating drug crops in the first place .

the development of licit livelihood options in drug producing areas is often raised as an alternative option to eradication .

essentially , such a strategy would provide a positive incentive for farmers to abandon their drug crops , rather than serve as a negative deterrent .

however , policymakers have been challenged to find viable income alternatives in often remote , underdeveloped regions for impoverished peasants who lack basic skills .

in conflict regions , where insecurity prevails , alternative development may not even be an option .

in best case scenarios , alternative development can take years to show results , rendering it an ineffective short - term solution .

alternative development need not be a zero - sum drug policy option .

with regard to colombia , for example , recent studies have found that the combination of jointly implemented eradication , alternative development , and interdiction is more effective than the independent application of any one of these three strategies .

in la macarena , colombia , for example , the colombian government has had success by focusing its efforts on improving security conditions and government services in that area and by coordinating eradication with food security for farmers and then with alternative livelihoods projects .

as previously mentioned , many analysts have suggested that the likelihood of success would increase if there were modifications in the sequencing of eradication and alternative development strategies , implementing alternative development programs first and eradication programs later .

others have urged andean governments , as well as usaid , not to disqualify an entire community from participating in an alternative development project if a few families are found to be producing coca .

congress has also taken some interest in the extent to which u.s. domestic initiatives to counter drug demand affect counterdrug assistance efforts in latin america .

drug demand in the united states fuels a multi - billion dollar illicit industry .

in 2010 , about 22.6 million individuals were current ( past month ) illegal drug users , representing 8.9% of individuals aged 12 and older .

obama administration officials and experts alike have acknowledged that u.s. domestic demand for illegal drugs is a significant factor driving the global drug trade , including the drug trafficking - related violence that is occurring in source and transit countries in latin america .

in july 2011 , the administration released its 2011 national drug control strategy , which continues to emphasize the need to reduce u.s. drug demand .

the strategy includes a five - year goal of cutting drug use among youth by 15% .

drug policy experts have praised the administration's focus on reducing consumption , but criticized the administration for requesting relatively modest budget increases in funding for treatment programs .

some have questioned whether the federal government allocates enough of the drug budget to adequately address the demand side .

in fy2011 , the administration dedicated $10 million to drug demand reduction programs .

nevertheless , the fy2012 drug budget and fy2013 drug budget request continue to spend a majority of funds on supply reduction programs including drug crop eradication in source countries , interdiction , and domestic law enforcement efforts .

in addition to federal efforts , however , many state , local , and nonprofit agencies also channel funds toward demand reduction .

