the small business administration ( sba ) administers several programs to support small businesses , including the historically underutilized business zone empowerment contracting ( hubzone ) program .

the hubzone program is "a place - based contracting assistance program whose primary objective is job creation and increasing capital investment in distressed communities. .

it was authorized in 1997 ( p.l .

105-135 , the hubzone act of 1997 ; title vi of the small business reauthorization act of 1997 ) , and the sba began accepting applications from interested small businesses on march 22 , 1999 .

the hubzone program provides participating small businesses located in areas with low income , high poverty , or high levels of unemployment with contracting opportunities in the form of set - asides , sole - source awards , and price - evaluation preferences .

the competition in contracting act of 1984 generally requires "full and open competition" for government procurement contracts .

however , procurement set - asides are permissible competitive procedures .

a set - aside restricts competition for a federal contract to specified contractors .

set - asides can be exclusive or partial , depending upon whether the entire procurement or just part of it is so restricted .

in this case , the competition may be restricted to sba - certified hubzone businesses if there is a reasonable expectation of at least two sba - certified hubzone bidders and a fair market price .

it is the most commonly used mechanism in the hubzone program , accounting for about 78.4% of hubzone program contract dollars ( $1.49 billion of $1.90 billion ) in fy2017 .

a sole - source award is a federal contract awarded , or proposed for award , without competition .

sole - source awards accounted for about 3.4% of hubzone program contract dollars ( $65.3 million of $1.90 billion ) in fy2017 .

in addition , in any full and open competition for a federal contract "the price offered by a qualified hubzone business shall be deemed as being lower than the price of another offeror if the hubzone business price offer is not more than 10% higher than the other offer. .

price - evaluation preferences accounted for about 18.2% of hubzone program contract dollars ( $346.9 million of $1.90 billion ) in fy2017 .

in fy2017 , the federal government awarded 81,082 contracts valued at $7.53 billion to hubzone - certified businesses .

about $1.90 billion of that amount was awarded with a hubzone preference ( $1.49 billion through a hubzone set - aside , $65.3 million through a hubzone sole - source award , and $346.9 million through a hubzone price - evaluation preference ) .

about $1.53 billion of that amount was awarded to hubzone - certified businesses in open competition with other firms .

the remaining $4.10 billion was awarded with another small business preference ( eg , set aside and sole source awards for small business generally and for 8 ( a ) , women - owned , and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses ) .

the program's administrative cost is about $9.8 million annually .

it received an appropriation of $3 million for fy2019 , with the additional cost of administering the program provided by the sba's appropriation for salaries and general administrative expenses .

congressional interest in the hubzone program has increased in recent years , primarily due to u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) reports of fraud in the program and efforts by small businesses to ease hubzone eligibility requirements .

this report examines arguments presented both for and against targeting assistance to geographic areas with specified characteristics as opposed to providing assistance to people or businesses with specified characteristics ; assesses arguments presented both for and against the creation and continuation of the hubzone program , starting with the arguments presented during consideration of p.l .

105-135 , which authorized the program ; discusses the hubzone program's structure and operation , focusing on the definitions of hubzone areas and hubzone small businesses and the program's performance relative to federal contracting goals ; and provides an analysis of the sba's administration of the hubzone program and the sba's performance measures .

this report also examines hubzone - related legislation , including p.l .

114-92 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 , which expanded the definition of a base realignment and closure act ( brac ) military base closure area to make it easier for businesses located in those areas to meet the hubzone program's requirement that at least 35% of its employees reside in a hubzone area .

it also extended brac base closure area hubzone eligibility from five years to not less than eight years , provided hubzone eligibility to qualified disaster areas , and added native hawaiian organizations to the list of hubzone eligible small business concerns .

p.l .

115-91 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 , which included provisions from several bills introduced during the 115 th congress , including s. 929 , the invest in rural small business act of 2017 , and h.r .

3294 , the hubzone unification and business stability act of 2017 .

specifically , the act , among other provisions , allows small businesses that have hubzone status on or before december 31 , 2019 , to retain that status from january 1 , 2020 , until the sba prepares an updated online tool depicting hubzone qualified areas ( anticipated by the sba to take place in december 2021 ) .

once the new online tool ( currently called the hubzone map ) is operational , the sba must update it every five years for qualified census tracts and nonmetropolitan counties and when a change in status takes place for other hubzone types ( eg , when an area becomes , or ceases to be , a redesignated area ) .

the act also allows governors , starting on january 1 , 2020 , to petition the sba each year to designate areas located in nonurban areas , with a population of 50,000 or fewer , and an average unemployment rate at least 120% of the national or state average , whichever is lower , as hubzones ; requires the sba to process hubzone certification applications with sufficient and complete documentation within 60 days of receipt ; ensures that hubzone - eligible brac areas receive hubzone eligibility for a full eight years , beginning on the date they are designated a brac ; and requires the sba , not later than one year after enactment , to publish performance metrics measuring the hubzone program's success in promoting economic development in economically distressed areas .

in addition , p.l .

114-187 , the puerto rico oversight , management and economic stability act ( promesa ) , includes a provision exempting puerto rico from the 20% population cap on qualified census tracts ( qcts ) located in metropolitan statistical areas ( msas ) for 10 years , or until the date on which the financial oversight and management board for puerto rico , created by promesa , ceases to exist , whichever comes first .

the act also requires the sba to implement a risk - based approach to requesting and verifying information from firms applying to be designated or recertified as a qualified hubzone small business .

several bills are also discussed that would increase the federal government's small business contracting goals .

for example , during the 113 th congress , s. 259 , the assuring contracting equity act of 2013 , would have increased the federal government's 23% contracting goal for small businesses generally to 25% , the 5% contracting goals for small disadvantaged businesses and women - owned small businesses to 10% , and the 3% contracting goals for hubzone - certified small businesses and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses to 6% .

the bill's provisions were reintroduced in both the house and senate during the 114 th congress ( h.r .

3175 and s. 1859 ) and the 115 th congress ( h.r .

2362 and s. 1061 ) .

also , h.r .

273 , the minority small business enhancement act of 2015 , would have increased the federal government's 23% contracting goal for small businesses generally to 25% and the 5% contracting goals for small disadvantaged businesses and women - owned small businesses to 10% .

the hubzone program was authorized by p.l .

105-135 .

senator christopher s. "kit" bond , the legislation's sponsor , described it as a "jobs bill and a welfare - to - work bill" designed to "create realistic opportunities for moving people off of welfare and into meaningful jobs" in "inner cities and rural counties that have low household incomes , high unemployment , and whose communities have suffered from a lack of investment. .

its enactment was part of a broader debate that had been under way since the late 1970s concerning whether the federal government should target assistance to geographic areas with specified characteristics as opposed to providing assistance to people or businesses with specified characteristics .

five hubzone types ( or classes ) currently exist: qualified census tracts ( qcts ) , qualified nonmetropolitan counties , qualified indian reservations / indian country , military bases closed under the brac , and qualified disaster areas .

in addition , qcts and qualified nonmetropolitan counties that lose their eligibility may temporarily retain their eligibility by becoming redesignated areas .

also , p.l .

115-91 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 , authorizes governors , starting on january 1 , 2020 , to petition the sba annually to grant hubzone eligibility to designated covered areas in their state ( or territory ) which are located outside of an urbanized area , have a population of 50,000 or fewer , and have an unemployment rate at least 120% of the unemployment rate for the nation or state in which it is located , whichever is less .

firms must be certified by the sba to participate in the hubzone program .

table 1 indicates the number of hubzone - certified small businesses listed in the sba's dynamic small business search database for selected dates from 2010 to 2018 .

the sba's database contains information provided by small businesses interested in obtaining federal contracts when they registered in the federal system for award management ( sam ) .

the data indicate that the number of hubzone firms increased from may 2010 to may 2011 and then generally declined until mid - 2015 , with much of the reduction due to the previously mentioned expiration of grandfathered redesignated areas on october 1 , 2011 .

since then , the number of hubzone firms has increased somewhat .

as of april 3 , 2019 , the sba's dynamic small business search database included 6,769 firms with active hubzone certifications .

to become certified , firms complete and submit specified sba hubzone application forms to the sba , either online or by mail .

firms must meet sba size standards for the firm's primary industry classification ; be at least 51% owned and controlled by u.s. citizens , a community development corporation , an agricultural cooperative , or an indian tribe ( including alaska native corporations ) ; maintain a principal office located in a hubzone ; ensure that at least 35% of its employees reside in a hubzone ; represent , as provided in the application , that it will "attempt to maintain" having at least 35% of its employees reside in a hubzone during the performance of any hubzone contract it receives ; represent , as provided in the application , that it will ensure that it will comply with certain contract performance requirements in connection with contracts awarded to it as a qualified hubzone small business concern ( such as spending at least 50% of the cost of the contract incurred for personnel on its own employees or employees of other qualified hubzone small business concerns and meeting specified subcontracting limitations to nonqualified hubzone small business concerns ) ; provide an active , up - to - date dun and bradstreet profile and data universal numbering system ( duns ) number that represents the business ; and provide an active central contractor registration profile for the business .

prior to 2010 , the sba's goal was to make its determination within 30 calendar days after receipt of a complete application package , subject to the need for additional information or clarification of information contained in the application .

in response to reports of applicant fraud , in fy2009 the sba began a two - year effort to reengineer its applicant review process ( requiring applicants to submit documentation such as lease or rental agreements , three years of tax returns , citizenship documentation , and payroll records to prove they meet program requirements ) .

initially , depending on the complexity of the application and the need for additional information , the sba took from 5 months to 12 months to make its determination .

the sba has since decreased the average time to process hubzone applications , with about 61% of applications processed in three months or less .

p.l .

115-91 requires the sba , effective january 1 , 2020 , to process hubzone certification applications with sufficient and complete documentation within 60 days of receipt .

if the sba approves an application , it sends a written notice to the business and adds the business to its list of certified hubzone businesses .

a decision to deny eligibility must be in writing and state the specific reasons for denial .

in the past , the sba's staff conducted random program examinations "to verify the accuracy of any certification made or information provided as part of the hubzone application process , or in connection with a hubzone contract. .

examiners typically verified that the business met the program's eligibility requirements and that it met such requirements at the time of its application for certification , its most recent recertification , or its certification in connection with a hubzone contract .

in response to reports of fraud , the sba , in addition to reengineering its applicant review process , now conducts program examinations of all firms that received a hubzone contract in the previous fiscal year .

sba district field offices also conduct site visits to validate the geographic requirement for principal offices .

in fy2018 , sba district field offices completed 529 on - site compliance reviews of hubzone - certified firms , about 10% of the hubzone - certified firms in the sba's portfolio .

certified hubzone small business concerns must recertify every three years to the sba that they meet the requirements for being a hubzone business .

they must also immediately notify the sba of any material change that could affect their eligibility , such as a change in the ownership , business structure , or principal office of the concern or a failure to meet the 35% hubzone residency requirement .

since 1978 , federal agency heads have been required to establish federal procurement contracting goals , in consultation with the sba , "that realistically reflect the potential of small business concerns and small businesses concerns owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals" to participate in federal procurement .

each agency is required , at the conclusion of each fiscal year , to report its progress in meeting the goals to the sba .

in 1988 , congress authorized the president to annually establish government - wide minimum participation goals for procurement contracts awarded to small businesses and small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals .

congress required the government - wide minimum participation goal for small businesses to be "not less than 20% of the total value of all prime contract awards for each fiscal year" and "not less than 5% of the total value of all prime contract and subcontract awards for each fiscal year" for small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals .

each federal agency was also directed to "have an annual goal that presents , for that agency , the maximum practicable opportunity for small business concerns and small business concerns owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals to participate in the performance of contracts let by such agency. .

the sba was also required to report to the president annually on the attainment of the goals and to include the information in an annual report to congress .

the sba negotiates the goals with each federal agency and establishes a small business eligible baseline for evaluating the agency's performance .

the agency head is required to "make consistent efforts to annually expand participation by small business concerns from each industry category. .

if the sba and the agency cannot agree on the goals , the agency may submit the case to the office of management and budget ( omb ) office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) for resolution .

the small business eligible baseline excludes certain contracts that the sba has determined do not realistically reflect the potential for small business participation in federal procurement ( such as those awarded to mandatory and directed sources ) , contracts funded predominately from agency - generated sources ( i.e. , nonappropriated funds ) , contracts not covered by federal acquisition regulations , acquisitions on behalf of foreign governments , and contracts not reported in the federal procurement data system ( such as contracts or government procurement card purchases valued less than $10,000 ) .

these exclusions typically account for 18% to 20% of all federal prime contracts each year .

the sba then evaluates the agencies' performance against their negotiated goals annually , using data from the federal procurement data system — next generation , managed by the u.s. general services administration , to generate the small business eligible baseline .

this information is compiled into the official small business goaling report , which the sba releases annually .

each agency that fails to achieve any proposed prime or subcontract goal is required to submit a justification to the sba on why they failed to achieve a proposed or negotiated goal with a proposed plan of corrective action .

agencies can take credit in every category that is applicable to the recipient of the contract .

for example , "when counting goaling achievements , a contract awarded to a service - disabled veteran - owned woman - owned small business would be counted toward the small business ( sb ) goal , the service - disabled veteran - owned small business ( sdvosb ) goal and the women - owned small business ( wosb ) goal .

however , these category counts are not summed to triple the total count .

the sum of parts does not equal the whole ( italics in original ) . .

over the years , federal government - wide procurement contracting goals have been established for small businesses generally ( p.l .

100-656 , the business opportunity development reform act of 1988 , and p.l .

105-135 , the hubzone act of 1997 — title vi of the small business reauthorization act of 1997 ) , small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals ( p.l .

100-656 ) , women ( p.l .

103-355 , the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 ) , small businesses located within a hubzone ( p.l .

105-135 ) , and small businesses owned and controlled by a service - disabled veteran ( p.l .

106-50 , the veterans entrepreneurship and small business development act of 1999 ) .

the current federal small business contracting goals are at least 23% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards to small businesses for each fiscal year , 5% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to small disadvantaged businesses for each fiscal year , 5% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to women - owned small businesses , 3% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to hubzone small businesses , and 3% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses .

there are no punitive consequences for not meeting these goals .

however , the sba's small business goaling report is distributed widely , receives media attention , and serves to heighten public awareness of the issue of small business contracting .

for example , agency performance as reported in the sba's small business goaling report is often cited by members during their questioning of federal agency witnesses during congressional hearings .

as shown in table 2 , the fy201 7 small business goaling report , using data in the federal procurement data system , indicates that federal agencies met the federal contracting goal for small businesses generally , small disadvantaged businesses , and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses in fy2017 .

federal agencies awarded 23.88% of the value of their small business eligible contracts ( $442.5 billion ) to small businesses ( $105.7 billion ) , 9.10% to small disadvantaged businesses ( $40.2 billion ) , 4.71% to women - owned small businesses ( $20.8 billion ) , 1.65% to hubzone small businesses ( $7.3 billion ) , and 4.05% to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses ( $17.9 billion ) .

the percentage of total reported federal contracts ( without exclusions ) awarded to those small businesses in fy2017 is also provided in the table for comparative purposes .

congressional interest in the hubzone program has increased in recent years , primarily due to gao reports of fraud in the program and efforts by small businesses to ease hubzone eligibility requirements .

congressional interest in the sba's hubzone program has increased in recent years .

debates over the program's effect on economically distressed communities , as reflected in gao's recommendation for new sba performance measures ; the federal government's difficulty in meeting the 3% contracting goal ; the reduction in the number of hubzone firms ; and small business anxiety concerning the increased frequency of hubzone eligibility determinations have all served to elevate congressional interest in the program .

but perhaps the most influential reason for the increased level of congressional interest has been gao's finding of fraud in the program .

the sba has overhauled the program .

it reported in its fy2011 congressional budget justification that it had "met its primary goal during fy2009" to reengineer its "business processes to reduce fraud and abuse with the program. .

on april 21 , 2010 , then - sba administrator karen mills testified before the house committee on small business that progress has been made but "we know there's more work to do. .

she testified that "at the front - end , it means more upfront certification and eligibility .

for small businesses already in the program , it means more efforts with compliance and site visits .

and if they're found to be out of compliance , it means pursuing and removing bad actors. .

also , in its fy2013 congressional budget justification , the sba indicated that to further reduce fraud , waste , and abuse , the hubzone program began the systematic legacy portfolio review of firms that were certified as a hubzone prior to the fy2009 policy of full document review for initial certification .

during fy2011 , 2,040 firms completed the legacy portfolio review .

the sba also conducted and received 987 site visit reports from its field staff conveying whether or not the firm appeared to be operating from the hubzone principal office .

this amount is in sharp contrast with the seven site visits that had been conducted in fy2008 .

in fy2012 , the sba will be rolling out a hubzone recruitment initiative to target firms that may be hubzone eligible and educate them on the benefits of the program .

one of the immediate by - products of the sba's new business processes was an increase in the processing time for new hubzone certifications .

in the past , the sba had a self - imposed goal of making those certifications within 30 calendar days after receipt of a complete application package , subject to the need for additional information or clarification of information contained in the application .

now , depending on the complexity of the application and the need for additional information , the sba reports that it takes , on average , about three months to make those certifications .

concerns about the processing times were reflected in p.l .

115-91 's provision requiring the sba , effective january 1 , 2020 , to process hubzone certification applications with sufficient and complete documentation within 60 days of receipt .

it remains to be determined if the sba's new processes will reduce the incidence of fraud within the program .

the resolution of that question could determine the future of the hubzone program .

