coupled with increasing concerns about the environment , the magnitude of federal spending on contracts has prompted numerous questions from members of congress and the public about the role of environmental considerations in federal procurement .

these include: to what extent do agencies consider environmental factors when procuring goods or services ? .

what legal authorities presently require or allow agencies to take environmental factors into account when acquiring goods or services ? .

how are existing provisions authorizing agencies to consider environmental factors implemented ? .

this report provides an overview , answering these and related questions .

it does not address green building initiatives , energy - savings performance contracts , policy documents , agency - specific laws , or environmental laws of general applicability that effectively shape the products available for purchase .

beginning with president obama's 2009 executive order on "federal leadership in environmental , energy , and economic performance," the obama administration has taken steps to promote consideration of environmental factors in federal procurement .

recently , for example , the general services administration ( gsa ) reported on plans to incorporate consideration of greenhouse gas emissions inventories into federal procurement decisions , and the federal acquisition regulation was amended to require that contractors report on their purchases of biobased products under service and construction contracts .

certain such initiatives have prompted controversy , however .

some members of congress sought to restrict the department of defense's purchase of biofuels as part of the national defense authorization act for fy2013 , and some commentators have objected to gsa's use of the leadership in energy and environmental design ( leed ) rating system for buildings .

fundamentally , federal procurement involves agencies acquiring the goods and services they need to carry out their missions .

the vision for federal acquisition , as presented in the far , is "to deliver on a timely basis the best value product or service to the customer , while maintaining the public's trust and fulfilling public policy objectives. .

environmental objectives have historically constituted one of the "public policy objectives" to be furthered by federal procurement , and environmental interests were among the "competing interests" in the federal procurement system .

however , they were arguably one among many , sometimes competing , policy objectives until the may 2011 amendments to the far articulated a "sustainable acquisition policy," which generally requires that agencies shall advance sustainable acquisition by ensuring that 95 percent of new contract actions for the supply of products and for the acquisition of services ( including construction ) require that the products are — ( 1 ) energy - efficient ( energy star® or federal energy management program ( femp ) - designated ) ; ( 2 ) water - efficient ; ( 3 ) biobased ; ( 4 ) environmentally preferable ( eg , epeat - registered , or non - toxic or less toxic alternatives ) ; ( 5 ) non - ozone depleting ; or ( 6 ) made with recovered materials .

while many of the products to be purchased under this policy ( eg , energy - efficient , biobased ) were previously "preferred" in federal procurements , as discussed below , the policy could be said to create increased impetus for their purchase by requiring federal agencies to ensure that 95% of their new "contract actions" entail the acquisition of such products .

however , even with the may 2011 amendments to the far , agencies would generally not be required to purchase energy - efficient , water - efficient , biobased , environmentally preferable , non - ozone depleting , or recovered - content products in any specific procurement .

rather , they are to ensure that 95% of their new contract actions generally involve such products .

it is also important to note that the may amendments generally rely upon , rather than expand , existing legal authorities ( discussed below ) requiring or permitting agencies to prefer certain products based upon their environmental attributes .

in addition , the amendments do not purport to address which "sustainable" product agencies should purchase when two or more different products — each of which agencies purportedly "must" purchase because of its environmental attributes — could meet agency requirements .

moreover , as agencies implement the requirement that 95% of their new contract actions entail the purchase of energy - efficient and similar products , questions could arise about the relationship between the sustainable acquisition policy and other long - standing federal procurement policies .

for example , some small businesses that participated in a pilot project to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the federal supply chain have reported being concerned that they might appear less "environmentally friendly" to contracting officers than competitors that travel shorter distances or can afford more fuel - efficient vehicles .

various legal authorities currently require or allow contracting officers to take environmental considerations into account when procuring goods or services .

these authorities can be broadly divided into three categories: ( 1 ) "attribute - focused" authorities , generally requiring agencies to avoid or acquire products based on their environmental attributes ( eg , ozone - depleting substances , recovered content ) ; ( 2 ) general contracting authorities , allowing agencies to purchase goods with certain environmental attributes when they have bona fide requirements for such goods ; and ( 3 ) responsibility - related authorities , which require agencies to avoid certain dealings with contractors that have been debarred from government contracting for violations of the clean air act or clean water act .

implementation of the attribute - specific and general authorities that could allow agencies to prefer certain products or vendors based on environmental considerations involves two components: identification of prospective products and contractors , and implementation of various purchasing methods .

in the case of the attribute - specific authorities , contracting officers generally rely on third - party designations of eligible ( or ineligible ) products , rather than making their own determinations of which products qualify on a case - by - case basis .

in fact , the statutes and executive orders providing such authority often require both that ( 1 ) one agency , with appropriate technical expertise , designate eligible products and ( 2 ) other agencies purchase these products .

where recovered - content products are involved , for example , the epa designates eligible products , while the u.s. department of agriculture designates biobased products .

when relying on the general contracting authorities , program managers or other program personnel identify their requirements and communicate these requirements to the contracting officer , who incorporates them into a solicitation .

parties excluded from government contracting because of violations of the clean air and clean water acts , among other things , are listed in the excluded parties list system ( epls ) .

responsibility determinations are made on a case - by - case basis by contracting officers considering information included in the federal awardee performance and integrity information ( fapiis ) , as well as information submitted by the prospective contractor and from other sources .

when purchasing products or services under either the attribute - focused or general contracting authorities , agencies rely on the same vehicles or methods generally available for their use in purchasing goods or services .

this includes ( 1 ) bilateral contracts ; ( 2 ) the federal supply schedules ; and ( 3 ) government - wide commercial purchase cards .

when determining which of these options to use , contracting officers consider various factors , such as the nature or type of the agency's requirements ( i.e. , goods or services , or both ) ; the anticipated cost ( or price ) ; and the complexity of the procurement .

probably the best - known procurement vehicle is the bilateral contract , which "means a mutually binding legal relationship obligating the seller to furnish the supplies or services ( including construction ) and the buyer to pay for them. .

contracts are the end result of a process that begins when agencies identify their requirements and craft solicitations to procure goods or services meeting these requirements .

solicitations identify , or describe , what agencies want to buy and also include applicable information , instructions , or guidance related to , for example , packaging and marking , inspection and acceptance , contract administration , special contract requirements , applicable contract clauses , representations and certifications , and evaluation factors for award .

as discussed earlier , these factors may include ones that address environmental considerations and attributes .

for example , an agency that uses the tradeoff source selection method for a specific procurement could include environmental considerations as a non - cost , or non - price , evaluation factor provided that they have a bona fide need for goods or services with specific environmental attributes .

another option available to agencies procuring goods or services with desirable environmental attributes involves the general services administration's ( gsa's ) federal supply schedules .

a schedule is an online "catalogue" that contains goods or services offered by multiple vendors .

each schedule focuses on a particular category of goods and services , and gsa has established and maintains over 40 schedules , covering things such as "advertising and integrated marketing solutions" ( schedule 541 ) and "professional engineering services" ( schedule 871 ) .

federal agencies can use gsa's online shopping and ordering system , gsa advantage ! ® , to procure goods and services off the schedules .

several special buying programs are listed on this web page , including "environmental," which leads to a separate web page ( "go environmental with gsa advantage ! ®" ) .

this web page enables prospective buyers to identify the type of product or service they plan to purchase and then select one or more environmentally based criteria or filters .

among the 14 criteria listed are biobased , energy star® compliant , and epeat .

however , gsa leaves it up to vendors to determine and identify , as applicable , the environmental attributes of the products or services they provide .

gsa notes that , for some products , "vendors denote whether the product meets the specifications and determine which symbols [environmental criteria] to display. .

elsewhere on its website , gsa offers the following caveat regarding vendors' claims about environmental attributes: to assist customers' [agencies'] efforts in complying with the requirements of environmental laws and executive orders ( considering price , availability , and performance requirements ) , schedule contractors have been requested ( where possible and / or feasible ) to identify items that: have recycled content ( eg , epa - designated items with specific content requirements ) ; are energy and / or water saving ( eg , energy star ) ; [or] have reduced pollutants ( eg , low volatile organic compounds ( vocs ) and chromate - free ) .

note : customers should review contractor literature and contact the contractor directly to obtain complete information regarding environmental claims .

moreover , recent court decisions suggest that vendors' misrepresentation of their products on gsa advantage ! ® is not sufficient for liability under the false claims act absent government purchases of the misrepresented products through the site .

agency personnel authorized to make "micro - purchases" can also use government purchase cards , which are similar to credit cards , to purchase so - called green products or services .

a micro - purchase is "an acquisition of supplies or services using simplified acquisition procedures [eg , a purchase card] , the aggregate amount of which does not exceed the micro - purchase threshold," which is generally $3,000 .

when using a government - wide commercial purchase card , agency personnel may generally buy any commercially available supply or service not prohibited by either federal or agency - specific procurement regulations .

however , the may 2011 amendments to the far expressly provide that federal environmental policies pertaining to energy , water efficiency , and renewable energy extend to all acquisitions , including those at or below the micro - purchase threshold and made with government - wide commercial purchase cards: the government's policy is to acquire supplies and services that promote a clean energy economy that increases our nation's energy security , safeguards the health of our environment , and reduces greenhouse gas emissions from direct and indirect federal activities .

to implement this policy , federal acquisitions will foster markets for sustainable technologies , products , and services .

this policy extends to all acquisitions , including those below the simplified acquisition threshold and those at or below the micro - purchase threshold ( including those made with a government purchase card ) .

in procurements not covered by the may 2011 amendments , though , agency personnel could retain substantial discretion in determining what to purchase .

personnel could thus select goods or services based on their environment attributes , although they would not necessarily be required to do so .

