policymaking at the federal level reflects a growing awareness that improving educational outcomes depends greatly upon increasing the quality of classroom instruction .

in establishing the student performance standards and accountability provisions in the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb , p.l .

107-110 ) , legislators recognized that the success of these reforms rests largely on improving teachers' knowledge and skills .

thus , in enacting nclb , congress amended the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) to establish a requirement that all teachers be highly qualified and authorized the title ii , teacher and principal training and recruiting fund to assist schools' efforts to meet this new requirement .

more recently , congress enacted additional programs to improve the teacher workforce including the teacher incentive fund ( tif ) , teacher education assistance for college and higher education ( teach ) grants , and amendments to the higher education act ( hea ) .

the nclb highly qualified teacher requirement has now been the cornerstone of federal teacher policy for nearly a decade .

in that time , the requirement has come to be seen by many as a minimum standard for entry into the profession ( rather than a goal to which teachers might aspire ) and a growing body of research has revealed its underlying credentials to be weakly correlated with student achievement .

meanwhile , congressional interest has begun to shift from a focus on teacher input ( i.e. , quality ) to teacher output ( i.e. , effectiveness ) .

congress passed provisions in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) which required states applying for state fiscal stabilization funds to provide assurances that they will take actions to improve teacher effectiveness .

the secretary of education used arra authority to encourage states to better link student achievement and teacher effectiveness .

the secretary also promoted teacher effectiveness with an esea flexibility package that makes available waivers exempting states from certain nclb accountability provisions , but requires the adoption of teacher evaluation policies .

congress is currently considering esea reauthorization proposals .

further , policy makers at all levels are considering how such issues as teacher compensation , licensure or certification , and tenure may relate to teacher performance in the classroom .

the organization and size of the public k - 12 educational enterprise pose a significant challenge to formulating federal teacher policy .

nationwide , nearly 4 million teachers are employed in almost 100,000 public schools located in about 14,000 school districts .

this is a decentralized system ; states and localities have legal and administrative responsibility for k - 12 education .

school districts control most of the major aspects of this system , including the recruitment , hiring , evaluation , professional development , compensation , and retention of teachers .

some aspects of the system — like certification procedures and tenure rules — are dictated at the state level .

pre - service teacher preparation and in - service training often take place at higher education institutions .

teacher assignments and evaluations are often the domain of schools .

this section discusses how these factors shape the teacher policy context .

the previous section explained that much of the teacher policy context is dictated at the local level .

the systems for preparing , recruiting , certifying , compensating , granting tenure , and structuring the working conditions of elementary and secondary school teachers is primarily the responsibility of states and school districts .

these areas have historically been viewed as largely outside the reach of the federal government .

however , beginning with the 105 th congress , the federal role in k - 12 teaching has greatly expanded .

in fy1998 , the total amount appropriated for all teacher programs under the u.s. department of education ( ed ) was $498 million .

since that time , funding for this purpose has increased roughly fivefold .

along with this growth , congress has redefined the nature of the federal role in this area .

this section briefly discusses how this role has evolved and expanded in the last decade .

this section provides descriptions of the major federal programs currently authorized to address k - 12 teaching .

the primary focus of this discussion is on the programs in the esea as amended by nclb .

select federal teacher programs authorized in the hea and elsewhere are also described .

the authorization for esea programs expired at the end of fy2008 , and the 113 th congress is considering whether to amend and extend the esea .

this section discusses teacher policy issues that may arise if congress proceeds with reauthorization .

federal policy has , until very recently , been silent on what constitutes effective teaching .

the definition of an effective teacher and the evaluation of teachers' performance have largely remained the responsibility of school leadership within broad parameters outlined at the district level ; indeed , few states have intervened in this process .

still , congress has shown increasing interest in growing federal involvement in this area , most recently through passage of rtt and several hearings on the topic .

among other questions that may arise during esea reauthorization , congress may consider whether definitions of teacher effectiveness and principal effectiveness should be written into federal law ; whether housse procedures currently laid out in nclb to identify highly - qualified teachers can be adapted to reform teacher evaluation ; whether federal accountability requirements for student achievement can be amended to facilitate their use in teacher evaluation ; whether the federal investment in teacher and principal training should be targeted at improving evaluation systems ; whether the best policy levers for reforming teacher evaluation systems to emphasize effectiveness occur at the state , district , or school level ; and whether value - added methods for determining the effectiveness of individual teachers , principals , schools , or districts is currently feasible across grades and subject areas and should be required by federal policy .

along with increasing the federal role in the evaluation of teacher and principal effectiveness , congress has shown interest in influencing the use of these evaluations .

the tif requires that grantees reform compensation systems to reward teacher performance with bonuses and other financial incentives .

rtt requires that grantees go further and use evaluations to inform high - stakes decisions such as the granting of tenure , awarding full certification , and removing ineffective teachers .

with the knowledge that these decisions are often made at the local level of our educational system , congress may consider whether the federal government will have a sustained role in teacher and principal compensation and whether this role will focus on seeding efforts to develop the capacity to link compensation to performance ; whether performance - based teacher compensation efforts have triggered reforms in other areas such as evaluation procedures , leadership development , and data systems ; whether successful reforms in a limited set of school districts can be replicated by scaling up the federal investment ; and whether federal policy should address other barriers ( i.e. , beyond failure to identify poor teacher performance ) that limit the role of teacher evaluations in high - stakes decision - making .

nclb requires that highly - qualified teachers be equitably distributed among classrooms and schools .

although some claim that high - poverty schools are less likely to have highly qualified teachers , given that nearly all teachers are considered highly qualified , it is not clear whether this requirement has proven useful .

congress included similar provisions concerning the equitable distribution of teacher effectiveness in rtt .

however , instead of binary categories — highly qualified or not highly qualified — the new program requires states to define and identify "effective" and "highly effective" teachers .

if distribution issues arise during esea reauthorization , congress may consider whether federal policy should require states , districts , and / or schools to distinguish multiple levels of teacher quality and / or effectiveness in order to better examine questions of equity ; whether requirements for distribution of teacher quality and / or effectiveness should be integrated with requirements for "comparability of services" under title i - a ; whether current seniority rules for teacher - to - school assignment , often written into collective bargaining agreements , that contribute to the uneven distribution of teachers , should be addressed by the federal government ; and whether other policy levers , such as pay incentives , are effective at improving equity and should be expanded .

the federal government currently plays a somewhat limited role with regard to support for pre - service teacher preparation .

fewer than 1 in 20 teacher preparation programs receive funding through hea , title ii - a .

all such programs at institutions receiving assistance through the hea must adhere to the accountability provisions in title ii - a , including reporting requirements regarding pass rates on teacher certification exams .

when congress reauthorized the hea through the heoa , title ii - a was authorized through fy2011 ( rather than the fy2014 authorization provided most of the rest of the hea ) .

this early expiration provides congress with an opportunity to simultaneously reauthorize two of the major federal teacher programs ( esea , title ii - a and hea , title ii - a ) .

in taking this opportunity , congress may consider whether a portion of the comparatively large federal investment supporting in - service teacher training ( under esea , title ii - a ) should be reallocated to pre - service preparation ; whether current support for traditional teacher preparation programs under hea , title ii - a needs to be reworked in light of the growth of alternative routes to certification ; whether accountability for teacher preparation programs under hea , title ii - a should be designed to promote the most effective training practices rather than identify so - called "failing" programs ; and whether certification reform efforts supported by the initial round of hea , title ii - a state grants should be renewed in light of recent congressional interest in incorporating teacher effectiveness into the awarding of full certification to teachers .

esea , title ii - a funds are increasingly being used by school districts to support additional in - service professional development .

however , this training is often delivered in a sporadic and uncoordinated fashion and teachers often find it of little use in the classroom .

as federal mandates expand the collection of student achievement data , teachers have little access to the training needed to use this data effectively .

should improving teacher training become an issue during esea reauthorization , congress may consider whether to amend the current , lengthy definition of "professional development" and / or create mechanisms to enforce the practices described in the definition ; whether to hold schools and / or professional development providers accountable for improving teachers' effectiveness ; and whether strengthening incentives to improve student achievement is a better way to improve teacher training than to define what that training should entail .

