intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) systems are matters of great congressional interest .

these systems can provide policymakers with information on the military capabilities of foreign countries , the location of key defense and industrial sites , indications of the presence of weapons of mass destruction , and information on the plans of foreign leaders and terrorist groups .

national - level isr is essential for both defense planning and arms control negotiations .

military commanders rely on intelligence systems for information on enemy positions and activities ; tactical isr has also been essential for precise targeting in counterterrorism operations while minimizing civilian casualties .

at present , major isr systems — national and tactical — are used by both military commanders and washington policymakers to follow developments in combat areas in great detail .

isr systems include reconnaissance satellites , some of which have been operational for decades ; unmanned aerial systems ( uas ) of various sizes ; and manned aircraft and other sensor platforms .

in practice , some isr systems acquired for one purpose are regularly used for other missions that may have been unanticipated when the systems were designed .

acquisition of isr systems presents particular challenges to the intelligence community , the department of defense ( dod ) , and congress .

agencies responsible for national systems are usually separate from those that design and acquire tactical systems .

the costs and complexity of individual systems , continuing changes in technologies , and the difficulties involved in linking disparate systems together to serve a variety of consumers require different acquisition approaches than those often used for ships , tanks , and manned aircraft .

moreover , since the establishment of the united launch alliance in late 2006 , isr satellites rely on launch platforms and other technologies used by non - intelligence satellites ; thus , there is a necessity to coordinate intelligence satellite developments and launch schedules with elements of the national space effort that is managed by federal agencies outside dod and the intelligence community .

uas have demonstrated that on occasion they can provide data at a fraction of the costs of multi - billion dollar satellites , but uas acquisition efforts have been anything but simple .

there has been a tendency to introduce new and untested capabilities to unmanned platforms , causing production delays and cost growth .

some policymakers would centralize uas acquisition efforts under an executive agent ( an initiative that congress at one point mandated but then abandoned ) , but , in practice , the four services have been intent on acquiring different uas that meet their perceived unique requirements .

the result has often been excessive costs required for different systems with duplicative or overlapping capabilities .

other platforms for isr collection , such as manned aircraft , continue to have important functions , but often they compete for agency funding with non - intelligence aircraft rather than with unmanned intelligence systems , and intelligence requirements may not receive the highest priorities .

acquisition efforts are further complicated by the fact that congress addresses isr programs through a number of committees , principally armed services , intelligence , and appropriations .

such factors taken together have often led to piecemeal acquisition efforts , major cost overruns , and an inability to ensure that disparate systems can be linked effectively to yield a comprehensive intelligence picture .

there have been production delays and only recently have uas been available in adequate numbers to support the pace of operations in iraq and afghanistan .

observers argue — and a number of key members of congress have concurred — that the drawbacks inherent in past and current isr acquisition efforts are serious enough to indicate that consideration should be given to the preparation of an agreed - upon multi - year plan or "architecture" that provides production schedules for currently planned isr systems and the introduction of new platforms .

if such a plan were agreed upon , advocates argue , it would be possible to restrain cost growth , ensure that all requirements had been considered , and establish the best possible mix of satellites and unmanned and manned systems .

on the other hand , skeptics suggest that dynamic technologies and the changing international environment would nevertheless necessarily limit what can be done in terms of multi - year procurement efforts .

a key consideration underlying efforts to acquire , deploy , and operate isr systems is the way or ways that they will be used .

the need to gain insights into soviet military capabilities during the cold war provided the principal impetus for the sizable investments in global signals intelligence and overhead reconnaissance capabilities .

these systems were considered "national" ; they were acquired primarily to support the president and key cabinet members .

a number of "national" organizations — especially the national reconnaissance office ( nro ) and the national security agency ( nsa ) , along with the central intelligence agency ( cia ) , were established to gather and analyze information for senior policymakers .

the ability of u.s. leaders to gauge the extent of soviet strategic capabilities was essential to defense planning and arms control negotiations , but there was less capability to support military commanders in ongoing combat operations .

beginning with desert shield in 1991 , however , these national - level systems began to be adapted to tactical use in iraq , bosnia , kosovo , afghanistan , and elsewhere .

wherever u.s. forces have been deployed for combat there have been requirements for intensive intelligence support that called upon national systems that were not originally intended for tactical uses .

in peacekeeping / peacemaking / stabilization operations , the overriding need to minimize attacks on civilians has led commanders and national - level leaders to seek ever more precise target data from all available sources of information .

in addition to adapting older systems to the demands of current modes of warfighting , newer isr systems have also been employed with considerable success .

in particular , uas have proven their value as relatively low - cost systems that can be routinely used by ground commanders to acquire tactical intelligence .

in regular use since the early 1990s , uas range in size and sophistication from very small systems that can be launched by an individual soldier for short - range tactical operations to the high - altitude global hawk that can acquire much of the same information as reconnaissance satellites .

the potential overlap , or possibility of close coordination between uas and national satellites has , however , called into question the separate organizational and congressional oversight structures that have been established or have evolved over the past decades .

in spring 2009 , secretary of defense robert gates argued in foreign affairs that the nature of u.s. strategic planning has unalterably changed .

his comments summarize the evolution of defense and intelligence planning that guided the administration's budget proposals for fy2010: [f]or far too long there was a belief or a hope that iraq and afghanistan were exotic distractions that would be wrapped up relatively soon — the regimes toppled , the insurgencies crushed , the troops brought home .

therefore we should not spend too much or buy too much equipment not already in our long - range procurement plans or turn our bureaucracies and processes upside down.... as a result of these failed assumptions , the capabilities most urgently needed by our warfighters , were for the most part fielded ad hoc and on the fly , developed outside the regular bureaucracy and funded in supplemental legislation that would go away when the wars did — if not sooner .

... [g]iven the types of situations the united states is likely to face … the time has come to consider whether the specialized , often relatively low - tech equipment well suited for stability and counterinsurgency missions is also needed .

it is time to think hard about how to institutionalize the procurement of such capabilities and get them fielded quickly .

secretary gates was addressing issues of defense acquisition in general and not isr systems in particular .

it is clear , however , from the text of his speeches and his actions as defense secretary that he sees isr support to warfighters as a major example of the challenge facing policymakers in both the executive branch and congress .

military operations have increasingly come to depend upon the availability of copious amounts of real - time isr .

as a result of the commitment to iraq and afghanistan , requirements for isr and the actual use of isr data have grown exponentially in the past decade .

the military priorities of both the bush and obama administrations have established priorities for particular kinds of intelligence and thus particular types of intelligence collection systems .

the february 2010 quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) report reflected secretary gates's earlier statements: the wars we fighting today and assessments of the future security environment together demand that the united states retain and enhance a whole - of - government capability to succeed in large - scale counterinsurgency ( coin ) , stability , and counterterrorism ( ct ) operations in environments ranging from densely populated urban areas and mega - cities , to remote mountains , deserts , jungles , and littoral regions .

stability operations , large - scale counterinsurgency , and counterterrorism operations are not niche challenges or the responsibility of a single military department , but rather require a portfolio of capabilities as well as sufficient capacity from across america's armed forces and other departments and agencies .

nor are these types of operations a transitory or anomalous phenomenon in the security landscape .

on the contrary , we must expect that for the indefinite future , violent extremist groups , with or without state sponsorship , will continue to foment instability and challenge u.s. and allied interests .

the qdr indicates that dod has placed special emphasis on "certain capabilities that have been in consistently high demand and have proven to be key enablers of tactical and operational success. .

these enablers include unmanned aircraft systems such as the mq - 1 predator and mq - 9 reaper uas and manned aircraft systems such as the mc - 12 project liberty aircraft .

isr systems are acquired in very different ways ; the process is conducted in classified channels and there is no overall isr package that is developed by the executive branch and forwarded to congress for its consideration .

rather , different systems are treated separately and requests come to congress in different ways .

funds are also authorized and appropriated in different legislative measures .

as might be expected , the result can be disjointed , with duplicative coverage in some areas and shortfalls in others .

the most important isr category is the national intelligence program ( nip ) that includes systems designed for the use of national policymakers — the president and the national security council ( nsc ) .

other important isr systems are designed for and operated by military commanders and are grouped in the military intelligence program ( mip ) .

however , nip systems can also be used to support tactical operations , and mip systems can collect information of interest to senior policymakers .

traditionally , satellites are acquired as part of the nip , but some are now included in the mip .

most uas have been mip systems as have manned aircraft in recent decades .

the composition of annual nip and mip budget submissions are classified and available only to members of congress and appropriate committee staff .

isr acquisition efforts , given their size and cost , have generated significant public controversy , but public discussions are hampered by the absence of relevant information that is unclassified .

however , there have been a number of recent outside reviews conducted by properly cleared outsiders .

in general , these assessments have faulted organizational arrangements for the acquisition of isr systems .

a 2008 study conducted by the congressionally chartered independent assessment panel on the organization and management of national security space ( sometimes described as the allard commission after a key congressional sponsor , former senator wayne allard ) described the current organization for space systems used for national ( as opposed to tactical ) purposes: "authorities and responsibilities are spread across numerous organizations , including many within the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) [under secretary of defense ( usd / intelligence] , usd / acquisition , technology and logistics ; usd / policy ; and the assistant secretary of defense ( asd / networks & integration] , usaf , usn , usa , usmc , darpa [defense advanced research projects agency] , mda [missile defense agency] , and nro .

furthermore: there is no standing forum or mechanism below the level of the president to coordinate efforts among the agencies responsible for nss or to adjudicate differences over requirements and resources .

the predominant capability providers are nro and smc [space and missile systems center , a component of the air force's space command] , which today have parallel requirements and funding paths within the ic and dod .

space capability providers in noaa [national oceanic and atmospheric administration] , nasa [national aeronautics and space administration] , and other federal agencies have their own requirements , funding , and reporting chains .

within dod , there is no common authority below the secretary of defense to integrate space acquisition programs and resources , or to adjudicate differences there are separate requirements and funding chains within the pentagon for the air force , nro , darpa , mda [missile defense agency] , navy and army , commercial satellite communications , and commercial imagery .

a structure for coordinating space operations between dod and the intelligence community is emerging and is thought to be on target. .

the independent assessment panel argued that the president should establish and execute a national space strategy and establish a national security space authority who would be jointly responsible to the secretary of defense and to the dni and charged with defining the space budget for dod and the intelligence community and executing the program with milestone decision authority .

there would also be an effort to improve the qualifications of air force and nro acquisition professionals .

most controversially , the panel would create a national security space organization , which would combine several air force space offices with the nro under the national security space authority .

arguably , this official might be perceived as a security space "czar" with a role subordinate to one cabinet officer and the dni .

in 2008 the house permanent select committee on intelligence ( hpsci ) undertook its own assessment of u.s. space capabilities .

the resulting report reflected the conclusions of the committee's majority , that the united states is "losing its preeminence in space. .

the report focused on the need for an "integrated overhead roadmap" or "architecture. .

by "architecture," hpsci meant a problem - driven approach that is based on securing prioritized , well - defined national security interests ; a comprehensive solution that balances the financial investment against the overall risk to national security ; a realistic delivery schedule that meets the defined timeline that in many cases must be flexible and updated against the risk ; and a plan to migrate from a requirements - based acquisition approach towards a capabilities - based strategy , with the proviso that a purely capabilities - based approach could introduce additional challenges .

although the report acknowledged that executive branch officials believed they had provided a plan , committee members disagreed , maintaining that "there is no comprehensive space architecture or strategic plan that accommodates current and future national security priorities , dod and intelligence community capability requirements. .

the committee suggested that the practice has been for requirements to be added during the acquisition process resulting in added costs and delays and the need to resolve repeatedly the differing priorities of dod and the intelligence community .

when cutting - edge — and not yet available — technologies are chosen , the committee suggests that uncertainty and need for further testing complicate acquisition .

the report alluded to the interest of some to develop space systems solely for operational commanders in isolation from the nro .

presumably reference was being made to the ors ; hpsci suggested that "it is not in the best interest of the country to pursue separate national and military space architectures. .

the house report recommended that r&d be treated as a national security priority and protected against from diversion to immediate operational needs .

the hpsci report raised concerns about programs jointly funded in the national intelligence program ( nip ) and the military intelligence program ( mip ) .

the nip is designed to provide intelligence systems that can supply information primarily of interest to national - level policymakers ; the mip supports combatant commanders .

although there is pervasive overlap between the two sets of systems , there is also concern that , in some instances , funds from the nip have in effect been used by dod to fund what are essentially mip projects .

the committee report also addressed use of commercial imagery and statutes and regulations governing space commerce .

members of the committee's minority criticized several aspects of the report and maintained that it failed to "address the importance of integrated ground systems for tasking , processing , exploitation and dissemination. .

in november 2008 a joint defense science board and intelligence science board task force on integrating sensor - collected intelligence produced a report looking at various flaws in current isr efforts that extend beyond acquisition issues .

it argued that isr efforts can be better improved by integrating data from multiple sensors rather than by improving the design and performance of single sensors .

in making this argument the task force pointed to structural issues that complicate such data integration .

to accomplish this goal the task force recommended ensuring the inclusion of meta - data ( or tags that describe specific data that can in turn be searchable whereas the data itself may not be ) that can allow identification of information of specific interest .

the task force's emphasis on better ways to access and analyze data is influenced by the vast expansion in data available and in many cases never exploited .

it tended to favor a larger number of less sophisticated systems and achieve increased performance by integrating data from multiple sensors and platforms .

significant problems derive from limitations on the dissemination of collected data .

currently , meta - data are not consistently applied and tags are not consistent from agency to agency .

military commanders demand much larger quantities and more sophisticated types of intelligence ( especially tactical imagery ) , but in many cases are unaware of and incapable of accessing data available throughout the intelligence community .

"the number of images and signal intercepts are well beyond the capacity of the existing analyst community so there are huge backlogs for translators and image interpreters and much of the collected data are never reviewed .

further , decision makers and intelligence analyst have difficulty knowing what information is available. .

although an enormous number of full - motion video missions in support of tactical commanders have been conducted in iraq and afghanistan , the task force suggested that surveillance has often been episodic and continuing coverage of a given region had not always been possible .

the task force report emphasized that the isr concept encompasses more than platforms for collection .

it noted that dod has developed the global information grid , which includes a high - speed communications network of various ground , air , and space components .

there is a need , according to the task force , for better ways for tactical commanders to access this information "on the move," and thus it emphasized the advantages of assured and accessible communications as would be made available by the redundant and complementary communications capabilities — terrestrial fiber , government and civilian communications satellites , networks built and maintained by specific agencies .

 ( the task force advocated the transformational satellite system ( tsat ) to provide links to the fiber network to mobile and fixed theater commands .

tsat was subsequently killed by dod because it was considered duplicative. ) .

a key goal should be , according to the task force , to ensure that future communications systems adhere to interoperability standards to ensure that they can support joint and international operations as well as "reach back" to u.s. agencies for analytical support .

the essential concern of the task force was to ensure that the ongoing proliferation of platforms and sensors be matched by sufficient communications capabilities to enable their use .

currently , they found that "our rapidly growing airborne isr collection capabilities are not in balance with supporting communications. .

furthermore , the task force noted that even though the office of the under secretary of defense for intelligence ( usdi ) is double - hatted as director of defense intelligence under the dni , his judgment on space programs is affected by decisions of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ( at&l ) , whose mandate encompasses all dod programs and is not limited to intelligence programs .

the report reflected a concern that dod requirements , including to some extent tactical isr requirements , are being met at the cost of supporting national needs , echoing hpsci's concerns .

the task force found that there is a perception that intelligence officials may not be empowered to balance national and tactical requirements .

the report noted the decline in the number of trained and experienced government program managers who are able to conduct extensive acquisition initiatives over a multi - year period .

the report criticized short tours of duty for acquisitions personnel that precluded the development of deep expertise in specific systems and over - reliance on advisory contractors .

the lack of expertise was criticized as contributing to delays and costly changes in specifications .

more broadly , the report noted declining numbers of students pursuing engineering degrees and a reluctance of some to seek careers in the satellite area , where work can be repetitive and sporadic .

the tendency in recent years to focus on satellites that can fulfill current missions may discourage students who are most interested in "cutting - edge" r&d .

the government accountability office ( gao ) has assessed ongoing space systems acquisitions issues over a number of years .

in a may 2009 report it recommended that a formal space plan based on a national security space strategy is essential for managing the acquisition and deployment of space systems .

without a strategy ( and a plan to implement it ) "the defense and intelligence communities may continue to make independent decisions and use resources that are not necessarily based on national priorities , which could lead to gaps in some areas of space operations and redundancies in others. .

in march 2009 gao testified to the senate armed services committee in regard to challenges facing dod in space acquisitions .

echoing the views of other assessments , gao found on a broad scale , dod starts more weapon programs than it can afford , creating a competition for funding that encourages low cost estimating , optimistic scheduling , overpromising , suppressing bad news , and , for space programs , forsaking the opportunity to identify and assess potentially more executable alternatives ; dod has tended to start its space programs too early , that is , before it has the assurance that the capabilities it is pursuing can be achieved within available resources and time constraints — in part a result of the tendency to favor acquisition programs over efforts to ensure that new technologies are reliable ; dod has tended to prefer fewer but heavier , larger , and more complex satellites than larger constellations of smaller satellites ; several more recent space programs began in the late 1990s , when contracts were restructured in ways that reduced government oversight and shifted decision - making responsibilities to contractors , a situation that magnified problems relating to requirements creep and poor contractor performance .

gao generally recommended a number of best practices of the commercial sector to separate technology discovery from acquisition , follow incremental paths to meet user needs , match resources and requirements at program's start , and use quantifiable data and demonstrable knowledge to decide when to move to a new program phase .

gao acknowledged that dod was attempting to implement some of these practices and noted legislative initiatives that were later enacted .

gao also went further to underscore the difficulties resulting from the fact that requirements , resource allocation , and acquisition processes are led by different organizations and the need to strengthen coordination of military and intelligence space efforts .

as noted above , gao has been skeptical of the operationally responsive space effort due to its separation from other intelligence space programs even though it envisions smaller satellites built with available , proven technologies .

in january 2010 gao forwarded another report to the subcommittee on air and land forces of the house committee on armed services that expressed concern about the ability of the services to share information within combat theaters .

gao recommended that dod establish a concept of operations to provide direction and priorities for sharing intelligence information across the defense intelligence community .

gao also urged the services to develop their own implementation plans and set timelines for sharing data with the rest of dod .

although outlines of the obama administration's overall approach to longer - term isr acquisition issues have not been publicly detailed , the administration has taken an initial approach based on acquiring additional reconnaissance platforms that are based on currently available technologies .

in april 2008 , defense secretary gates , having been frustrated by reports from the field regarding inadequate numbers of uavs , established an isr task force that eventually made a number of recommendations to maximize the availability of systems in the inventory and to acquire adequate numbers of additional systems .

based on these findings , in april 2009 , secretary gates forwarded the administration's plans for isr programs in the fy2010 budget based on his determination to "to rebalance this department's programs in order to institutionalize and enhance our capabilities to fight the wars we are in and the scenarios we are most likely to face in the years ahead , while at the same time providing a hedge against other risks and contingencies. .

"first , we will increase intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance ( isr ) support for the warfighter in the base budget by some $2 billion .

this will include fielding and sustaining 65 continuous rpa orbits with the ability to increase them to 85 and maximizing their production .

this capability , which has been in such high demand in both iraq and afghanistan , will not be permanently funded in the base budget .

it will represent a 62% increase in capability over the current level and 127% from over a year ago .

increasing manned isr capabilities such as the turbo - prop aircraft deployed so successfully as part of 'task force odin' in iraq .

maintaining the air force's mc - 12 project liberty aircraft .

initiating research and development on a number of isr enhancements and experimental platforms optimized for today's battlefield. .

the administration proposal apparently does not include efforts to acquire "exquisite" satellite technologies that are at best still in the research and development stage .

congress essentially endorsed this approach in fy2010 defense appropriations and authorization legislation ( p.l .

111-118 and p.l .

111-84 ) .

media reports indicate that the obama administration ordered a thorough review of existing national space policy , including national intelligence assets , originally intended for completion by october 2009 , but which has not been made public .

in may 2009 defense secretary gates indicated that he and the dni had agreed that a new charter for the national reconnaissance office ( nro ) is needed given that the original one is decades old .

a committee headed by retired air force general trey obering was asked to look at the nro's roles and missions , and reportedly recommended that the nro structure should not be altered .

in march 2010 the dni and the secretary of defense endorsed a set of organizing principles for the nro that is intended to serve as a foundation for a revised nro charter .

on september 21 , 2010 , the director of national intelligence jim clapper and secretary of defense gates officially signed the newest nro charter , also referred to as a memorandum of agreement .

the first signed since 1965 , this agreement formalizes the role of the nro director as responsible for managing and operating nro programs , serving as the principal advisor on overhead systems to the secretary of defense and the dni .

the new charter also grants direct access to the nro director to both the defense secretary and the dni .

information on the isr component of the administration's fy2011 budget request is mostly classified , but dod did state that an additional $2.6 billion was added for contingency operations in afghanistan and iraq at the recommendation of dod's isr task force , including nearly doubling procurement of the mq - 9 reapers .

isr funding requested for ongoing combat operations rose from $5.9 billion in fy2010 to $7.0 billion in fy2011 .

congressional oversight of the acquisition of surveillance systems has its own challenges .

isr systems are overseen by the armed services , intelligence , and appropriations committees .

most aspects of the isr program are necessarily secret .

historically , the "national" systems were overseen by the intelligence committees , whereas the tactical systems were usually overseen by the armed services committees ( although the house intelligence committee had jurisdiction over both tactical and national systems ) .

public statements by some members indicate , however , that important differences among committees exist in regard to current plans for satellite programs , and there have been considerable differences in regard to uas programs , as well .

there is widespread frustration about cost growth of isr systems , unnecessary duplication of effort , and the possibility of inadequate collection .

a significant factor has been the absence of intelligence authorization legislation for over five years .

this suggests that the congressional role has been primarily exercised by the appropriations and armed services committees .

some observers believe that these committees may tend to focus on isr systems as components of larger defense programs whereas the intelligence committees might have focused more on support to national policymakers .

in addition to authorizing and appropriating funds for specific isr systems , congress has repeatedly emphasized the need for a more comprehensive approach to isr as a whole .

the october 2008 report by the house permanent select committee on intelligence noted that "members of congress have repeatedly expressed their disappointment that no architectural plan exists , and have repeatedly asked the administration for the plan .

the lack of an integrated architecture was one of the first issues to face the dni after the office was established in 2005 .

the frustration has continued to this day , and many believe that the nation is no closer to having a clearly defined plan than it was three years ago. .

the hpsci majority recommended that the dni and the secretary of defense "should develop a common architecture for all space - related systems ( imagery , signals , communications , etc. ) .

that supports prioritized national and military needs and takes into consideration budgetary constraints .

organizations proposing new satellites should demonstrate how their proposals fit into the architecture. .

the committee further recommended that the office of management and budget "carefully consider what space programs it recommends for funding until both the dni and [the secretary of defense] agree on an architecture. .

some observers suggest the goal of a "dynamic architecture" that will permit judicious investment in existing technologies to acquire adequate numbers of systems for current needs while intentionally providing windows of opportunity for the introduction of new technologies and adaptations to new military or diplomatic requirements .

the duncan hunter defense authorization act for fy2009 ( p.l .

110-417 ) , enacted on october 14 , 2008 , directed that the secretary of defense and the dni jointly conduct a comprehensive review of u.s. space policy , including space - based intelligence and surveillance and reconnaissance from space .

the review was to describe current and planned space acquisition programs .

this policy review by dod was to have been undertaken in conjunction with the national - level review of space policy .

when the overall space policy review is complete dod's space posture review will be issued .

at one point there were plans to issue an interim report that would detail current posture and programs .

the fy2009 defense authorization act , section 144 , also required the secretary of defense in consultation with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff establish a policy and an acquisition strategy for intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance payloads and ground stations for manned and unmanned aerial vehicle systems .

the policy and acquisition strategy shall be applicable throughout the department of defense and shall achieve integrated research , development , test , and evaluation , and procurement commonality .

many consider the desirability of a long - range plan or architecture for the deployment of surveillance assets is a given , but suspect it is almost unobtainable .

future intelligence requirements may change from those recently indicated by secretary gates .

the policies and military capabilities of sophisticated nation states may again become the highest collection priorities of the intelligence community , rather than terrorist groups that are currently the chief concern .

similarly , there are no indications that technological capabilities of isr systems have reached a stable plateau , and basing future plans on current technologies may prove to be shortsighted .

there are inherent challenges involved in establishing plans for acquisitions over a multi - year span , even if they are arguably outweighed by the limitations of annual planning cycles .

ultimately , most recognize that there are limitations on what congress can do to shape the international environment or the emergence of new technologies .

congress can , however , alter the roles and missions of the organizations involved in isr programs acquisition , as well as authorize and appropriate funds for isr systems acquisition .

some observers have suggested a number of steps internal to congress that might improve the acquisition process for isr systems .

the 9 / 11 commission , for instance , recommended that the intelligence committees be provided with responsibilities for both authorization and appropriations .

others have recommended a separate annual intelligence appropriations act and subcommittees for intelligence within the two appropriations committees .

such initiatives would allow greater concentration on intelligence programs as separate and distinct from defense programs .

on the other hand , such separation could complicate the close linkages and desirable duplication between some intelligence and defense programs .

congress could also set up special panels to look at isr programs with representatives from current intelligence , armed services , homeland security , and appropriations committees .

nevertheless , many of the complications involving isr systems derive from the organization of the executive branch and current policies .

the ability of the odni and dod ( including both the usd ( i ) or the usd ( at&l ) ) to establish an agreed - upon acquisition plan is inevitably a key factor .

the role of the staffs of the national security council and the office of management and budget in overseeing and monitoring acquisition plans and their implementation is also important .

some observers conclude that , ultimately , there must be some form of an overhead surveillance architecture , even if it cannot be set "in concrete" for a multi - year period .

in this view , it must include not only the collection platforms , but also associated communications , and data processing and analysis systems .

in ongoing legislative dialogue , the executive and legislative branches will be challenged to design and fund systems that maximize adaptability to new missions while accepting reasonable cost constraints .

such a goal will require not only careful interagency and inter - branch coordination , but also a willingness by all involved to accept decisions that do not fully meet the goals of each and every agency .

observers suggest a key role for congressional committees in minimizing the role of initiatives launched by "special interests" that ultimately could add significant unnecessary costs , and do not deliver maximum collection contributions .

the unique perspectives of the armed services , intelligence , and appropriations committees , if considered together , arguably could provide the comprehensive oversight that has occasionally eluded the executive branch .

isr has revolutionized military operations in the past half - century ; it is today an essential component of national security planning and operations .

at the same time , experience shows that not all the billions of dollars that have been invested have resulted in useful systems .

acquiring and using isr systems is likely to remain a substantial challenge for the u.s. government in coming decades and one that will depend on effective cooperation among the intelligence community , the defense department , and congress .

