the 111 th congress is considering various issues related to the world trade organization ( wto ) .

the united states was a major force behind the creation of the wto in 1993 and the establishment of new rules and trade liberalization that occurred as a result of the uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations ( 1986-1994 ) .

section 125 of the uruguay round agreements act ( p.l .

103-465 ) , which is the law that approved and implemented the agreements reached during the uruguay round , provided that the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) must submit to the congress every five years a report that analyzes the costs and benefits of continued u.s. participation in the wto .

once congress receives this comprehensive report , any member of congress may introduce a privileged joint resolution withdrawing congressional approval of the wto agreement within 90 days .

the legislative procedure for such withdrawal basically follows section 152 of the trade act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-618 ) , which provides for the enactment of joint resolutions disapproving certain trade - related actions .

the procedure provides for a ( non - mandatory ) introduction of the resolution , with mandatory , non - amendable language , and specific expedited ( fast - track ) legislative procedures .

the ustr submitted the report to congress on march 1 , 2010 .

to date no withdrawal resolution has been introduced in the 111 th congress in either chamber .

the last time such a resolution was considered was in 2005 .

at that time the administration submitted its report on u.s. participation in the wto on march 2 and on the same day , representative bernard sanders introduced withdrawal resolution h.j.res .

27 .

h.j.res .

27 was privileged and was considered under expedited legislative procedures .

on may 26 , 2005 , the house ways and means committee reported the resolution adversely ( h.rept .

109-100 ) .

on june 9 , 2005 , the house defeated h.j.res .

27 by a vote of 338-86 .

a similar withdrawal resolution was introduced in 2000 ( h.j.res .

90 ; h.rept .

106-672 ) and was voted down in the house by a 363-56 vote .

the withdrawal resolution offered the opportunity for members to examine the costs and benefits of wto participation , express the degree of satisfaction with wto dispute decisions , or debate other aspects of wto membership .

in addition to possibly considering a withdrawal resolution , the 111 th congress has monitored wto disputes involving u.s. interests and u.s. laws , china's implementation of its wto commitments , and u.s. participation in the doha development agenda , the latest round of multilateral trade negotiations .

these talks , which began in november 2001 in doha , qatar , have been stalemated for a number of years .

most observers maintain that u.s. withdrawal from the wto is at best highly unlikely for both substantive and procedural reasons .

substantively , the withdrawal of u.s. participation could undermine a multilateral system of trade rules and practices , formulated and implemented under u.s. leadership , that on balance has contributed to increased economic prosperity and security at home and abroad .

procedurally , a withdrawal resolution would have to pass both the house and senate and then surmount a likely presidential veto via an override with a two - thirds majority vote .

it has also been debated what legal effect the resolution would have if adopted .

yet , this resolution provides an opportunity for members of congress periodically to debate the u.s. role in an important international institution and the direction of u.s. trade policy , generally .

the reasons for the disapproval provision are explained by the house ways and means committee as follows: the purpose of this provision is to provide an opportunity for the congress to evaluate the transition of the gatt to the wto and to assess periodically whether continued membership in this organization is in the best interest of the united states .

it is the desire of the committee not to leave this decision totally in the hands of the executive branch but to be active in determining whether the wto is an effective organization for achieving common trade goals and principles and for settling trade disputes among sovereign nations .

the purpose of this report is to analyze some of the main issues in the debate on u.s. participation in the wto and to address some of the criticisms leveled at the organization .

to put the issue in perspective , the report begins with a brief history of the world trading system , including its purpose and functions , followed by an examination of the economic benefits and costs of the wto .

the main body of the report addresses selected issues for the united states: the economic costs and benefits to the united states ; decisionmaking in the wto and national sovereignty ; the wto dispute process ; and criticisms of the wto from environmental , health and safety , labor , development , and financial regulation perspectives .

following world war ii , nations throughout the world , led by the united states and several other developed countries , sought to establish an open and non - discriminatory trading system with the goal of raising the economic well - being of all countries .

aware of the role of trade barriers in contributing to the economic depression in the 1930s , including severe drops in world trade , global production , and employment , the countries that met to discuss the new trading system considered open trade as essential for economic stability and peace .

the intent of these negotiators was to establish an international trade organization , which would address not only trade barriers but other issues indirectly related to trade , including employment , investment , restrictive business practices , and commodity agreements .

unable to secure approval for such a comprehensive agreement , however , they reached a provisional agreement on tariffs and trade rules , called the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) .

the gatt went into effect in 1948 .

this provisional agreement became the principal set of rules governing international trade for the next 47 years .

the debate about the wto and trade is often intense and complicated .

showing few signs of abating , the debate has raised some basic questions .

why is freer trade and trade liberalization considered by most observers to be a desirable policy ? .

do the most frequently made criticisms of the wto and trade agreements have merit ? .

do wto rules erode a country's sovereignty and undermine its leeway to set health , safety , environmental and other domestic regulations ? .

defenders of the wto and its system of rules come mainly from exporters of goods , services , and agricultural products , foreign investors , consumer groups , retailers , mainstream economists and other academics , and government leaders .

they argue that rising levels of trade and a rules - based trading system contribute , on balance , to improving the welfare and prosperity of billions of people around the world .

trade expansion is viewed as an engine of economic growth both here and abroad .

wto membership is seen helping countries to keep their own markets open for the benefit of exporters , consumers , and industries using imports .

wto agreements are deemed to make it less tempting for governments to impose economically costly trade barriers under short - term political pressure .

supporters also argue that a rules - based trading system helps create more dynamic and competitive economies , and helps provide the kind of stability , predictability , and growth in international trade that is good for both the world and the united states .

supporters , however , recognize that the wto has shortcomings .

they worry , for example , about the wto's relevance as a result of the proliferation of regional and bilateral trade agreements .

they are concerned that the wto has been unable to conclude the doha round trade liberalization talks since negotiations began nearly nine years ago .

they are concerned about a perceived lack of transparency in the operations of the wto , particularly over the decision - making process guided by a consensus principle that makes it increasingly more difficult to make decisions .

they are also unsure whether the mandate given to the wto is too large or too small .

on the one hand , some supporters believe that the wto should stick to a much narrower agenda that deals with market access for goods and services .

on the other hand , some supporters want to expand the wto's mandate to include trade issues more broadly defined , including competition policy , energy policy , global health services , and a host of other contentious issues such as corruption , corporate social responsibility , exchange rates , and cyber security .

despite these concerns , supporters believe that the wto can be improved and reformed .

they point to studies initiated by the wto itself to address these concerns and are confident that progress in addressing alleged shortcomings is being made .

furthermore , they maintain that if the wto did not exist , some other organization would have to be invented to set and monitor trade rules between countries at the global level .

on the other side of the debate are many groups who oppose the current system of world trade as embodied in the wto .

these critics include ngos or public interest groups representing consumers , environmentalists , labor unions , food safety advocates , human rights groups , and other groups concerned about social justice and poverty in developing countries .

some economic populists , such as television commentators patrick buchanan and lou dobbs , fear the loss of economic sovereignty to the wto .

with notable exceptions , these groups are often hostile to , or highly critical of capitalism , multinational corporations , and freedom of cross - border trade and capital flows .

some see the wto and its agreements as "a powerful mechanism for spreading and locking - in corporate - led globalization. .

for example , thea lee of the afl - cio asserts that the major objective of u.s. trade policy as been to increase the profitability of u.s. - based multinational companies at the expense of u.s. workers who lose their jobs because their companies have shifted production overseas .

these groups tend to see freer trade and trade agreements as harming workers , weakening manufacturing industries and environmental standards , pressuring wages and labor standards , outsourcing jobs , and undermining u.s. sovereignty .

many of these trade skeptics see the evolving and growing wto agenda causing real - life hardships in terms of plant closings , layoffs of workers , lost jobs , and unsafe work places taking place in both developed and developing countries .

many of their concerns are directed at what they call free trade policies and the wto .

the concerns are propelled by rapid increase in international trade and a much more competitive international environment .

as global economic integration has accelerated in recent years , so has the pace of painful economic adjustments .

meanwhile , the reach of world trade rules has gone beyond trade barriers to encompass internal regulatory policies affecting health , safety , and the environment .

as a result , groups disturbed by these changes , whether directly in terms of jobs or indirectly in terms of community values they believe are at stake , have questioned the effects of integration and the institutions associated with it .

many of these groups have raised questions about the impact of commerce on the u.s. economy and on the operations and transparency of the wto .

they argue that trade liberalization agreements have gone too far by imposing restrictions of the ability of sovereign governments to regulate commercial activity within their borders by requiring them to adhere to wto rules .

in the background of the debate over the wto , the u.s. public has grown less supportive of international trade .

most polls show a majority of americans expressing some degree of skepticism that free trade and the wto benefit most americans .

a 2008 survey of public opinion in 24 countries by the pew research center found that americans are among the least supportive of international trade .

just 53% of americans said that trade was good for the united states , down sharply from 78% in 2002 .

they are also skeptical of trade agreements , with 35% saying that they were a good thing and 48% saying they were bad .

the american public also appears to care more about jobs destroyed by imports than about jobs destroyed due to technological change or shifts in demand .

these public views no doubt are reflected in recent congressional deliberations on u.s. trade policy in general , and on free trade agreements ( ftas ) in particular .

congressional ambivalence on trade liberalization , particularly in the house of representatives , seems to have increased in recent years as indicated by the increasing closeness of votes on trade legislation such as trade promotion authority .

in addition , while three ftas have been signed since 2007 ( colombia , korea , and panama ) , the obama administration to date has not arranged with congress for consideration of the implementing legislation .

lack of movement from the administration and the congressional leadership reflects , in part , the growing debate over the impact that ftas have on the u.s. economy .

while the u.s. business community broadly supports ftas as the promoters of u.s. exports , jobs , and stronger political ties , u.s. labor unions and some ngos oppose them on grounds of unfair competition or their alleged adverse impact on workers and development in poor countries .

one question that congress may consider as it debates continued participation in the wto is its effect on the economy and prosperity of the united states .

in one sense , this is a difficult question to answer as the general prosperity of the 15 years of wto existence occurred along with the information technology boom in the united states in the 1990s , the rise of china as an economic power , and macroeconomic and other factors .

u.s. involvement in the wto did not happen in a vacuum .

much of the increased trade may have occurred anyhow , or in the case of our two largest partners , canada and mexico , may have occurred as a consequence , in part , of the implementation of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , which was approved by congress in 1993 , more than because of the wto .

many economists believe that , over the past 60 years , the more predictable environment for trade as well as the reduction in trade barriers , which were a result of multilateral trade rules , have contributed to unprecedented economic prosperity for the majority of countries .

for example , the wto reports that the value of world exports in 2008 was 266 times that of 1948 , while world gross domestic product ( gdp ) in 2003 was 8.3 times that of world gdp in 1950 .

part of this growth is the result of the development of global supply chains , and related trade in intermediate products .

however , the rapid growth in world exports has also been attributed to the progressive reduction of trade barriers caused by successive rounds of gatt / wto trade liberalization , and likely has contributed to the growth in world gdp .

in the report that the president submitted to congress in march 2010 on the costs and benefits of u.s. participation in the wto , the administration has equated u.s. economic success with wto membership through a variety of trade and non - trade statistics .

for example , the report notes that during the 1994-2010 period ( the wto was established in 1995 ) : u.s. gdp rose 50% , industrial production also rose 50% , productivity rose at an annual rate of 4.4% or 70% for the period for manufacturing ( 2.5% per year or 40% for the economy as a whole in the period ) compared with 1.8% annually in the 1984-1994 period .

while the report states that "productivity growth is among the most important factors influencing how rapidly real incomes grow and living standards rise," it appears that increases in productivity have not been matched by rising real wages during the period .

the report mentions that real hourly compensation increased 21% during the period , or 1.3% per year , and 22.8 million new jobs were created .

yet , manufacturing employment declined 21% during this period to just about 10% of the labor force .

the president's report also cites trade statistics .

for example , bound tariff rates were lowered an average of 40% for developed countries and 25% for developing countries by the uruguay round .

u.s. exports of goods and services increased 112% from 1994-2008 , from $703 billion to $1.83 trillion .

u.s. goods exports increased 197% to developing countries and 117% to developed countries .

just over 50% of u.s. exports now go to developing countries , compared to 43% in 1994 .

imports of goods and services increased 143% , from $801 billion to $2.52 trillion during the wto period .

u.s. goods imports from developed countries increased 129% and by 334% from developing countries .

whereas 57% of u.s. imports came from industrialized countries in 1994 , now nearly 60% of imports come from developing countries .

moreover , the composition of imports from developing countries has changed since 1994 from primarily raw materials increasingly to manufactured products .

these statistics are used to bolster the case for continued u.s. participation in the wto .

however , saying that this economic activity occurred during the existence of the wto is different than saying it happened because of the wto .

aside from the time period correlation , the report does not conduct rigorous analysis on the value of u.s. participation .

because the wto's rules and principles for trade , trade liberalization , and dispute settlement procedures are all designed to encourage trade , it is often taken as self - evident that it accomplishes these goals .

however , other factors have been in play during the existence of the wto , such as the information and communications technology revolution , productivity advances in the united states , decreasing shipping costs , and other developments .

perhaps most importantly , these figures highlight the increased role of developing countries both as trading partners of the united states and in the world trading system .

nonetheless , most economists argue that increased trade will have a net positive effect on economies .

from their perspective , specialization from trade strengthens the most competitive and productive sectors of a nation's economy by reallocating resources from less efficient economic activities .

they assert that increased trade benefits consumers by offering a greater selection of goods , often at lower prices , which in turn would increase the real income of consumers , and that trade liberalization increases the rate of economic growth through such dynamic effects as the introduction of new products , access to specialized goods , skills transfers , and human capital accumulation .

a pair of econometric studies have attempted to measure the effect of the wto on the world economy .

in both studies , a gravity model ( an econometric model in which different phenomena such as gdp , population , distance , common language , or membership in trade arrangements are isolated to attempt to determine the importance of each to trade flows ) was used to attempt to isolate the effect of wto membership on the trade flows of various countries , both members and non - members .

the first study , using some 50 years of trade statistics from 175 countries , found that the existence of the gatt / wto , by itself , did not have a significant positive effect on trade flows .

however , a second study by two economists of the international monetary fund using much the same data suggests that if the aforementioned gravity model is designed to differentiate between developed and developing countries , then the effects of the gatt / wto membership on world trade flows can be positively identified , at least for developed countries .

the authors postulated that this result is due to developing countries largely being given a "free ride," due to special and differential treatment provisions that has exempted them from many gatt / wto obligations .

these studies show that the potential exists for wto liberalization to have a beneficial effect on trade , but the differences in their findings show that this issue has not been settled .

studies also abound on the value of prospective wto liberalization to the united states and the world economy .

in 2005 , the now - peterson institute for international economics ( iie ) released a report attempting to quantify the gains from global integration using trade liberalization as a proxy for globalization .

the study compiled different studies measuring the increased income resulting from increased exposure to trade , the 'sifting and sorting' effects of competition resulting from open trade , potential lost trade from not implementing trade liberalization in the post - war period , and the use of intermediate imports .

from this , iie estimated that the present benefit of all past trade liberalization to the u.s. economy is on the order of $1 trillion annually , and this translates to a u.s. per capita income gain of $2,800 to $5,000 .

however , this study refers to all trade liberalization , not just that resulting from the gatt / wto .

several studies have tried to model the effect of various wto doha round negotiating proposals through general or partial equilibrium models on trade flows and effects on national welfare .

one early study used the michigan model , a multi - country , multi - sector , general equilibrium model , to analyze various trade policy changes and scenarios .

in this case , the model was used to measure the welfare effects of a 33% reduction in agricultural tariffs and export and production subsidies , in tariffs on manufactures , and on service barriers .

the model estimates that u.s. net welfare would increase by $164 billion ( 1.81% increase in gdp ) .

it found that the united states would gain primarily from services liberalization ( $135 billion ) , would receive some net welfare benefit from manufacturing tariff liberalization ( $36.5 billion ) , but would actually suffer a net welfare loss of $7.23 billion from the agricultural liberalization envisioned by the model .

a 2009 study by the peterson institute for international economics that seeks to quantify the proposals made by chairs of the various negotiating committees at the doha round as of august 2009 .

the study covered 22 countries — 7 advanced and 15 developing — that account for about 75% of world trade .

the study found that agriculture and industrial market offers would increase trade among the sample countries by $133.8 billion ( $67.1 billion in exports and $66.8 billion in imports ) resulting in an increase in gdp of $63 billion .

the study found that proposals on the table would result in increased u.s. exports of $7.6 billion and imports of $14.3 billion .

it notes that the modest u.s. gain would be partially due to existing ftas with many partner countries .

the authors also modeled a 10% tariff equivalent liberalization in services , and sector liberalization in electronics / components , environmental goods , and chemicals , and drew on previous work on quantifying trade facilitation proposals .

if these are included , the doha round could lead to a much more substantive increase of $592 billion ( $280.4 billion in exports and $311.6 billion in imports ) resulting in gdp gains of $248.8 billion among the sample countries .

under this scenario , u.s. gdp would increase by $36.4 billion and would result in additional trade flows of $85.3 billion ( $39.4 in additional exports and $45.9 billion in additional imports ) .

a study conducted for the european commission trade directorate used a dynamic computable general equilibrium model to simulate the impact of the july 2008 negotiating proposals .

it found an increase in world exports of goods of $226 billion , resulting in a increase in world gdp of $57 billion by the base year 2020 .

adding what the authors term a "modest" 3% liberalization in services barriers results in an additional $36 billion in trade .

increased trade resulting from trade facilitation reforms would bring gains of an additional $99 billion , primarily to developing countries .

overall , world trade would increase by $383 billion as all the provisions are phased in , resulting in a gain of $167 billion in world gdp .

the study estimates that $10.3 billion of that gdp gain would accrue to the united states .

in discussing these recent studies , three world bank economists argue that while these gains may not seem particularly significant to the developed country corporate interests that have traditionally driven multilateral trade liberalization , concluding the round is important nonetheless .

because of years of steady trade and investment growth and unilateral trade liberalization in developing countries , they assert the relative quantifiable value of multilateral negotiations have diminished .

however , they maintain that the importance of the negotiations can be seen during times of economic distress .

they note that there has been little recourse to protectionism where multilateral disciplines exist and that such protectionism as has occurred largely has been consistent with the letter of wto commitments .

in areas where there are no multilateral disciplines , however , the resort to protection has been more common .

they cite the reintroduction of export subsidies for dairy products and restrictions on the movement of natural person — the so - called mode iv services — as examples of backsliding that would be prevented or regulated under the current negotiations .

there is an overall consensus among economists that , in general , consumers gain from trade in the form of lower prices and increased choice .

these so - called "welfare effects" allow consumers to buy more goods and services than before .

this increased buying power boosts demand for other goods and services , including those produced in the united states .

in 2005 , the president's report stated the number of wage / hours required to buy various consumer goods has decreased during the period of wto , and postulates that is due to trade openness promoted by the wto .

workers in export sectors also gain to the extent that the wto opens foreign markets to trade .

employees engaged in export sectors are generally more highly skilled than those of import - competing sectors and are generally more highly paid .

however , some labor , particularly unskilled labor , likely has lost out from free trade .

the income gap between high and low skilled labor , and between labor and other factors of production ( land , capital ) is consistent with international trade theory .

this theory suggests that in terms of factors of production ( land , labor , capital ) , trade between two countries will result in the relatively scarce factor in each country being made worse off by trade relative to other factors .

in the united states , labor , and especially unskilled labor , arguably is the relatively scarce factor in a country otherwise rich in capital , land and educational opportunities .

however , reallocating factors of production to their most efficient use has real human costs .

closing a local plant due to import competition is devastating for workers and communities alike , especially if no comparable employer exists to absorb the labor force .

although trade theory holds that labor and capital will eventually be redeployed in a more productive manner , eventually can be a long time coming for workers and communities that have lost their livelihood .

an important question related to the wto is who are the decisionmakers in the organization .

there are many different claims about who sets the rules .

a second question is , once the decisionmakers within the wto have agreed on rules , what do the rules mean with regard to national sovereignty of wto members ? .

some members of congress have criticized the operation of the wto dispute settlement process .

the procedures for resolving disputes in the international trading system were greatly strengthened by the uruguay round , which created the wto in 1995 .

before 1995 , the procedures under the gatt had been broadly criticized as being ineffective .

under those procedures , a panel finding would not be accepted unless there was a consensus among member states to impose the finding .

given that the party losing the dispute was unlikely to accept the finding , dispute decisions often did not result in an end to the challenged practice .

in the uruguay round , the united states was a principal proponent for a stronger dispute settlement process that provided a greater likelihood of ensuring compliance .

the wto's dispute settlement procedure was strengthened by imposing stricter deadlines and by making it easier to establish panels , adopt panel reports , and authorize retaliation , if necessary .

decisions are made by member country representatives to the wto general council who gather also as the dispute settlement body ( dsb ) .

the first stage of the dispute settlement process is consultation between the governments involved .

if consultation is not successful , the complainant may ask the dispute settlement body to establish a dispute panel .

the dispute panel hears the case and issues its report to the disputing parties and then to the members in general .

the report may be appealed , and once the panel and any appellate proceedings are completed , the reports are presented for adoption by the dsb under its reverse consensus rule .

if the complaining party prevails , the respondent may choose to change its practice or try to negotiate an agreeable resolution ; if the respondent chooses not to act , or its responsive action is not acceptable to the complaining country , the complainant may request that the dsb authorize suspension of obligations , thereby giving permission for the complainant to retaliate .

procedures are clearly set out with specific timetables at each stage .

so far under the wto dispute settlement procedure , the united states has had more success as a complainant than as a respondent .

according to ustr lists of disputes involving the united states , last updated february 17 , 2009 , the united states had filed 88 complaints ( including compliance proceedings ) , and 63 of those had been concluded .

in addition , the wto currently reports that the united states has joined an additional 78 cases as an interested party .

the ustr accounting indicates that the united states has won overwhelmingly in the cases that it has brought to the wto .

on the other hand , a number of u.s. trade practices have been successfully challenged at the wto .

according to the ustr list , the united states did not prevail on slightly more than half of the cases where another country brought the case .

 ( see table 3 for the disposition of those cases. ) .

it must be noted the success rate of the complainant is usually higher than those of a respondent in many instances .

members are more likely to file a complaint , or request a panel , if they are sure they have a good case and have a greater chance of prevailing .

the question of whether or not the united states should withdraw from the wto raises another question of what the united states would do without the wto dispute mechanism .

the united states is a party to a number of free - trade agreements that include dispute procedures .

where a violation of those agreements is alleged , the united states or other party to the agreement could turn to those procedures .

such instances , however , might be limited .

for practices not covered by those agreements , which would include actions by several of our large trading partners , including china , japan , and the eu , there would be no comparable rules or forum .

absent the wto , countries can always try to settle a trade dispute through bilateral negotiations , as can happen under section 301 of the trade act of 1974 , underpinned by the threat of unilateral trade sanctions .

however , the use of this mechanism prior to the formation of the wto angered u.s. trade partners .

generally speaking , most governments view wto dispute settlement generally as fair and impartial , which increases the chances that the parties adhere to its decisions .

while some countries may not want to be seen responding to pressure from the united states , they may be more amenable to be seen as in compliance with international rules and norms .

there have been complaints that some countries , including the united states , have not fully adhered to the finding of the wto dispute settlement panels .

an example is the u.s. complaint against european union ( eu ) trade restrictions on imports of beef produced with hormones .

the united states was granted permission by the dsb to impose retaliatory tariffs on imports from the eu .

in spite of continued retaliatory tariffs on its products , the eu has not withdrawn the challenged practice , although , subsequently , the eu has expanded its hormone - free quota , and the united states has modified its retaliation schedule .

although the eu believes it is now in compliance with its wto obligations in this case , the united states has been able to continue to maintain its retaliatory tariffs under wto rules .

other complaints center around trade remedy laws such as antidumping , countervailing duties , and safeguard provisions , including those involving the united states .

in the past decade , the united states has lost a number of these cases , including cases involving steel safeguards , the u.s. antidumping act of 1916 , the continued dumping and subsidy offset act — the so - called byrd amendment , and the practice of "zeroing" in antidumping procedures .

in response , members of congress and others have questioned the expertise underlying certain wto dispute decisions , whether the panels are making rules through their decisions and thus bypassing negotiations , and whether the panels are extending appropriate deference to domestic laws .

others have raised concerns about the growing use of trade remedy laws — and their wto compliance — by developing countries , especially against the united states .

an example of this sentiment in the 111 th congress can be found in the proposed trade act of 2009 ( h.r .

496 , rangel ) .

the legislation expresses the sense of congress that the wto appellate body does not have the authority to establish new legal standards that a dispute settlement panel must apply in deciding cases , and that "a dispute settlement panel is obligated to follow the text of an agreement negotiated by the wto members themselves , and not the 'jurisprudence' of the wto appellate body" ( sec .

205 ) .

in previous congresses , senator baucus introduced legislation ( most recently , s. 1919 in the 110 th congress ) that would create a wto dispute settlement review commission to review cases decided against the united states .

in such cases , the commission would determine whether the wto panel or appellate body deviated from the applicable standard of review , including in antidumping , countervailing duty , and other unfair trade remedy cases ( title ii ) .

although there are many complaints about the wto dispute process , especially after a major wto dispute decision against the united states , some members of congress look to the wto dispute process as an important way to challenge the trade practices of other nations .

in a number of instances , members have protested the actions of a foreign country and proposed that if the situation cannot be resolved , then the united states should file a dispute in the wto .

in these instances , members have viewed wto dispute resolution as a legitimate and possibly effective way to cause the countries to change their actions .

some members have urged wto action against china's policy of pegging the yuan to the dollar , viewed as an unfair trade practice .

the currency exchange rate oversight reform act of 2010 ( s. 3134 , schumer ) would require the united states to bring a complaint to the wto for certain countries , presumably china , alleged to have a misaligned currency .

the trade priorities enforcement act ( s. 1782 , brown ) would require the united states to initiate dispute settlement consultations in the wto against countries which the ustr has found to be engaged in a priority foreign country trade practice .

in the debate on u.s. participation in the wto , some advocates for the environment , food safety , labor , development , and financial regulation have been extremely vocal in their criticisms of the wto .

while some of the critics oppose the very existence of the wto , much of the criticism is based on interpretations of various wto agreements or rulings .

an examination of these criticisms follows .

most observers would maintain that the possibility of u.s. withdrawal from the wto is at best highly unlikely for procedural and substantive reasons .

this is because a withdrawal resolution would have to pass both the house and senate and then surmount a likely presidential veto via an override with a two - thirds majority vote .

it has also been debated what legal effect the resolution would have if adopted .

but in the remote possibility that a resolution was actually implemented leading u.s. withdrawal from the wto , such withdrawal would have a number of practical consequences .

substantively , the wto and its multilateral system of rules and practices , which were formulated and implemented under u.s. leadership , would be weakened .

the influence and the cohesiveness of the wto as an organization would also be adversely affected as both a forum for settling disputes and for negotiating multilateral trade rules .

non - discrimination , a key bedrock principle of the multilateral trading system , could be eroded , particularly given the added impetus u.s. withdrawal could give to the proliferation of regional and bilateral free trade agreements ( ftas ) .

in the process , economic inefficiency and political tensions could increase .

the withdrawal of the united states from the wto could also lead to a u.s. loss of influence over how important international trade matters are decided .

the wto could continue to exist without the united states and international trade rules could continue to be negotiated without u.s. participation , rules that practically could affect u.s. interests .

the founding of the gatt and creation of the wto was premised on the notion that a multilateral and rules - based trading system was necessary to avoid a return to the nationalistic interwar trade policies of the 1930s .

a loss of economic influence , in turn , could also be followed by a loss of political influence .

on a more functional level , the withdrawal would relieve the united states from obligations stemming specifically from the wto agreement , but also preclude it from benefiting from its rights under the agreement , particularly access to the wto dispute settlement mechanism .

as a practical matter , without recourse to the established dispute settlement process , the united states would be open to unrestrained retaliation and counter - retaliation .

by the same token , possible u.s. retaliatory actions would not be restrained by wto obligations .

withdrawal from wto obligations would also alter the basis for u.s. trade relationships in significant ways .

as the united states has implemented many wto obligations in the uruguay round agreements act ( uraa ; p.l .

103-465 ) as domestic law , these laws would not be repealed by the withdrawal resolution and would continue to apply to wto members and to u.s. trading partners in general .

at the same time , were the united states to withdraw from the wto , it would no longer need to maintain these provisions as a matter of wto obligation .

u.s. withdrawal would also raise questions about the continued effect of trade concessions made by other countries encompassed by the wto agreements .

in the absence of wto participation , u.s. trade relationships with a number of countries would continue to be regulated by earlier bilateral agreements and by ftas negotiated with some 17 countries .

most u.s. ftas contain references to wto agreements , however , and it is unclear how these provisions would be interpreted in the future .

the uruguay round agreements act ( uraa ; p.l .

103-465 ) in section 101 ( 19 u.s.c .

3511 ) authorized the acceptance , by the president , of u.s. membership in the world trade organization ( wto ) and , thereby , of the rights and obligations of the agreement establishing the world trade organization ( wto agreement ) with its annexed specialized multilateral and plurilateral trade agreements .

the uraa , on the other hand , also contains provisions spelling out the legislative procedure whereby the statutory approval of the united states's membership in the wto can be withdrawn .

the statute functionally ties the withdrawal of the united states from wto membership to the requirement of periodic reports by the executive to the congress on the operation of the wto and its effects on the united states .

section 124 of the uraa ( 19 u.s.c .

3534 ) requires the u.s. trade representative to submit to congress , by march 1 of each year , beginning in 1996 , a report on a wide range of wto activities and administrative aspects of wto operations during the preceding wto fiscal year ( which is the calendar year ) .

moreover , as required by section 125 of the uruguay round agreements act ( 19 u.s.c .

2535 ) , beginning with march 1 , 2000 , and every five years thereafter , such report , transmitted by the president , must "include an analysis of the effects of the wto agreement on the interests of the united states , the costs and benefits to the united states of its participation in the wto , and the value of the continued participation of the united states in the wto. .

following the submission of such quinquennial report , congress can withdraw its approval of the wto agreement and , with it , of the united states's participation in the wto , through the enactment of a joint resolution disapproving the original approval of the wto agreement .

the reasons for the disapproval provision are explained by the house ways and means committee on p. 35 of its report on the uruguay round agreements act ( h.r .

5110 ; h.rept .

103-826 , part 1 ) : the purpose of this provision is to provide an opportunity for the congress to evaluate the transition of the gatt to the wto and to assess periodically whether continued membership in this organization is in the best interest of the united states .

it is the desire of the committee not to leave this decision totally in the hands of the executive branch but to be active in determining whether the wto is an effective organization for achieving common trade goals and principles and for settling trade disputes among sovereign nations .

in the course of the five - year review , individual members of congress can evaluate whether the wto remains on course as a trade - oriented organization and has not expanded its activities to non - trade related areas .

congress wants to ensure that the united states can continue to exercise substantial influence within the wto and successfully promote goals that benefit american producers , workers and consumers .

the provision was added to the original draft of the measure in the trade subcommittee of the house ways and means committee prior to its introduction .

since the bill implementing the wto agreement was to be considered under the fast - track procedure and , hence , could not be amended once introduced , any changes to it had to be made before its formal introduction in mock mark - ups in the relevant committees with both congressional and executive participation .

the legislation lays out a specific procedure to be followed by the congress in the consideration of the withdrawal measure .

to the extent that it differs from the regular procedure , this procedure follows , in the main , the special abbreviated fast - track procedure for the consideration of "resolutions disapproving certain actions" ( section 152 of the trade act of 1974 , as amended ; 19 u.s.c .

2192 ) , which has been modified with respect to the timetable for certain legislative steps by the provisions of section 125 itself .

the provisions of both section 152 of the trade act of 1974 and section 125 of the uraa are specifically defined as exercises of the rulemaking power of either house and deemed a part of the rules of either house .

they can be changed by either house , with respect to its own procedure , at any time in the same manner and to the same extent as any other rule of that house ( section 151 ( a ) of the trade act of 1974 , as amended , applied to the procedure by section 152 of the same act ; and section 125 ( d ) of the uruguay round agreements act ; 19 u.s.c .

2191 ( a ) , 2192 , and 3535 ( d ) ) .

in the presentation that follows , consequently , statutory references to section 125 refer to that section of the uruguay round agreements act ( 19 u.s.c .

3535 ) , while those to section 152 refer to that section of the trade act of 1974 ( 19 u.s.c .

2192 ) .

functionally , the timetable for legislative consideration of the joint resolution of disapproval encompasses the following steps: ( 1 ) introduction of a joint resolution of withdrawal .

a joint resolution of withdrawal may be introduced in either house by any member of that house ( sec .

125 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( a ) ; 19 u.s.c .

3535 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( a ) ) within 90 days of the date on which the congress receives the quinquennial report submitted by the president on the operation of the wto ( sec .

125 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( b ) ; 19 u.s.c .

3535 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( b ) ) .

 ( 2 ) language of the withdrawal resolution .

the language of the joint resolution is prescribed by law ( sec .

125 ( c ) ( 1 ) ; 19 u.s.c .

3535 ( c ) ( 1 ) ) to read , after the resolving clause , only as follows: that the congress withdraws its approval , provided under section 101 ( a ) of the uruguay round agreements act , of the wto agreement as defined in section 2 ( 9 ) of that act .

 ( 3 ) committee referral .

the resolution is referred , in the house , to the committee on ways and means and , in the senate , to the committee on finance ( sec .

152 ( b ) ; 19 u.s.c .

2192 ( b ) ) .

 ( 4 ) committee consideration .

if the committee of either house to which the resolution has been referred has not reported it within 45 days after its introduction , the committee is automatically discharged from further consideration of the resolution , and the resolution is placed on the appropriate calendar for floor consideration ( sec .

125 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( c ) ; 19 u.s.c .

3535 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( c ) ) .

 ( also placed on the appropriate calendar under regular legislative procedure are measures that have been reported , whether favorably or adversely. ) .

 ( 5 ) restriction on consideration in either house .

it is not in order in either house to consider a joint resolution of withdrawal ( other than a resolution received from the other house ) if that house has previously adopted a joint resolution of withdrawal ( sec .

125 ( c ) ( 3 ) ; 19 u.s.c .

3535 ( c ) ( 3 ) ) .

 ( 6 ) floor consideration in the house .

 ( a ) it is not in order to consider the joint resolution unless it has been reported by the ways and means committee or that committee has been discharged ( sec .

125 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( d ) ( ii ) ; 19 u.s.c .

3535 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( d ) ( ii ) ) .

 ( b ) a motion to proceed to the consideration of the resolution may only be made on the second legislative day after the calendar day on which the sponsor of the motion announces to the house his intention to do so ( sec .

125 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( e ) ; 19 u.s.c .

3535 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( e ) ) .

the motion is highly privileged and nondebatable ; no amendment to the motion , nor a motion to reconsider the vote by which it has been agreed or disagreed to , is in order ( sec .

152 ( d ) ( 1 ) ; 19 u.s.c .

2192 ( d ) ( 1 ) ) .

 ( c ) debate is limited to 20 hours , divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the resolution ; a motion further to limit debate is nondebatable ; no amendment to the resolution , nor a motion to recommit it or to reconsider the vote by which it has been agreed or disagreed to , is in order ( sec .

152 ( d ) ( 2 ) ; 19 u.s.c .

2192 ( d ) ( 2 ) ) .

 ( d ) motions to postpone the consideration of the resolution and motions to proceed to the consideration of other business are decided without debate ( sec .

152 ( d ) ( 3 ) ; 19 u.s.c .

2192 ( d ) ( 3 ) ) .

 ( e ) all appeals from the decisions of the chair regarding the application of the rules of the house of representatives relating to the resolution are decided without debate ( sec .

152 ( d ) ( 4 ) ; 19 u.s.c .

2192 ( d ) ( 4 ) ) .

 ( f ) except as provided in the preceding provisions ( a ) - ( e ) , consideration of the resolution is governed by the rules of the house of representatives applicable to other measures in similar circumstances ( sec .

152 ( d ) ( 5 ) ; 19 u.s.c .

2192 ( d ) ( 5 ) ) .

 ( hence , like all expedited procedures , this procedure can be superseded by the house's adoption of a resolution reported by the rules committee providing for a different procedure. ) .

 ( 7 ) procedure in the senate .

 ( a ) a joint resolution of withdrawal that has passed the house is , upon receipt by the senate , referred to the committee on finance ( sec .

152 ( f ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( i ) ; 19 u.s.c .

2192 ( f ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( i ) ) .

 ( b ) if a joint resolution was introduced in the senate before receipt of the resolution passed by the house , the house resolution is placed on the senate calendar , but the senate considers its own resolution , except that the senate vote on the passage of the resolution is on the house resolution ( sec .

152 ( f ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( ii ) ; 19 u.s.c .

2192 ( f ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( ii ) ) .

 ( c ) if the senate passes a joint resolution of withdrawal before receiving the passed house resolution , its resolution is held at the desk pending the receipt of the house resolution .

upon receipt of the house resolution , the latter is deemed to have been read twice , considered , read the third time , and passed ( sec.152 ( f ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ; 19 u.s.c .

2192 ( f ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ) .

 ( this procedure makes it clear that a resolution of withdrawal cannot be adopted unless it is a house joint resolution. ) .

 ( 8 ) floor consideration in the senate .

 ( a ) a motion to proceed to the consideration of the resolution is privileged ; an amendment to the motion is not in order , nor is a motion to reconsider the vote on the motion to proceed , whether agreed or disagreed to ( sec .

152 ( e ) ( 1 ) ; 19 u.s.c .

2192 ( e ) ( 1 ) ) .

 ( b ) debate on the joint resolution and all debatable motions and appeals connected therewith is limited to 20 hours , equally divided between , and controlled by , the majority leader and the minority leader , or their designees ( sec .

152 ( e ) ( 2 ) ; 19 u.s.c .

2192 ( e ) ( 2 ) ) .

 ( c ) debate on any debatable motion or appeal is limited to one hour , equally divided between , and controlled by , its mover and the manager of the resolution , except that when the manager is in favor of such motion or appeal , the time in opposition is controlled by the minority leader or his designee .

such leaders , or either of them , may , from time under their control on the passage of the resolution , allot additional time to any senator during the consideration of any debatable motion or appeal ( sec .

152 ( e ) ( 3 ) ; 19 u.s.c .

2192 ( e ) ( 3 ) ) .

 ( d ) a motion to further limit debate on the resolution , on a debatable motion , or on an appeal is nondebatable ; and no amendment to , or motion to recommit , the resolution is in order ( sec .

152 ( e ) ( 4 ) ; 19 u.s.c .

2192 ( e ) ( 4 ) ) .

 ( 9 ) deadline for transmission to the president .

if the congress adopts a joint resolution of withdrawal , it must transmit it to the president within 90 days from the receipt of the president's quinquennial report ( sec .

125 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( i ) ; 19 u.s.c .

3535 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( i ) ) .

 ( 10 ) override of the veto .

if the president vetoes the joint resolution , each house may vote to override the veto [by a two - thirds majority] either by the last day of the 90-day period beginning on the date the congress receives the president's report , or the last day of the 15-day period beginning on the date the congress receives the veto message , whichever is later ( sec .

125 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( a ) ( ii ) ; 19 u.s.c .

3535 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( a ) ( ii ) ) .

in the senate , consideration of a veto message , including consideration of any debatable motions and appeals related thereto , is limited to ten hours , equally divided between , and controlled by , the majority leader and the minority leader , or their designees ( sec .

152 ( f ) ( 3 ) ; 19 u.s.c .

 ( f ) ( 3 ) ) .

 ( 11 ) implementing the withdrawal .

the withdrawal of a member from the wto is regulated by article xv of the wto agreement .

the provision requires the transmission of a written notice of withdrawal by the withdrawing member to the director - general of the wto , which takes effect six months after the date of its receipt and applies to the wto agreement and all related multilateral trade agreements ; withdrawal from plurilateral agreements acceded to by the withdrawing member is controlled by the specific provisions of such agreements .

thus , the withdrawal from the plurilateral agreement on government procurement under its article 10 takes effect 60 days after the receipt of written notice of withdrawal by the director - general of the wto ; and the withdrawal from the agreement on civilian aircraft under its article 9.6 , 12 months from the receipt of the written notice .

as to the actual implementation of the withdrawal: section 125 contains no specific provisions regarding the resolution's entry into effect , nor a directive ( presumably to the president ) to transmit the notice of withdrawal to the director - general , nor the deadline for such transmittal .

nor does it address the time - lag between the entry into effect of the resolution ( on the date of its enactment or veto override ) and the effective date of withdrawal of the united states from the wto ( six months after the transmittal of the withdrawal notice ) .

