for 30 years , the nunn - mccurdy act ( 10 u.s.c .

§2433 ) has served as one of the principal mechanisms for notifying congress of cost overruns in major defense acquisition programs ( mdaps ) .

the act establishes thresholds to determine if an mdap or designated major subprogram of an mdap experiences a cost overrun .

 ( for purposes of this report , the term program refers to mdaps as well as designated major subprograms. ) .

nunn - mccurdy thresholds are based on a comparison between a program's actual costs and the current baseline estimate or original baseline estimate ( defined below ) .

a program that has cost growth that exceeds any of these thresholds is said to have a nunn - mccurdy breach and the department of defense ( dod ) must notify congress of the breach .

in the early days of the reagan administration , a number of high - profile weapon systems , including the black hawk helicopter and the patriot missile system , experienced substantial cost overruns .

responding to public concern over escalating cost growth , senator sam nunn and representative david mccurdy spearheaded the passage of the nunn - mccurdy act , which was intended to create a reporting requirement for programs experiencing cost overruns .

it was believed that publicly exposing cost overruns would force dod to rein in cost growth .

according to representative mccurdy , the assumption behind the nunn - mccurdy provision of the fiscal 1983 defense authorization bill was that the prospect of an adverse reaction from the office of management and budget , congress , or the public would force senior pentagon officials to address the question of whether the program in question — at their newly reported , higher costs — were worth continuing .

nunn - mccurdy was not originally intended to create a mechanism for managing programs or allocating funds .

the rationale for an after - the - fact report was a matter of some debate .

during floor debate on the original amendment in 1981 , senator john tower , then chairman of the senate armed services committee , said that the reporting requirements were like "closing the gate after the horse has galloped off into the boondocks. .

one issue for congress is to determine whether nunn - mccurdy should be used as 1. only a reporting mechanism to provide information on cost growth to congress or 2. both a reporting and management tool .

congress appears to have used nunn - mccurdy as both a reporting and a management tool .

to enhance the effectiveness of the act as a reporting tool , congress has amended it over the last 25 years to increase visibility into mdap cost growth and improve the reliability of the data reported .

for example , as discussed above , in the fy2006 national defense authorization act , congress added an additional threshold against which to measure cost growth to improve visibility into the cost growth experienced by a program from its inception .

at the same time , congress has taken actions which imply that nunn - mccurdy is also a management tool .

for example , in the weapon systems acquisition reform act of 2009 , congress mandated that a program that has a critical breach must be restructured to address the root causes of cost growth and have its most recent milestone approval revoked .

clarifying what role nunn - mccurdy should play in helping congress exercise its oversight role could help congress determine how best to amend the act in the future .

the first two ships in the ford - class nuclear - powered aircraft carrier program , the gerald r. ford ( cvn - 78 ) and john f. kennedy ( cvn - 79 ) , have estimated procurement cost growth of 22.9% and 24.0% , respectively ( since the submission of the fy2008 budget ) .

because each ship is part of a larger multi - ship acquisition program , the full program has not breached the nunn - mccurdy thresholds .

given that aircraft carriers are estimated to cost on average in excess of $11.5 billion , congress may consider designating individual carrier procurement efforts as major subprograms for purposes of nunn - mccurdy reporting requirements .

in the fy2012 ndaa , congress took a similar approach with the evolved expendable launch vehicle , when it required the secretary of defense to either redesignate the evolved expendable launch vehicle program as a major defense acquisition program not in the sustainment phase under section 2430 of title 10 , united states code ; or provide congress with the information that would have been statutorily required if eelv were designated as a major defense acquisition program not in the sustainment phase , as it relates to cost , schedule , and performance ; select acquisition reports , including updated program life - cycle cost estimates ; and unit cost reports .

some analysts have argued that under the current statute , too much time elapses from when a critical breach is first identified to when the secretary of defense certifies the program to congress .

according to these analysts , the nunn - mccurdy timelines often span two budget cycles , and in some cases can exceed 300 days from when a program manager accurately suspects that a critical nunn - mccurdy breach has taken place figure 6 .

one option for congress could be to consider shortening some of the nunn - mccurdy timeframes .

condensing the timeframes could give congress a greater opportunity to consider budgeting options for troubled programs .

some analysts have gone further , arguing that the time it takes to report a breach to congress could be shortened by notifying congress when a unit cost report or when a contract performance report ( which is used in earned value management ) indicates that a program has breached a nunn - mccurdy threshold .

however , according to dod , "the timing of breach determinations is one of the most difficult parts of nunn - mccurdy. .

within the department , there is a great deal of discussion and deliberation at all levels prior to the formal breach determination and notification to congress .

initial breach indications from the contractor or program manager could be premature .

for example , even if the program manager has reasonable cause to believe there is a nunn - mccurdy breach , senior leadership could initiate cost reductions or descope the program .

using the unit cost reports or contractor performance reports to determine a nunn - mccurdy breach could deprive dod of the opportunity to manage programs and take steps to rein in cost growth .

given the costs associated with operations and support , congress may consider applying nunn - mccurdy - type reporting requirements to o&s costs .

applying a reporting requirement to o&s costs might help congress set its budgetary priorities , as well as gather and track cost data for future analysis .

another option for congress could be to require the cost assessment and program evaluation office to include in its annual report to congress a comparison of original o&s cost estimates to current actual costs ( adjusted for inflation ) for ongoing programs .

the extent to which these options may be viable depends on the reliability of the data available .

appendix a .

data on nunn - mccurdy breaches sources and methodologies selected acquisition reports are not reliable sources for analyzing nunn - mccurdy breaches .

in some instances , sar data is subsequently amended .

for example , chemical demilitarization - assembled chemical weapons alternatives ( chem demil - acwa ) was reported to congress in the september 2010 sar as a significant breach , prompting then usd ( at&l ) ashton carter to direct cape to examine the program .

cape determined that the program had a critical breach , not a significant breach , as reported to congress .

information on the critical breach was subsequently included in the december 2010 sar .

the significant breach notification is not included in table a - 1 because for purposes of this analysis , crs deems the december sar as a correction of the record , akin to an errata sheet , and not a result of a second breach .

in other instances , sar data does not accurately reflect the timing of nunn - mccurdy breaches .

for example , dod did not submit a sar in december 2008 .

as a result , the vh - 71 breach that would have been reported in a december 2008 sar was reported in the march 2009 sar .

for purposes of this analysis , crs is categorizing vh - 71 based on when the breach occurred ( 2008 ) and not on when the sar was sent to congress .

in its 2013 annual report: performance of the defense acquisition system , dod published data on the number of programs that had nunn - mccurdy breaches .

however , this data was derived from the sars and therefore does not contain the most comprehensive and up - to - date information .

in 2011 , the government accountability office published the report trends in nunn - mccurdy cost breaches for major defense acquisition programs , which contained data on the number of programs that had nunn - mccurdy breaches .

the data contained in the gao report was the most comprehensive at the time .

subsequent to gao's audit work , program data was restated .

as a result , the gao list does not include updated or restated data .

appendix b .

legislative history on september 8 , 1982 , president ronald reagan signed into law the department of defense authorization act for fiscal year 1983 ( p.l .

97-252 ) , which included what has come to be known as the nunn - mccurdy act .

this appendix traces the most significant changes to the nunn - mccurdy act .

department of defense authorization act , 1982 ( p.l .

97-86 ) antecedents of the nunn - mccurdy act on may 14 , 1981 , senator sam nunn offered a floor amendment to the department of defense authorization act of 1982 requiring dod to notify congress if the cost growth of an mdap ( referred to in the amendment as a major defense system ) exceeded certain thresholds .

the purpose of the measure was to "help control the increasing costs of major defense systems. .

in arguing for the amendment , senator nunn raised a number of issues , including the need to ensure that dod's "spending priorities are being established within the context of a coherent national strategy. .

he argued that "the unit costs of major defense weapon systems are increasing at rates far beyond the rate of inflation , adding billions to the budget just to buy the same quantities of weapons that were planned before. .

senator nunn believed that the amendment "holds the appropriate pentagon officials and defense contractors publicly accountable and responsible for managing costs. .

but ultimately , the amendment was intended to inform congress whether dod's acquisition process is working effectively .

in arguing in support of the amendment , senator nunn concluded if the system works , if the cost estimates and the inflation estimates are anywhere near accurate , giving a 15% margin on r. & d. , a 10% margin on inflation in the procurement accounts , then the reports will not be necessary .

if the system does not work , then , of course , we should know and we should be alerted .

despite initial opposition by senator john tower , then chairman of the senate armed services committee , the amendment passed by a vote of 94-0 and was included in the department of defense authorization act of 1982 .

as shown in table b - 1 , the thresholds set forth in the 1982 act were similar to the significant and critical breach levels that exist in the nunn - mccurdy act today ( the original statute did not use the terms significant or critical breach ; these terms are used below for comparison with the current statute ) .

according to the act , a significant breach occurred when the program acquisition unit cost ( pauc — total cost of development , procurement , and construction divided by the number of units ) or the procurement unit cost ( puc — total procurement funds appropriated in a fiscal year divided by the number of end units to be procured with such funds in the same fiscal year ) for an mdap increased by more than 15% .

a "critical" breach occurs when the pauc or puc increased by more than 25% .

inflation costs were included in the cost growth analysis .

under the act , a program manager was required to submit a quarterly unit cost report to the appropriate secretary within seven days of the end of the quarter .

however if a program manager had "reasonable cause" to believe that a program had a breach , the program manager was required to immediately submit a report to the service secretary concerned .

if the secretary concerned determined that a breach had occurred , he had to "promptly" notify congress of the breach in writing and submit a written report to congress within 30 days that included 1. an explanation of the reasons for the cost increase , 2. the names of the military and civilian personnel responsible for program management and cost control , 3. action taken and proposed to control future cost increases , 4. any changes in performance or schedule that contributed to cost growth , 5. the identities of the principal contractors , and 6. an index of all testimony and documents previously provided to congress on the program's estimated costs .

if the secretary concerned determined that a critical breach had occurred , in addition to the above requirements , the secretary had to certify to congress in writing within 60 days of the determination that 1. the program was essential to national security , 2. there was no viable cost effective alternative to the program , 3. the new cost estimate was reasonable , and 4. the management structure was sufficient to control additional cost growth .

if the secretary did not submit the 30- or 60-day reports in a timely manner , then no additional funds were allowed to be obligated for the program .

the statute only applied to programs with cost overruns that occurred in fy1982 .

department of defense authorization act , 1983 ( p.l .

97-86 ) passage of the nunn - mccurdy act in 1981 , representative dave mccurdy , then chairman of the house armed services committee special panel on defense procurement procedures , held a series of hearings examining weapon system cost growth .

according to representative mccurdy , the intent of the panel was "to identify and recommend a method which will allow the congress to more effectively review and evaluate cost categories for major weapons systems. .

subsequently , senator nunn and representative mccurdy led an effort to permanently enact the reporting requirements established in the fy1982 defense authorization act .

in the department of defense authorization act of 1983 ( 96 stat .

718 ) , congress passed a modified version of the fy1982 reporting requirements .

on september 8 , 1982 , president ronald reagan signed into law the department of defense authorization act , 1983 ( p.l .

97-252 ) , which included what has come to be known as the nunn - mccurdy act .

statutory structure of the fy1983 nunn - mccurdy act the nunn - mccurdy act made a number of modifications to the reporting requirements that were included in the fy1982 act .

definition of program acquisition unit cost and procurement unit cost the nunn - mccurdy act changed the definition of puc to mean ( changes in italics ) total procurement funds appropriated in a fiscal year minus advanced procurement funds appropriated that year for use in future fiscal years , plus advanced procurement funds appropriated in prior years for use in the current fiscal year divided by the number of end units to be procured with such funds in the same fiscal year .

pauc continued to be defined as the total cost of development , procurement , and construction divided by the number of units .

thresholds the nunn - mccurdy act established the baseline for measuring cost growth as the "baseline selected acquisition report," defined as the selected acquisition report in which information on the program is first included or the comprehensive annual selected acquisition report for the prior fiscal year , whichever is later .

the thresholds remained unchanged from the original nunn amendment of the fy1982 authorization act ( the terms "significant" and "critical" breach were not included in the statute but are used below for comparison with the current statute ) .

unlike the current nunn - mccurdy statute , the original act included inflation in determining if a breach had occurred .

reporting under the act , a program manager was required to submit a written quarterly unit cost reports to the appropriate secretary within seven days of the end of each quarter .

however if a program manager had "reasonable cause" to believe that a program had a breach , the program manager was required to immediately submit a report to the secretary concerned .

the program manager was also required to submit a unit cost report if a cost or schedule variance of a major contract under the program resulted in more than 15% cost growth compared to the date the contract was signed .

after a breach occurred , if the program subsequently experienced additional cost growth of more than 5% in puc or apuc , or additional cost growth of a major contract of at least 5% ( due to cost or schedule variance ) , then the program manager was required to submit an additional unit cost report .

the fy1983 ndaa changed some of the information required for the 30-day report to congress , removing the requirement to provide an index of all testimony and documents previously provided to congress on the program's estimated costs and adding a number of other requirements , including 1. cost and schedule variance information , 2. changes to the performance or schedule milestones of the program that have contributed to cost growth , and 3. prior cost estimating information .

timelines the service secretary was required to review the unit cost reports and determine whether there was a breach .

if the secretary determined that a breach occurred , he was required to notify congress of the breach in writing and submit a written report to congress within 30 days of the unit cost report being submitted to him ( the fy1982 act required the secretary to "promptly" notify congress of the determination ) .

if the secretary did not submit the 30- or 60-day report in a timely manner , then additional funds could not be obligated for the program .

the funding prohibition could be waived by consent of the house and senate armed services committees .

fy1985 department of defense authorization act ( p.l .

98-525 ) definition of procurement unit cost and major contract the fy1985 department of defense authorization act changed the meaning of procurement unit cost to mean total funds programmed to be available for obligation for procurement for a fiscal year , minus funds programmed to be available in the current fiscal year for obligation for advanced procurement in future years , plus advanced procurement appropriated in prior years for use in the current fiscal , divided by number of units procured with such funds in the same fiscal year .

the authorization act also changed the definition of a major contract ( changes in italics ) to mean each prime contract and each of the six largest associate contracts ( including for government - furnished equipment ) that is in excess of $2,000,000 .

in 1986 the threshold was changed to $40 million .

reporting requirements prior to the fy1985 authorization act , sars did not need to include a status report for an mdap for the second , third , and fourth fiscal quarters if such a report was included in a previous sar for that fiscal year and there were no changes in program cost , performance , or schedule .

the fy1985 act changed the standard , stating that a sar did not need to include a status report if there was less than a 5% change in the total program cost and less than a three - month delay in the milestone schedule as shown in a previous sar for the same fiscal year .

the act also added that reporting requirements under nunn - mccurdy do not apply to a program that has delivered 90% of the end units or expended 90% of planned expenditures .

the baseline against which to measure a breach was amended slightly ( changes in italics ) to be the baseline sar submitted in the previous fiscal year , or if there was a breach in the previous fiscal year , the unit cost report that reported the breach .

timeline changes the fy1985 act changed the timeline for requiring the submission of a sar to congress .

previously , sars had to be submitted to congress within 30 days of when the president submitted the budget to congress and within 30 days after the end of the quarter for all other quarters .

the act extended the sar submission date to within 60 days after the president sends the budget to congress and 45 after the end of all other quarters .

the act also changed the deadline by which a program manager must submit a unit for the first quarter of a fiscal year from within seven days of the end of the quarter to within seven days of the submission of the president's budget .

fy1990 and 1991 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

101-189 ) the fy1990 and 1991 ndaa added the role of the service acquisition executive to the nunn - mccurdy act .

under title x , as amended , the program manager submits unit cost reports to the service acquisition executive , who then determines whether a nunn - mccurdy breach has taken place .

a determination of a breach by the service acquisition executive is sent to the secretary concerned for a further determination .

reporting requirements the fy1990 and 1991 act amended section 2432 of title x to state that a sar did not need to include a status report if there was less than a 15% increase in program acquisition unit cost and current acquisition unit cost as shown in a previous sar for the same fiscal year .

previously , a sar had to include a status report if there was a 5% change in the total program cost .

the baseline against which to measure a breach was amended slightly ( changes in italics ) to be the baseline sar submitted in the previous fiscal year , or if there was a breach in the previous fiscal year , the sar submitted to congress in connection with the breach .

the other significant change to nunn - mccurdy in the act is the consequence of dod failing to submit a sar for a 15% breach or a certification for a 25% breach .

previously , if dod failed to provide the required reports in a timely manner , no funds could be obligated for the program unless the house and senate armed services committees waived the funding prohibition .

the act changed the penalty , stating that if the required reports are not filed in a timely manner , appropriated funds could not be obligated for construction , rdt&e , and procurement for a major contract under the program .

however , once dod submits the required reports , the prohibition ends at the end of 30 days of continuous session of congress .

timeline changes the act changed the deadline by which a program manager must submit a unit cost report for the first quarter of a fiscal year from within seven days of the submission of the president's budget to within seven days of the end of the quarter .

the act also changed the timeline for the secretary to submit notifications and certifications to congress .

specifically , the secretary must submit a notification of a breach to congress within 30 days of the service acquisition executive submitting his determination report to the secretary .

for a 25% breach , dod must submit the written certification to congress within 30 days of the deadline for submitting the sar .

fy1993 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

102-484 ) threshold changes in the fy1993 ndaa , congress slightly modified the nunn - mccurdy thresholds from more than 15% and 25% to at least 15% and at least 25% .

reporting requirements when a program breaches the nunn - mccurdy thresholds , dod is required to submit a sar to congress .

the fy1993 ndaa provided some flexibility to this requirement ( changes in italics ) , stating that a sar shall be submitted to congress for the quarter in which the determination is made that a breach occurred , or for the quarter which immediately precedes the quarter in which the determination is made .

this added flexibility means that if a program has a breach in one quarter but the determination that a breach occurred does not happen until the next quarter , the secretary can submit a sar for either quarter .

timeline changes the fy1993 ndaa changed the deadline for the program manager submitting a quarterly unit cost report to the service acquisition executive from seven business days to 30 calendar days after the end of the quarter .

in addition , the act changed the timeline for notifying congress of a breach if the breach was determined based on a quarterly unit cost report .

previously , the secretary had to notify congress of a breach within 30 days of the service acquisition executive reporting his determination to the secretary .

under the amended statute , the secretary must notify congress within 45 days of the end of the quarter in which the breach took place .

federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-355 ) definition of procurement unit cost and baseline estimate the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 ( fasa ) changed the definition of procurement unit cost to mean total funds programmed to be available for obligation for procurement for the program divided by number of units procured .

fasa also changed the benchmark against which cost growth is to be measured .

fasa required the secretary of the department managing an mdap to develop a baseline description for the program .

the description must include a cost estimate .

the baseline description must be prepared prior to each major milestone .

threshold changes fasa changed the way cost growth is measured , stating that cost growth should be measured in constant base year dollars , thereby excluding inflation as a factor for calculating cost growth .

fy2006 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

109-163 ) the fy2006 national defense authorization act amended nunn - mccurdy to include the original baseline estimate as a standard against which to measure cost growth .

the fy2006 ndaa also introduced the terms significant and critical cost growth that are used in the current nunn - mccurdy act .

the new standard was intended to prevent dod from avoiding a nunn - mccurdy breach by simply re - baselining a program .

congress believed that these changes to nunn - mccurdy would help "encourage the department of defense both to establish more realistic and achievable cost and performance estimates at the outset of mdaps and to more aggressively manage mdaps to avoid undesirable cost growth on these programs. .

the introduction of the original baseline threshold increased the number of programs triggering a reporting requirement to congress .

for example , according to dod , 11 programs that did not have a nunn - mccurdy breach prior to the new fy2006 requirements were re - categorized as having significant breaches as a result of the fy2006 legislation .

the first sar submitted by dod after enactment of the fy2006 ndaa contained 36 programs that were in breach of one of the nunn - mccurdy thresholds .

fy2007 john warner national defense authorization act ( p.l .

109-364 ) the fy2007 ndaa added to the definition of the baseline estimate , stating that the original baseline estimate is the description established for the program prepared before it enters system development and demonstration ( milestone b ) or at program initiation , whichever is later , without adjustment or revision .

fy2009 duncan hunter national defense authorization act ( p.l .

110-417 ) the fy2007 ndaa applied nunn - mccurdy to all major subprograms of mdaps designated by the secretary of defense as major subprograms .

to qualify as a major subprogram , an mdap must have "two or more categories of end items which differ significantly from each other in form and function. .

weapon system acquisition reform act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-23 ) this act introduced a number of changes to the nunn - mccurdy act , primarily by adding section 2433a to title x. pursuant to section 2433a , whenever a program suffers a critical breach , an analysis must be conducted to determine the root cause of the critical cost growth , as well as an assessment projecting the cost for completing the program as is , completing the program with modifications to the requirements , and alternative systems or capabilities .

the assessment must also include the extent to which funding for other programs needs to be reduced to cover the increased cost of the breaching program .

according to section 2433a , the program must be terminated unless the secretary of defense submits the required certifications and the root - cause analysis to congress , including a new certification — that the program is a higher priority than those programs whose funding is reduced to cover the cost increases of the breaching program .

if the program is not terminated , the program must 1. be restructured to address the root causes of cost growth , 2. have its most recent milestone approval revoked and have a new approval before entering into a new contract or exercising a contract option ( the milestone decision authority can approve necessary contract actions ) , 3. include in the report all funding changes , including reductions in funding in other programs , to cover the cost growth .

fy2012 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

112-81 ) in this act , congress waived the requirement to rescind the milestone approval for programs whose cost growth is due primarily to a strategic decision to change the quantity of items purchased .

under the amended statute , a program experiencing a critical nunn - mccurdy breach does not have to have its prior milestone approval rescinded if 1. but for the change in the number of units being acquired , the program acquisition unit cost or procurement unit cost would not have increased by more than 5% of the current baseline estimate or 10% of the original baseline estimate and 2. the change in quantity was not made as a result of increasing costs , a delay in the schedule , or problems with meeting the requirements .

for dod to invoke this exception , within 60 days of the sar being submitted to congress , the secretary of defense must submit to congress a written determination , along with an explanation of the basis for the determination , that 1. based on the root - cause analysis , but for the change in the number of units being acquired , the program acquisition unit cost or procurement unit cost would not have increased by more than 5% of the current baseline estimate or 10% of the original baseline estimate and 2. the change in quantity was not made as a result of increasing costs , a delay in the schedule , or problems with meeting the requirements .

timeline changes previously , sars had to be submitted with 60 days of when the president submitted the budget to congress .

the fy2012 ndaa decreased the time dod has to submit the sar to 45 days after the submission of the president's budget. .

