on april 23 , 2010 , arizona enacted legislation ( commonly referred to as s.b .

1070 ) intended to make attrition through enforcement the public policy of all state and local government agencies in arizona .

the provisions of this act are intended to work together to discourage and deter the unlawful entry and presence of aliens and economic activity by persons unlawfully present in the united states .

by so doing , arizona arguably placed itself in the vanguard of recent attempts to test the legal limits of greater state involvement in immigration enforcement , and prompted significant debate regarding the desirability and effectiveness of s.b .

1070 and similar state or local measures .

supporters of s.b .

1070 argue that federal enforcement of immigration law has not adequately deterred the migration of unauthorized aliens into arizona , and that state action is both necessary and appropriate to combat the negative effects of unauthorized immigration .

opponents argue , among other things , that s.b .

1070 will be expensive and disruptive , will be susceptible to uneven application , and can undermine community policing by discouraging cooperation with state and local law enforcement .

in part to respond to some of these concerns , the arizona state legislature modified s.b .

1070 on april 30 , 2010 , through the approval of h.b .

2162 ( unless otherwise specified , references to s.b .

1070 in this report refer to the version amended by h.b .

2162 ) .

following the enactment of s.b .

1070 but prior to its scheduled date to go into effect ( july 29 , 2010 ) , the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) and a number of private entities filed separate lawsuits challenging the legislation .

the central argument made by the petitioners was that aspects of s.b .

1070 , both separately and in conjunction , are preempted by federal law and are therefore unenforceable .

on july 28 , 2010 , judge susan bolton of the u.s. district court for the district of arizona granted doj's motion to preliminarily enjoin , pending a final ruling on the case , those provisions of s.b .

1070 pertaining to ( 1 ) immigration status determinations during stops , detentions , or arrests by state law enforcement ; ( 2 ) the imposition of state criminal penalties for certain violations of federal alien registration requirements ; ( 3 ) the criminalization of the solicitation or performance of work by unlawfully present aliens ; and ( 4 ) the authorization of state law enforcement to make warrantless arrests for public offenses which constitute grounds for deportation under federal immigration law .

however , the district court did not enjoin other provisions of s.b .

1070 from taking effect , including provisions allowing legal residents of arizona to bring suit to challenge state or local policies that restrict enforcement of federal immigration laws and provisions criminalizing activities related to the transportation or harboring of unlawfully present aliens .

arizona appealed the district court's decision , and on april 11 , 2011 , a three - judge panel of the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit issued a decision affirming the district court's decision to preliminarily enjoin enforcement of those provisions of s.b .

1070 pertaining to immigration status determinations during stops , detentions , and arrests ; failure to apply for or carry alien registration papers ; the solicitation or performance of work by unauthorized aliens ; and warrantless arrests for certain public offenses .

the panel unanimously affirmed the district court's injunction order with respect to those provisions of s.b .

1070 relating to alien registration and the performance of work by unauthorized aliens , and split 2-1 in affirmation of those portions of the order relating to status determinations and warrantless arrests .

arizona petitioned the supreme court to hear an appeal of the panel's decision and , on december 12 , 2011 , the court granted certiorari .

the court's decision could determine the permissibility not only of the challenged provisions of s.b .

1070 but also of subsequent measures enacted by alabama , south carolina , and utah , which the federal government has also challenged on the grounds that they are preempted .

the district court has yet to issue a final ruling as to the merits of the federal government's challenge , but its preliminary injunction remains in effect .

this report discusses s.b .

1070 and notable preemption issues raised by some of its provisions .

it examines rulings made by the reviewing district and appellate court concerning the federal government's legal challenge .

it also discusses other preemption issues potentially raised by s.b .

1070 or similar legislation , including some issues that have yet to be addressed by the reviewing courts .

the foreign born population of the united states has grown rapidly from the 1980s onward .

a significant component of this population , an estimated 28% in 2009 , resides in the united states without legal authorization , either as a result of fraudulent or surreptitious entry or of overstaying nonimmigrant visas that had allowed their temporary presence in the country .

in 1986 , approximately 3 million unauthorized aliens resided in the united states .

by 2006 , the estimated number of unauthorized aliens had more than tripled .

as the population of unauthorized aliens grew , several impacted states sued the federal government to recover the costs of benefits and services they were required to provide unauthorized aliens because of the alleged failure of the federal government to enforce immigration law adequately .

these lawsuits failed .

meanwhile , many jurisdictions throughout the country have sought to deter the presence of unauthorized aliens and reduce attendant costs through a variety of enforcement measures of their own .

as a legal matter , states have inherent "police powers" to promote and regulate safety , health , welfare , and economic activity within their respective jurisdictions .

the exercise of state police powers may be limited by the rights owed to individuals under the constitution .

moreover , these powers can be affected by assertions and delegations of federal authority , which may change over time .

when they do , state powers can be concomitantly restricted or expanded .

beginning in the 1970s , federal legislation on aliens more frequently regulated the incidents of daily life of noncitizens , lawful and unlawful .

prime examples include rules on noncitizen access to public benefits and programs , and sanctions against employers who hire unauthorized workers .

to some degree , new federal restrictions crowded out concurrent state regulation .

at the same time , however , the push by congress to regulate the stay of aliens in the united states more comprehensively also included , particularly in two statutes enacted in 1996 , increased authority for the states to mirror federal benefit restrictions and cooperate with immigration enforcement generally .

laws like arizona's s.b .

1070 , even as modified by h.b .

2162 , appear to test the legal limits of a trend toward greater state involvement .

nevertheless , not all jurisdictions have reacted similarly in responding to the influx of unauthorized aliens and the perception of growing state and local authority to react to it .

at the one end of the spectrum , some jurisdictions ( occasionally referred to as "sanctuary cities" ) have been unwilling to assist the federal government in enforcing measures that distinguish between legal and non - legal residents of the community , and , in some cases , have actively opposed providing assistance to federal enforcement efforts .

moving toward the middle of the spectrum , some states and localities communicate with federal immigration enforcement officers under limited circumstances ( eg , after arresting an unauthorized alien for a criminal offense ) , but for various reasons do not take a more active role in deterring illegal immigration .

at the other end of the spectrum are jurisdictions , like arizona , that have actively sought to deter the presence of unlawfully present aliens within their territory .

some of these jurisdictions have assisted federal authorities in apprehending and detaining unauthorized aliens , including under written agreements with federal immigration authorities made under section 287 ( g ) of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

more controversially , some states and localities have considered , and in a few cases enacted , measures intended to deter the presence of aliens who are in the united states without legal authorization , including by limiting access to housing , employment , or municipal services .

in may 2011 , the supreme court ruled in the case of chamber of commerce v. whiting that federal law did not preempt a state statute requiring employers to use the federal government's e - verify system to determine the work eligibility of employees , and which authorized the suspension or revocation of the business licenses of entities that knowingly employed unauthorized aliens .

it seems likely that this ruling will inform deliberations by some states or localities as to whether to adopt similar measures .

section 1 of s.b .

1070 declares that the provisions of the legislation are "intended to work together to discourage and deter the unlawful entry and presence of aliens and economic activity by persons unlawfully present in the united states. .

it further declares the intent to establish a state - wide policy of "attrition through enforcement. .

"attrition through enforcement" has been described by some observers as an approach to deter unlawful migration and encourage the compelled or voluntary exit of unlawfully present aliens through the "steady , across - the - board enforcement of our immigration laws. .

this approach is most often associated with more vigorous and efficient implementation of employer sanctions , improved recordkeeping and more secure documents , and other measures to make current law more effective .

it can also imply better cooperation between the states and federal immigration authorities , and the adoption of state and local laws that discourage the presence of unauthorized aliens .

these objectives are reflected in the major provisions of s.b .

1070 , which can arguably be characterized as falling into two categories: ( 1 ) those provisions that seek to bolster direct enforcement of federal immigration law , including through the identification and apprehension of aliens who are unlawfully present in the united states , by state and local law enforcement ; and ( 2 ) those provisions that criminalize conduct which may facilitate the presence of unauthorized aliens within arizona .

sections 2 and 6 of s.b .

1070 can be characterized as falling within the former category , while sections 3-5 fall within the latter .

section 2 of s.b .

1070 directs state and local law enforcement officers and agencies , whenever making a lawful stop , detention , or arrest pursuant to the enforcement of state or local laws , to make a reasonable attempt whenever practicable to determine the person's immigration status , if there is reasonable suspicion to believe the person is an alien who is unlawfully present in the country .

a person is presumed not to be an unlawfully present alien if he can provide specified documentation , such as an arizona driver's license .

an attempt to determine status need not be made if it would hinder or obstruct an investigation .

the immigration status of a person who is arrested must be determined before the person is released .

in implementing these provisions , law enforcement officials "may not consider race , color , or national origin" except to the extent permitted by the u.s. or arizona constitution .

section 2 further mandates that the u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) or customs and border protection ( cbp ) be notified when an unlawfully present alien who has been convicted of a crime is released from prison or is assessed a monetary penalty .

additionally , s.b .

1070 authorizes state and local law enforcement officials to transport unlawfully present aliens in their custody to a federal facility .

section 2 also prohibits restrictions upon state or local officials or agencies sending , receiving , exchanging , or maintaining information relating to the immigration status of an individual for the purpose of determining eligibility for public services or benefits , verifying domicile or residence , or determining whether a person is in compliance with federal alien registration laws .

it further provides that any legal resident of arizona may bring suit to challenge any state or local policy that restricts the enforcement of federal immigration laws to less than the full extent permitted by federal law .

section 3 criminalizes some activities currently proscribed by federal immigration laws .

if a person violates 8 u.s.c .

sections 1304 ( e ) or 1306 ( a ) , he will also be guilty of the state crime of "willful failure to complete or carry an alien registration document. .

modifications by h.b .

2162 eliminated the penalty structure under s.b .

1070 for alien registration violations , which would have made these offenses felonies in certain circumstances , and substituted a provision making all violations misdemeanors .

this section does not apply with respect to aliens who maintain authorization from the federal government to remain in the united states .

sections 4 and 5 of s.b .

1070 address activities relating to the transport and harboring of unlawfully present aliens .

section 4 modifies a preexisting arizona statute addressing alien smuggling , but this amendment does not alter the earlier statute's substantive scope .

more significantly , section 5 adds a new criminal statute prohibiting alien smuggling - related activities , when such activities are committed by a person who is also in violation of another criminal offense .

specifically , section 5 imposes criminal penalties upon the transport of an alien within the state in furtherance of the alien's illegal presence in the united states , when done with knowledge or in reckless disregard of the alien's unauthorized status .

harboring an alien or encouraging an alien to come to or reside in arizona with knowledge or in reckless disregard of the fact that the alien's presence is in violation of the law is also prohibited .

further , vehicles used in committing an offense under the new smuggling statute are subject to mandatory immobilization or impoundment .

section 5 also makes it an arizona crime for an unlawfully present alien to apply for or solicit work in the state , or work as an employee or an independent contractor in the state .

separately , it is unlawful for an occupant of a motor vehicle that is stopped on a roadway to pick up and hire , or attempt to hire , passengers for work at a different location , if the motor vehicle blocks or impedes the normal movement of traffic .

section 5 also makes it unlawful for a person to enter the motor vehicle in such circumstances , in order to be hired by the vehicle's occupant .

section 6 further authorizes officers to make an arrest without a warrant if they have probable cause to believe the person to be arrested has committed any "public offense" that makes the person removable from the united states .

arizona law elsewhere defines a "public offense" as any "conduct for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment or of a fine is provided by any law of the state in which it occurred," and , if the act occurred outside arizona , would have been punishable under arizona law if it had occurred in the state .

the central issue that has been raised in litigation challenging s.b .

1070 concerns whether its major provisions are preempted by federal law .

the doctrine of preemption derives from the supremacy clause of the constitution , which establishes that federal law , treaties , and the constitution itself are "the supreme law of the land. .

thus , one essential aspect of the federal structure of government is that states can be precluded from taking actions that are otherwise within their authority if federal law is thereby thwarted .

"states cannot , inconsistently with the purpose of congress , conflict or interfere with , curtail or complement , the federal law , or enforce additional or auxiliary regulations. .

an act of congress may preempt state or local action in a given area in any one of three ways: ( 1 ) the statute expressly states preemptive intent ( express preemption ) ; ( 2 ) a court concludes that congress intended to occupy the regulatory field , thereby implicitly precluding state or local action in that area ( field preemption ) ; or ( 3 ) state or local action directly conflicts with or otherwise frustrates the purpose of the federal scheme ( conflict preemption ) .

the delineation between these categories , particularly between field and conflict preemption , is not rigid .

the power to set rules for which aliens may enter and remain in the united states is undoubtedly federal , and the breadth and detail of regulation congress has established in the ina precludes substantive state regulation concerning which noncitizens may enter or remain .

nevertheless , the supreme court has never held that "every state enactment which in any way deals with aliens is a regulation of immigration and thus per se pre - empted by this constitutional power , whether latent or exercised. .

in the 1976 case of de canas v. bica , the court held that state regulation of matters within their jurisdictions that were only tangentially related to immigration would , "absent congressional action[,] ... not be an invalid state incursion on federal power. .

the court further indicated that field preemption claims against state action that did not conflict with federal law could only be justified when the "complete ouster of state power ... was the clear and manifest purpose of congress. .

still , the de canas court recognized that , even in situations where federal immigration law "contemplates some room for state legislation," a state measure might nonetheless be unenforceable on conflict preemption grounds if it "stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of congress in enacting the ina. .

a separate but somewhat related legal issue concerns the authority of states and localities to directly enforce provisions of the ina , including by investigating and making arrests for criminal and civil violations of federal immigration law .

as a general matter , it appears well established that states have at least implicit authority to make arrests for violations of federal law , unless the nature or purpose of the federal regulatory scheme precludes state action .

historically , the authority for state and local law enforcement officials to enforce immigration law has been construed to be generally limited to certain criminal provisions of the ina .

by contrast , the enforcement of the civil provisions , including the apprehension and removal of deportable aliens , has been viewed as a federal responsibility , with states and localities preempted from playing more than an incidental supporting role , except to the extent specifically authorized by federal law .

for the first several decades following the ina's enactment , the prevailing assumption appears to have been that the ina's deportation provisions constituted a pervasive regulatory scheme under which state and local enforcement was preempted .

then in the 1980s and 1990s , some jurisdictions that were heavily impacted by immigration grew more insistent in characterizing federal enforcement of federal immigration law as inadequate .

in part to address these concerns , congress included authority in the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( iirira ) for the attorney general ( now the secretary of homeland security ) to enter into cooperative agreements with states and localities under which trained state and local law enforcement officers can , under federal supervision and subject to federal direction , perform certain functions relative to the investigation , apprehension , or detention of unlawful aliens to the extent permitted by state or local law .

the enacted version of this measure was significantly narrower than some of those considered ( a house - passed version , for example , would have authorized agreements permitting states to carry out all deportation functions , including prosecution , adjudication , and physical removal ) , but all of the proposals that were seriously considered seem to have reflected a perception that , absent a cooperative arrangement with federal authorities , states and localities would play at most a secondary and supportive role in the enforcement of the civil provisions of the ina .

but a restrictive view of a state and local role in the enforcement of immigration law may be changing .

in 2002 , the office of legal counsel ( olc ) within the doj issued a memorandum which concluded that "federal law did not preempt state police from arresting aliens on the basis of civil deportability," and it withdrew the advice of a 1996 olc opinion which had suggested otherwise .

additionally , a series of cases decided by the tenth circuit variously drew no distinction between the criminal and civil provisions of the ina in relation to state and local enforcement authority , or alluded to the "implicit authority" or the "general investigatory authority" of the states to engage in civil immigration enforcement activities .

more recently in litigation concerning s.b .

1070 , however , a majority of the reviewing ninth circuit panel rejected the argument that states have implicit or inherent authority to enforce the civil provisions of the ina .

in the 1968 case of terry v. ohio , the supreme court held that the fourth amendment permits a law enforcement officer to stop and briefly detain a person when the officer reasonably suspects that the person has committed a crime .

reasonable suspicion may not be based on a mere hunch , but instead upon "specific reasonable inferences which [the officer] is entitled to draw from the facts in light of his experience. .

section 2 of s.b .

1070 , as amended by h.b .

2162 , generally requires that in the context of a lawful stop , detention or arrest by state and local law enforcement pursuant to the enforcement of a state or local law , law enforcement must determine the person's immigration status , if practicable , when "reasonable suspicion exists that the person is an alien … who is unlawfully present in the united states. .

some have expressed concern that this provision may lead to the harassment of certain racial and ethnic groups by arizona law enforcement .

the arizona statute does not expressly prohibit law enforcement from relying , at least in part , upon an individual's racial or ethnic background when assessing whether to pursue an inquiry into the person's immigration status ; instead , as amended by h.b .

2162 , it provides that law enforcement may not consider the race , color , or national origin of an individual when determining whether there is reasonable suspicion to believe the person is an unlawfully present alien , "except to the extent permitted by the united states or arizona constitution. .

although the issue was not raised in the doj's lawsuit challenging s.b .

1070 , some have expressed concern that enforcement of s.b .

1070 would lead to constitutionally impermissible "racial profiling. .

partially to address such concerns , arizona governor jan brewer issued an executive order on the same day she signed the bill into law , which requires state law enforcement officers to undergo training concerning the implementation of s.b .

1070 .

among other things , such training is intended to "provide clear guidance to law enforcement officials regarding what constitutes reasonable suspicion , and shall make clear that an individual's race , color or national origin alone cannot be grounds for reasonable suspicion to believe any law has been violated. .

whether or not it is constitutionally permissible for race , ethnicity , or national origin to be considered as a factor by arizona authorities when determining whether to inquire into a person's immigration status may depend upon a number of considerations .

on several occasions , courts have decided cases involving law enforcement authorities stopping persons for suspected immigration violations on account of those persons' suspected mexican ancestry .

supreme court jurisprudence holds that race or ethnicity cannot be the sole factor giving rise to a law enforcement stop for suspected immigration violations , but that at least in cases near the u.s. - mexican border , stops may be partially based on race .

nevertheless , the court has suggested that a different conclusion might be reached if stops based partially on mexican ancestry occur in places farther removed from the u.s. - mexican border .

in 2000 , the ninth circuit , sitting en banc , ruled that the border patrol could not take into account hispanic origin when making stops in southern california , concluding that in areas "in which the majority — or even a substantial part — of the population is hispanic," as was the case in southern california , the probability that any given hispanic person "is an alien , let alone an illegal alien , is not high enough to make hispanic appearance a relevant factor in the reasonable suspicion calculus. .

this ruling would seem to preclude arizona law enforcement from using hispanic origin as a factor in the "reasonable suspicion" test in areas with similar demographics as southern california .

in sum , court jurisprudence indicates that arizona law enforcement may not stop persons for suspected immigration - related violations solely on account of such persons' race or ethnicity , but that at least in certain circumstances , suspicion may partially be based on such considerations .

additional considerations , including population demographics , may also affect the weight to which suspicions based on race or ethnicity may be permissibly given .

in recent decades , congress has increasingly focused federal immigration policy on the daily incidents of alien residency .

concomitantly , congress has enlarged the opportunities for states to become involved in enforcing immigration law .

s.b .

1070 is in the vanguard of testing the legal limits of these increased opportunities , though h.b .

2162 modified some of its more legally ambitious efforts .

although a federal district court has issued a preliminary injunction barring implementation of some provisions of s.b .

1070 , the ultimate legal fate of these provisions ( as well as those which were not enjoined by the district court ) remains to be decided .

at least some other states and localities that see themselves as heavily impacted by unauthorized immigration likely will join arizona on any new ground that s.b .

1070 establishes .

and this potential for diverse and possibly fragmented immigration enforcement doubtless will be among the many issues considered by the courts as legal challenges to s.b .

1070 proceed .

