on february 1 , 2010 , the defense department released a report on the 2010 quadrennial defense review , a legislatively mandated assessment of defense strategy , force structure , weapons programs , and operations designed to guide defense programming , operational planning , and budgets projected as far as twenty years ahead .

the 2009-2010 exercise is the fourth quadrennial defense review carried out under that name and the sixth comprehensive reexamination of u.s. defense policy since the end of the cold war .

it was preceded by earlier qdrs completed in february 2006 , september 2001 , and may 1997 ; by the bottom - up review conducted at the beginning of the clinton administration and completed in may 1993 ; and by the base force analysis carried out by the joint chiefs of staff during the george h.w .

bush administration in 1990 and described in congressional testimony in 1991 .

these official reassessments have been supplemented by reviews conducted by independently chartered panels , including the 1995 commission on roles and missions of the armed forces , the 1997 national defense panel that followed the 1997 qdr , and the 1998-1999 commission on national security / 21 st century .

the 2010 qdr was formally conducted from april 2009 , when secretary of defense robert gates issued guidance on the main tasks of the exercise , through the writing and release of the report on the review on february 1 .

the qdr report , though quite extensive , is not the main result of the process .

officials who have participated in the review say , rather , that its value lies in having the senior leadership of the department systematically assess defense strategy , force planning , and programs with a relatively long view ahead .

ultimately , the review resulted in concrete decisions on a broad range of program and policy matters .

much of the 2010 qdr report is devoted to listing initiatives intended to improve capabilities to accomplish critical missions .

the qdr also resolved a number of policy matters that have been ongoing topics of discussion within the defense department .

this crs report provides an overview of the 2010 qdr , partly with a view toward putting matters the qdr addresses into the context of the ongoing evolution of defense policy , and partly in an effort to identify issues for future qdrs or for a broader review of national security strategy .

under current law , the secretary of defense is required every four years , in the year following a presidential election , and in consultation with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , to "conduct a comprehensive examination … of … national defense strategy , force structure , force modernization plans , infrastructure , budget plan , and other elements of the defense program and policies of the united states with a view toward determining and expressing the defense strategy of the united states and establishing a defense program for the next 20 years. .

this exercise , known as the quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) , is required ( 1 ) to delineate a national defense strategy consistent with the most recent national security strategy prescribed by the president pursuant to section 108 of the national security act of 1947 ( 50 u.s.c .

404a ) ; ( 2 ) to define sufficient force structure , force modernization plans , infrastructure , budget plan , and other elements of the defense program … required to execute successfully the full range of missions called for in that national defense strategy ; ( 3 ) to identify ( a ) the budget plan that would be required to provide sufficient resources to execute successfully the full range of missions called for in that national defense strategy at a low - to - moderate level of risk , and ( b ) any additional resources ( beyond those programmed in the current future - years defense program ) required to achieve such a level of risk ; and ( 4 ) to make recommendations that are not constrained to comply with the budget submitted to congress by the president pursuant to section 1105 of title 31 .

the statute further requires that the secretary provide a report on the qdr to the house and senate armed services committees no later than the following february , when the president's annual budget is due to be delivered to congress .

the report is required to address 16 specific topics , plus "any other matters the secretary considers appropriate. .

the topics required to be addressed , quoted in full , include: ( 1 ) the results of the review , including a comprehensive discussion of the national defense strategy of the united states , the strategic planning guidance , and the force structure best suited to implement that strategy at a low - to - moderate level of risk .

 ( 2 ) the assumed or defined national security interests of the united states that inform the national defense strategy defined in the review .

 ( 3 ) the threats to the assumed or defined national security interests of the united states that were examined for the purposes of the review and the scenarios developed in the examination of those threats .

 ( 4 ) the assumptions used in the review , including assumptions relating to — ( a ) the status of readiness of united states forces ; ( b ) the cooperation of allies , mission - sharing and additional benefits to and burdens on united states forces resulting from coalition operations ; ( c ) warning times ; ( d ) levels of engagement in operations other than war and smaller - scale contingencies and withdrawal from such operations and contingencies ; and ( e ) the intensity , duration , and military and political end - states of conflicts and smaller - scale contingencies .

 ( 5 ) the effect on the force structure and on readiness for high - intensity combat of preparations for and participation in operations other than war and smaller - scale contingencies .

 ( 6 ) the manpower and sustainment policies required under the national defense strategy to support engagement in conflicts lasting longer than 120 days .

 ( 7 ) the anticipated roles and missions of the reserve components in the national defense strategy and the strength , capabilities , and equipment necessary to assure that the reserve components can capably discharge those roles and missions .

 ( 8 ) the appropriate ratio of combat forces to support forces ( commonly referred to as the "tooth - to - tail" ratio ) under the national defense strategy , including , in particular , the appropriate number and size of headquarters units and defense agencies for that purpose .

 ( 9 ) the specific capabilities , including the general number and type of specific military platforms , needed to achieve the strategic and warfighting objectives identified in the review .

 ( 10 ) the strategic and tactical air - lift , sea - lift , and ground transportation capabilities required to support the national defense strategy .

 ( 11 ) the forward presence , pre - positioning , and other anticipatory deployments necessary under the national defense strategy for conflict deterrence and adequate military response to anticipated conflicts .

 ( 12 ) the extent to which resources must be shifted among two or more theaters under the national defense strategy in the event of conflict in such theaters .

 ( 13 ) the advisability of revisions to the unified command plan as a result of the national defense strategy .

 ( 14 ) the effect on force structure of the use by the armed forces of technologies anticipated to be available for the ensuing 20 years .

 ( 15 ) the national defense mission of the coast guard .

 ( 16 ) the homeland defense and support to civil authority missions of the active and reserve components , including the organization and capabilities required for the active and reserve components to discharge each such mission .

 ( 17 ) any other matter the secretary considers appropriate .

the fy2008 national defense authorization act , p.l .

110-181 , enacted in january , 2008 , also requires the next qdr , i.e. , the one due in february 2010 , to examine the capabilities of the armed forces to respond to the consequences of climate change , in particular , preparedness for natural disasters from extreme weather events and other missions the armed forces may be asked to support inside the united states and overseas .

the same provision requires the national defense strategy and the national security strategy completed after january 2008 ( a ) to assess the risks of projected climate change to current and future missions of the armed forces ; ( b ) to update defense plans based on these assessments , including working with allies and partners to incorporate climate mitigation strategies , capacity building , and relevant research and development ; and ( c ) to develop the capabilities needed to reduce future impacts .

the national security strategy that the law refers to is required to be prepared annually by the white house .

the national defense strategy that the law refers to is required by the original quadrennial defense review statute as part of each qdr ( see below for a further discussion ) .

the 2010 qdr report begins with a forceful assertion that has become almost a mantra in statements by secretary of defense gates and other senior defense officials for the past couple of years .

"[w]e must recognize" says the opening of the executive summary , "that first and foremost , the united states is a nation at war. .

that precept is echoed throughout the report and it is reflected in the two central themes of the review .

first , the report says , the defense department must rebalance its priorities to put more emphasis on support for forces engaged in current operations ; to institutionalize capabilities for counterinsurgency , stability , and counter - terrorism operations ; and to counter emerging challenges to u.s. military capabilities .

second , the report asserts , the defense department must reform its ways of doing business to be more agile , innovative , and streamlined in adapting to the diverse challenges of a rapidly changing international security environment and in using limited resources efficiently .

the 2010 qdr does not represent a stark break with earlier defense strategy and plans , and it reflects , in particular , a considerable degree of continuity with the 2005 national defense strategy , the 2006 qdr , and the 2008 national defense strategy , all prepared after the attacks of 9 / 11 and the beginning of wars in iraq and afghanistan .

the 2010 qdr is new in some important ways , however .

most apparently , it reflects secretary gates' insistence that prevailing in current wars in iraq and afghanistan is the first priority in military planning .

it also puts an emphasis on support for military personnel and their families , on the premise that the quality of the all - volunteer force is an essential pillar of long - term military strength .

the base force analysis , the bottom - up review , and the four qdrs have generated considerable debate .

often , the criticisms of successive reviews have at least as much to do with the perspectives of the critics as with the logic of the reviews .

some commentators consistently think that reviews have led to too small a military force , others to a force too large .

reformers who think the acquisition process is flawed or corrupt argue that reviews to date have simply confirmed a continuation of business as usual .

the technology - driven elements of the force , they say , have become progressively less relevant to real defense requirements , and forces are less ready for war at ever increasing cost .

in the past , some complained that defense policy was losing its focus on major wars because it was diverted by missions in somalia or the balkans that had little to do with u.s. security .

today , that criticism is echoed to some degree by those who object to a strategy that explicitly accepts greater risk in capabilities for traditional , state - on - state conflicts .

many warn that china or russia , like resentful , rising , and ambitious powers in the past , may pose the gravest long - term threats to peace , and complain that the current qdr neglects the danger .

a persistent line of criticism , reflected to a considerable extent in the 1997 national defense panel report and pursued further in a number of subsequent commentaries , argues that qdrs have been too slow to adapt to new , non - traditional threats to security and to the danger of asymmetric threats that exploit u.s. weaknesses .

force planning has been even slower to adapt , in this view , than formal statements of strategy .

that critical view is addressed at some length in the following section of this report , which discusses whether quite radically new assessments of the international security environment in recent qdrs may warrant more far - reaching changes in defense posture than the defense department has so far been willing to accept .

while critical reviews of the current qdr and its predecessors cover the gamut , and are often diametrically at odds with each other , a few recurring themes stand out , including the following: the current qdr , like some of its predecessors , is too constrained by budgets and does not , therefore , adequately address shortfalls in critical military capabilities ; a contrary view , that the current qdr , like some of its predecessors , fails to make necessary choices among major programs ; while a focus on current wars is appropriate , the 2010 qdr puts too little emphasis on investments in conventional forces needed to prepare for future threats ; the current qdr is too timid in its characterization of threats from russia and china , and underplays tensions with china in particular ; the delay in issuing a white house national security strategy statement left the qdr without sufficient guidance on strategic priorities ; the current qdr does not clearly show how force plans are derived from its assessments of strategy , so it is hard to understand the rationale for maintaining a force of the current size and composition ; qdrs are , by law , required to look ahead twenty years , but the current qdr appears to have a much shorter time horizon and says little about long - term planning .

taken as a whole , discussions of security challenges in successive qdrs appear to represent a considerable evolution of official thinking over time .

the 1990 base force analysis and the 1993 bottom - up review ( bur ) were intended to provide a rationale for maintaining strong military capabilities as the cold war came to an end .

the bur established the requirement that u.s. military forces should be able to prevail in two nearly simultaneous regional conflicts comparable to the war with iraq .

for future planning , it put an emphasis on continuing to maintain a substantial technological advantage over potential adversaries .

planners did not neglect post - cold war requirements for capabilities to manage other kinds of operations , but they concluded that forces able to prevail in two major wars would also be able to meet less demanding requirements .

the quadrennial defense review is not what the 1995 roles and missions commission proposed when it urged a periodic reassessment of security policy .

the commission recommended a quadrennial national security review managed by the national security council rather than a defense department exercise .

the congressional mandate , however , required the defense department to carry out quadrennial reviews to address defense strategy , force structure , and resources , and not security policy in general , which , presumably , is left to be defined by the annual white house national security strategy reports that were required by the 1986 goldwater - nichols defense reorganization act .

successive qdrs have consequently been described by some observers as "stovepiped" exercises , addressing only certain sets of security issues , recently supplemented by similarly stovepiped reviews of diplomacy and development policy by the state department and u.s. aid , and of homeland security policy by the department of homeland security .

defense officials acknowledge as much , but also insist that the 2010 qdr was carried out in close collaboration with other agencies and with the white house , so that it reflects broader security policy perspectives .

a less critical way of describing the qdr , the qddr , and the qhsr , would be to say that each , appropriately , stays in its lane .

the qdr report often asserts the need to focus on preventing and deterring conflicts before they start , on cooperating with partner states through bilateral and multilateral alliances , on strengthening civilian agencies , on better interagency coordination , and on a "whole - of - government" approach to security .

the report also acknowledges that global financial developments ; the diffusion of advanced technology ; limits on energy and other resources ; the health of the environment ; the effects of climate change ; demographic trends ; ethnic and cultural divisions ; and the pace of global communications all shape the evolving security landscape in complex ways .

while it is not the legislatively mandated role of the qdr to define policy on all these overlapping matters , policy - makers may wish to consider whether it would be worthwhile for the qdr to consider how selected , broader national security matters affect the role of military power in general and key aspects of defense policy more specifically .

the principal policy matters that directly shape defense planning include when and under what conditions to use military force ; effects of global financial trends on long - term security planning ; effects of long - term domestic economic and budget trends on defense planning ; the effect of growing costs of personnel , operations , and acquisition on long - term defense plans ; the evolution of cold war - era alliances in the post - cold war era ; global cooperation and global rules of behavior on proliferation , terrorism , human rights , and democratization ; the integration of defense and non - defense responsibilities in national security policy .

the quadrennial defense review has become an important supplement to the defense department's long - established planning , programming , budgeting , and execution system ( ppbes ) , that prepares five - to six - year program and budget plans and that develops annual budget requests to congress .

while the qdr draws on many of the same resources used in the ppbes process , it also engages different and broader parts of the dod organization in thinking about and debating defense priorities in , at least to some degree , a longer - term context .

qdrs have also become a focus of extensive discussion and debate about defense policy in the broader community of national security commentators , analysts , and advocates .

although successive qdrs have been the subject of some criticism , they have also become models of long - term planning that congress has recently applied to the state department and the department of homeland security .

the value of qdrs , nonetheless , remains a matter of some debate and qdr legislation has regularly been amended .

congress has revised the qdr's statutory mandate by adding topics to address , by requiring an independent review , by broadening the scope of the independent review , and by requiring the qdr to address resource issues differently .

additional changes may be expected .

congress may also want to consider whether the current requirement for an annual national security strategy statement should be replaced by a mandate for a more comprehensive , and less frequent , national security strategy review .

the 1995 roles and missions commission recommended this approach , as did the center for strategic and international studies "beyond goldwater - nichols" project .

some of the matters that might be addressed were identified in the report of the project on national security reform , that proposed measures to improve interagency coordination of national security policy - making and implementation .

the 2010 qdr suggests , perhaps above all else , a need for continuing efforts to consider and periodically reconsider the implications of the apparently accelerating pace of change in the global security environment for u.s. national security organizational structures , plans , and processes .

secretary of defense gates has argued more forcefully than any other senior official in recent memory that the institutional mechanisms the united states government relies on to sustain security have become , not merely too slow and unresponsive , but , in some cases , barriers to the adaptive flexibility that global developments require .

to the extent this view is widely shared , the key issue may be how to enhance processes like the qdr to enable policymakers to better grasp the critical dynamics of the evolving global order and to adjust both the purposes and the processes of national security planning to address the challenges and opportunities ahead .

appendix a .

current qdr legislation as amended through the fy2010 national defense authorization act this appendix includes •    the full , current text of title 10 , u.s. code , section 118 , as amended to date , which is the permanent statute , originally enacted in the fy2000 national defense authorization act , p.l .

106-65 , october 5 , 1999 , that requires a quadrennial defense review very four years , and •    the full text of provisions of the fy2010 national defense authorization act , p.l .

111-84 , october 28 , 2009 , that establish additional requirements for the 2010 quadrennial defense review , including provisions regarding an independent panel to assess the 2010 qdr .

together , these statutes constitute the legislative requirements for the 2010 qdr .

other statutes , not cited here , require a white house national security strategy statement , reports on u.s. nuclear , space , and ballistic missile defense policy , and quadrennial reports by the department of defense on the roles and missions of the military services .

title 10 , u.s. code , section 118 § 118 .

quadrennial defense review ( a ) review required .

 — the secretary of defense shall every four years , during a year following a year evenly divisible by four , conduct a comprehensive examination ( to be known as a "quadrennial defense review" ) of the national defense strategy , force structure , force modernization plans , infrastructure , budget plan , and other elements of the defense program and policies of the united states with a view toward determining and expressing the defense strategy of the united states and establishing a defense program for the next 20 years .

each such quadrennial defense review shall be conducted in consultation with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff .

 ( b ) conduct of review .

 — each quadrennial defense review shall be conducted so as — ( 1 ) to delineate a national defense strategy consistent with the most recent national security strategy prescribed by the president pursuant to section 108 of the national security act of 1947 ( 50 u.s.c .

404a ) ; ( 2 ) to define sufficient force structure , force modernization plans , infrastructure , budget plan , and other elements of the defense program of the united states associated with that national defense strategy that would be required to execute successfully the full range of missions called for in that national defense strategy ; ( 3 ) to identify ( a ) the budget plan that would be required to provide sufficient resources to execute successfully the full range of missions called for in that national defense strategy at a low - to - moderate level of risk , and ( b ) any additional resources ( beyond those programmed in the current future - years defense program ) required to achieve such a level of risk ; and ( 4 ) to make recommendations that are not constrained to comply with the budget submitted to congress by the president pursuant to section 1105 of title 31 .

 ( c ) assessment of risk .

 — the assessment of risk for the purposes of subsection ( b ) shall be undertaken by the secretary of defense in consultation with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff .

that assessment shall define the nature and magnitude of the political , strategic , and military risks associated with executing the missions called for under the national defense strategy .

 ( d ) submission of qdr to congressional committees .

 — the secretary shall submit a report on each quadrennial defense review to the committees on armed services of the senate and the house of representatives .

the report shall be submitted in the year following the year in which the review is conducted , but not later than the date on which the president submits the budget for the next fiscal year to congress under section 1105 ( a ) of title 31 .

the report shall include the following: ( 1 ) the results of the review , including a comprehensive discussion of the national defense strategy of the united states , the strategic planning guidance , and the force structure best suited to implement that strategy at a low - to - moderate level of risk .

 ( 2 ) the assumed or defined national security interests of the united states that inform the national defense strategy defined in the review .

 ( 3 ) the threats to the assumed or defined national security interests of the united states that were examined for the purposes of the review and the scenarios developed in the examination of those threats .

 ( 4 ) the assumptions used in the review , including assumptions relating to — ( a ) the status of readiness of united states forces ; ( b ) the cooperation of allies , mission - sharing and additional benefits to and burdens on united states forces resulting from coalition operations ; ( c ) warning times ; ( d ) levels of engagement in operations other than war and smaller - scale contingencies and withdrawal from such operations and contingencies ; and ( e ) the intensity , duration , and military and political end - states of conflicts and smaller - scale contingencies .

 ( 5 ) the effect on the force structure and on readiness for high - intensity combat of preparations for and participation in operations other than war and smaller - scale contingencies .

 ( 6 ) the manpower and sustainment policies required under the national defense strategy to support engagement in conflicts lasting longer than 120 days .

 ( 7 ) the anticipated roles and missions of the reserve components in the national defense strategy and the strength , capabilities , and equipment necessary to assure that the reserve components can capably discharge those roles and missions .

 ( 8 ) the appropriate ratio of combat forces to support forces ( commonly referred to as the "tooth - to - tail" ratio ) under the national defense strategy , including , in particular , the appropriate number and size of headquarters units and defense agencies for that purpose .

 ( 9 ) the specific capabilities , including the general number and type of specific military platforms , needed to achieve the strategic and warfighting objectives identified in the review .

 ( 10 ) the strategic and tactical air - lift , sea - lift , and ground transportation capabilities required to support the national defense strategy .

 ( 11 ) the forward presence , pre - positioning , and other anticipatory deployments necessary under the national defense strategy for conflict deterrence and adequate military response to anticipated conflicts .

 ( 12 ) the extent to which resources must be shifted among two or more theaters under the national defense strategy in the event of conflict in such theaters .

 ( 13 ) the advisability of revisions to the unified command plan as a result of the national defense strategy .

 ( 14 ) the effect on force structure of the use by the armed forces of technologies anticipated to be available for the ensuing 20 years .

 ( 15 ) the national defense mission of the coast guard .

 ( 16 ) the homeland defense and support to civil authority missions of the active and reserve components , including the organization and capabilities required for the active and reserve components to discharge each such mission .

 ( 17 ) any other matter the secretary considers appropriate .

 ( e ) cjcs review .

 — ( 1 ) upon the completion of each review under subsection ( a ) , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff shall prepare and submit to the secretary of defense the chairman's assessment of the review , including the chairman's assessment of risk and a description of the capabilities needed to address such risk .

 ( 2 ) the chairman's assessment shall be submitted to the secretary in time for the inclusion of the assessment in the report .

the secretary shall include the chairman's assessment , together with the secretary's comments , in the report in its entirety .

 ( f ) independent panel assessment .

 — ( 1 ) not later than six months before the date on which the report on a quadrennial defense review is to be submitted under subsection ( d ) , the secretary of defense shall establish a panel to conduct an assessment of the quadrennial defense review .

 ( 2 ) not later than three months after the date on which the report on a quadrennial defense review is submitted under subsection ( d ) to the congressional committees named in that subsection , the panel appointed under paragraph ( 1 ) shall submit to those committees an assessment of the review , including the recommendations of the review , the stated and implied assumptions incorporated in the review , and the vulnerabilities of the strategy and force structure underlying the review .

the assessment of the panel shall include analyses of the trends , asymmetries , and concepts of operations that characterize the military balance with potential adversaries , focusing on the strategic approaches of possible opposing forces .

 ( g ) consideration of effect of climate change on department facilities , capabilities , and missions .

 — ( 1 ) the first national security strategy and national defense strategy prepared after january 28 , 2008 s hall include guidance for military planners — ( a ) to assess the risks of projected climate change to current and future missions of the armed forces ; ( b ) to update defense plans based on these assessments , including working with allies and partners to incorporate climate mitigation strategies , capacity building , and relevant research and development ; and ( c ) to develop the capabilities needed to reduce future impacts .

 ( 2 ) the first quadrennial defense review prepared after the date of the enactment of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 shall also examine the capabilities of the armed forces to respond to the consequences of climate change , in particular , preparedness for natural disasters from extreme weather events and other missions the armed forces may be asked to support inside the united states and overseas .

 ( 3 ) for planning purposes to comply with the requirements of this subsection , the secretary of defense shall use — ( a ) the mid - range projections of the fourth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change ; ( b ) subsequent mid - range consensus climate projections if more recent information is available when the next national security strategy , national defense strategy , or quadrennial defense review , as the case may be , is conducted ; and ( c ) findings of appropriate and available estimations or studies of the anticipated strategic , social , political , and economic effects of global climate change and the implications of such effects on the national security of the united states .

 ( 4 ) in this subsection , the term "national security strategy" means the annual national security strategy report of the president under section 108 of the national security act of 1947 ( 50 u.s.c .

404a ) .

 ( h ) relationship to budget - nothing in this section shall be construed to affect section 1105 ( a ) of title 31 .

 ( i ) interagency overseas basing report - ( 1 ) not later than 90 days after submitting a report on a quadrennial defense review under subsection ( d ) , the secretary of defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report detailing how the results of the assessment conducted as part of such review will impact — ( a ) the status of overseas base closure and realignment actions undertaken as part of a global defense posture realignment strategy ; and ( b ) the status of development and execution of comprehensive master plans for overseas military main operating bases , forward operating sites , and cooperative security locations of the global defense posture of the united states .

 ( 2 ) a report under paragraph ( 1 ) shall include any recommendations for additional closures or realignments of military installations outside of the united states and any comments resulting from an interagency review of these plans that includes the department of state and other relevant federal departments and agencies .

fy2010 national defense authorization act , provisions regarding the 2009-2010 quadrennial defense review sec .

1051 .

report on statutory compliance of the report on the 2009 quadrennial defense review .

 ( a ) comptroller general report . — not later than 90 days after the secretary of defense releases the report on the 2009 quadrennial defense review , the comptroller general shall submit to the congressional defense committees and to the secretary of defense a report on the degree to which the report on the 2009 quadrennial defense review addresses each of the items required by subsection ( d ) of section 118 of title 10 , united states code .

 ( b ) secretary of defense report . — if the comptroller general determines that the report on the 2009 quadrennial defense review fails to directly address items required by subsection ( d ) of section 118 of such title , the secretary of defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report directly addressing those items not later than 30 days after the submission of the report by the comptroller general required by paragraph ( 1 ) .

sec .

1052 .

report on the force structure findings of the 2009 quadrennial defense review .

 ( a ) report requirement . — concurrent with the delivery of the report on the 2009 quadrennial defense review required by section 118 of title 10 , united states code , the secretary of defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report with a classified annex containing — ( 1 ) the analyses used to determine and support the findings on force structure required by such section ; and ( 2 ) a description of any changes from the previous quadrennial defense review to the minimum military requirements for major military capabilities .

 ( b ) major military capabilities defined . — in this section , the term ''major military capabilities'' includes any capability the secretary determines to be a major military capability , any capability discussed in the report of the 2006 quadrennial defense review , and any capability described in paragraph ( 9 ) or ( 10 ) of section 118 ( d ) of title 10 , united states code .

[...............] sec .

1061 .

additional members and duties for the independent panel to assess the quadrennial defense review .

 ( a ) additional members . — ( 1 ) in general. — for purposes of conducting the assessment of the 2009 quadrennial defense review under section 118 of title 10 , united states code ( in this section referred to as the ''2009 qdr'' ) , the independent panel established under subsection ( f ) of such section ( in this section referred to as the ''panel'' ) shall include eight additional members as follows: ( a ) two appointed by the chairman of the committee on armed services of the house of representatives .

 ( b ) two appointed by the chairman of the committee on armed services of the senate .

 ( c ) two appointed by the ranking member of the committee on armed services of the house of representatives .

 ( d ) two appointed by the ranking member of the committee on armed services of the senate .

 ( 2 ) period of appointment ; vacancies. — members of the panel appointed under paragraph ( 1 ) shall be appointed for the life of the panel .

any vacancy in an appointment to the panel under paragraph ( 1 ) shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment .

 ( b ) additional duties . — in addition to the duties of the panel under section 118 ( f ) of title 10 , united states code , the panel shall , with respect to the 2009 qdr — ( 1 ) review the secretary of defense's terms of reference , and any other materials providing the basis for , or substantial inputs to , the work of the department of defense on the 2009 qdr ; ( 2 ) conduct an assessment of the assumptions , strategy , findings , and risks in the report of the secretary of defense on the 2009 qdr , with particular attention paid to the risks described in that report ; ( 3 ) conduct an independent assessment of a variety of possible force structures for the armed forces , including the force structure identified in the report of the secretary of defense on the 2009 qdr ; and ( 4 ) review the resource requirements identified in the 2009 qdr pursuant to section 118 ( b ) ( 3 ) of title 10 , united states code , and , to the extent practicable , make a general comparison of such resource requirements with the resource requirements to support the forces contemplated under the force structures assessed under paragraph ( 3 ) .

 ( c ) reports . — ( 1 ) initial report of panel. — the report on the 2009 qdr that is submitted to congress pursuant to section 118 ( f ) ( 2 ) of title 10 , united states code , shall include , in addition to any other matters required by such section , the interim findings of the panel with respect to the matters specified in subsection ( b ) .

 ( 2 ) final report of panel. — not later than july 15 , 2010 , the panel shall submit to the secretary of defense , and to the congressional defense committees , the final report of the panel on the matters specified in subsection ( b ) .

the report shall include such recommendations on such matters as the panel considers appropriate .

 ( 3 ) report of secretary of defense. — not later than august 15 , 2010 , the secretary of defense shall , after consultation with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , submit to the congressional defense committees a report setting forth the secretary's response to the final report of the panel under paragraph ( 2 ) .

 ( d ) termination of panel . — the panel shall terminate 45 days after the date on which the panel submits its final report under subsection ( c ) ( 2 ) .

appendix b. bibliography of official strategy reports quadrennial defense review , prior , and related reports u.s. department of defense , quadrennial defense review report , february 2010 , online at http: / / www.defense.gov / qdr / images / qdr_as_of_12feb10_1000.pdf .

u.s. department of defense , quadrennial defense review report , february 2006 , online at http: / / www.defense.gov / qdr / report / report20060203.pdf .

u.s. department of defense , quadrennial defense review report , september 30 , 2001 , online at http: / / www.defense.gov / pubs / pdfs / qdr2001.pdf .

u.s. department of defense , report of the quadrennial defense review , may 1997 , on line in sequential sections at http: / / www.fas.org / man / docs / qdr / .

u.s. department of defense , report on the bottom up review , october 1993 , partially on line in sequential sections at http: / / www.fas.org / man / docs / bur / index.html .

roles and missions commission of the armed forces , directions for defense: report to congress , the secretary of defense , and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , may 24 , 1995 , "executive summary," online at http: / / www.fas.org / man / docs / corm95 / index.html .

national defense panel , transforming defense: national security in the 21 st century , report of the national defense panel , december , 2007 , online at http: / / www.dtic.mil / ndp / fulldoc2.pdf .

national defense strategy reports u.s. department of defense , national defense strategy , march 2005 , online at http: / / www.defense.gov / news / mar2005 / d20050318nds1.pdf .

u.s. department of defense , national defense strategy , june 2008 , online at http: / / www.defense.gov / news / 2008%20national%20defense%20strategy.pdf .

recent national security strategy reports the white house , the national security strategy of the united states of america , september 2002 online at http: / / georgewbush - whitehouse.archives.gov / nsc / nss / 2002 / nss.pdf .

the white house , the national security strategy of the united states of america , march 16 , 2006 , online at http: / / georgewbush - whitehouse.archives.gov / nsc / nss / 2006 / nss2006.pdf .

current nuclear posture and ballistic missile defense reports department of defense , ballistic missile defense review report , february 2010 , online at http: / / www.defense.gov / bmdr / docs / bmdr%20as%20of%2026jan10%200630_for%20web.pdf .

department of defense , nuclear posture review report , april 6 , 2010 ; online at http: / / www.defense.gov / npr / docs / 2010%20nuclear%20posture%20review%20report.pdf .

