the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca , p.l .

111-148 , march 23 , 2010 ) creates , requires others to create , or authorizes dozens of new entities to implement the legislation .

some of these new entities are offices within existing cabinet departments and agencies , and are assigned certain administrative or representational duties related to the legislation .

other entities are new boards and commissions with particular planning and reporting responsibilities .

still others are advisory bodies that were created to study particular issues , offer recommendations , or both .

although ppaca describes some of these new organizations and advisory bodies in detail , in most cases it is currently impossible to know how much influence they will ultimately have over the implementation of the legislation .

although some observers have asserted that ppaca will result in a precise number of new boards and commissions , the exact number of new organizations and advisory bodies that will ultimately be created pursuant to the legislation is currently unknowable .

some individual sections of ppaca are expected to create more than one new entity , the number of entities created pursuant to some sections of the legislation is contingent upon other factors , the requirements in more than one section may be satisfied by a single new entity , and some new entities may be created to implement the legislation even though they are not specifically mentioned in ppaca .

the appendix to this report identifies dozens of sections of ppaca that create or require the establishment of new entities , but some of those sections are expected to create more than one new office or advisory body to implement the legislation .

for example , section 10334 ( b ) of ppaca ( "minority health" ) requires the heads of six separate agencies within hhs to each establish their own offices of minority health .

other provisions in the legislation may result in an indeterminate number of new organizations .

for example: section 1002 of ppaca ( "health insurance consumer information" ) refers to an "independent office of health insurance consumer assistance , or an ombudsman" that state governments must designate to be eligible to receive a grant .

because it is not clear how many states will seek such grants , it is unclear how many of these offices will be established .

section 1323 ( d ) of the legislation requires state governments to establish or designate public or non - profit "state advisory councils," but exempts states that opt out of the program .

because the number of states that will opt out is currently unknown , it is unclear how many state advisory councils will be established .

section 5208 ( b ) states that nurse - managed health clinics that apply for a grant must ensure that a "community advisory committee" will be established .

because it is unknown how many such clinics will apply for a grant , the number of these committees is also unknown .

section 6301 ( a ) of ppaca says that the patient - centered research institute "may appoint permanent or ad hoc expert advisory panels as determined appropriate. .

how many such panels will be "determined appropriate" by the institute is currently unclear .

it is also possible that one new entity could satisfy multiple ppaca requirements .

for example , section 2951 of ppaca ( "maternal , infant , and early childhood home visiting programs" ) contains two separate requirements for the secretary of hhs to establish advisory bodies in relation to early childhood home visitation programs conducted with grants — ( 1 ) one body that obtains recommendations regarding the technical assistance provided to entities that are required to develop and implement an improvement plan ( i.e. , those that do not demonstrate improvement in at least four of six specified areas ) ; and ( 2 ) another body that makes recommendations on the design and plan for the evaluation of statewide needs assessments and grants .

given that both advisory bodies are required in relation to different elements of the same program ( technical assistance and evaluation ) , it is possible that one body could perform both tasks .

some ppaca requirements may be satisfied by existing entities .

for example , section 1104 ( b ) states that a required review committee on operating rules for health information transactions can be the national committee on vital and health statistics or "any appropriate committee as determined by the secretary. .

the national committee on vital and health statistics has been in operation for more than 55 years .

other new entities were created by eliminating existing entities and transferring functions .

for example , section 3509 ( a ) of the legislation establishes an office on women's health within the office of the secretary of hhs , transferring all functions and authorities of an existing office on women's health from the public health service .

also , section 5103 of ppaca requires the secretary of hhs to create a national center for health workforce analysis , transferring the responsibilities and resources of the existing national center for health workforce analysis in the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) within hhs to the new center within 180 days after enactment ( i.e. , by september 19 , 2010 ) .

in addition to the entities that ppaca specifically creates , requires others to create , or authorizes , other entities have been established administratively to implement the legislation , and others may be established in the future .

for example , on april 19 , 2010 , hhs established an office of consumer information and insurance oversight to implement many of the provisions in the legislation that address private health insurance .

ppaca does not mention such an office .

according to the office's website , our office is responsible for ensuring compliance with the new insurance market rules , such as the prohibitions on rescissions and on pre - existing condition exclusions for children that take effect this year .

it will oversee the new medical loss ratio rules and will assist states in reviewing insurance rates .

it will provide guidance and oversight for the state - based insurance exchanges .

it will also administer the temporary high - risk pool program and the early retiree reinsurance program , and compile and maintain data for an internet portal providing information on insurance options .

in some cases , the language in ppaca appears to have created certain entities and advisory bodies as of the date that the legislation was enacted .

for example , section 3201 ( a ) of ppaca states that "there is created within the centers for medicare & medicaid services a center for medicare and medicaid innovation ... to carry out the duties described in this section. .

section 3403 ( a ) states that "there is established an independent board to be known as the 'independent medicare advisory board.' .

in other cases , ppaca appears to require someone else to create these new entities .

for example , section 4001 ( a ) states that "the president shall establish , within the department of health and human services , a council to be known as the 'national prevention , health promotion and public health council.' .

section 4001 ( f ) requires the president to establish an advisory group to the council within hhs composed of not more than 25 non - federal members to be appointed by the president .

section 3509 ( a ) states that "the secretary ( of hhs ) shall establish within the office of the administrator of the health resources and services administration , an office to be known as the office of women's health. .

the wording of these provisions notwithstanding , in practical terms , many of these entities will not be able to function until their members are appointed and funds are appropriated or made available for the entities to operate ( to the extent that operating funds are required ) .

for example , neither the national prevention , health promotion and public health council nor the advisory group to the council will be able to function until the president acts to convene the council and appoint members to the advisory group .

the experience of the administrative conference of the united states ( acus ) is instructive in this regard .

congress created acus in 1964 , but did not provide an appropriation for the agency until 1968 , when it was able to begin operations .

in 1995 , congress eliminated acus , and it went out of existence the next year .

in 2004 , congress reauthorized appropriations for acus during fy2005 through fy2007 , but no appropriations were subsequently provided for those years .

as a result , acus still did not exist during this period .

in july 2008 , acus was again reauthorized for appropriations for fy2009 through fy2011 , and in march 2009 , congress appropriated $1.5 million for acus to use during the remainder of fy2009 ( i.e. , until about six months later at the end of september 2009 ) .

however , professor paul verkuil's nomination as chairman of acus was not received in the senate until november 2009 , and he was not confirmed until march 2010 .

it was only at that point that acus could begin to secure office space and hire staff .

the ppaca provisions creating or requiring others to create new entities vary considerably in their degree of specificity .

for some of the entities , the legislation goes into great detail describing such characteristics as when they are to be established , where they are to be located , their structure and composition , their purposes , how certain members are to be appointed , the amount or timing of appropriations , the application of certain general management laws , and when they will cease to exist .

in other cases , however , ppaca is silent with regard to some or all of these dimensions .

those differences may have significant implications for congressional control and , conversely , agency discretion in the implementation of ppaca .

ppaca requires gao to study and report on a variety of issues .

in addition , six sections of the legislation require the comptroller general ( cg ) to make at least 83 appointments to new entities and advisory bodies .

section 1322 ( b ) requires the cg to appoint the 15 members of an advisory board as part of the co - op program .

section 3403 ( a ) requires the cg to make 10 appointments to a "consumer advisory council" to the independent medicare advisory board .

section 5101 ( a ) requires the cg to appoint 15 members of the national health care workforce commission , and to appoint the leadership of the commission .

section 6301 ( a ) requires the cg to appoint 19 members of the patient - centered outcomes research institute to staggered six - year terms .

section 6301 ( a ) also requires the cg to appoint up to 15 members of the "standing methodology committee" ( which is to be established by the patient - centered outcomes research institute ) .

section 10607 requires the cg to appoint at least 9 but not more than 13 members of a panel to review demonstration grant applications ( re alternatives to medical tort litigation ) from the states .

although congress had previously tasked the cg with making appointments to other bodies , ppaca increased the cg's appointment responsibilities significantly ( from 45 positions to at least 128 positions ) .

some of the entities on which the cg's ppaca appointees serve arguably carry out more than just advisory or representational duties .

for example: the patient - centered outcomes research institute ( which is described in ppaca as "neither an agency nor establishment of the united states government" ) is directed to improve evidence regarding how health conditions can be prevented , diagnosed , and treated through research and dissemination of findings .

the institute is directed to carry out its research agenda through contracts and data collection efforts .

the national health care workforce commission is directed to communicate and coordinate with the departments of health and human services , labor , veterans affairs , homeland security , and education on related activities administered by one or more of the departments .

ppaca also says that the commission is to develop and initiate evaluations of education and training activities to determine whether the demand for health care workers is being met ; identify barriers to improved coordination at the federal , state , and local levels and recommend ways to address such barriers ; and encourage innovations to address population needs , constant changes in technology , and other environmental factors .

also , it is unclear how gao will be able to independently audit these entities when the cg has appointed their members .

according to the independence standard in gao's government auditing standards , audit organizations "must be free from personal , external , and organizational impairments to independence , and must avoid the appearance of such impairments of independence. .

although the precise number of governmental organizations and advisory bodies that will be created pursuant to ppaca cannot currently be determined , the legislation will undoubtedly lead to dozens of new entities being established in the coming months and years .

the roles that these entities are expected to play in the implementation of ppaca vary significantly .

many of the organizations were designed to represent certain constituencies , gather and report information , or coordinate different agencies or groups .

other organizations appear to have more decision making authority , and perhaps as a consequence , are more controversial .

for example , the independent medicare advisory board's recommendations to reduce the rate of growth in medicare spending are required to be implemented by the secretary of hhs unless congress approves an alternative proposal .

some observers have already expressed concerns about the amount of power given to this board .

congress has a range of options as it attempts to oversee the creation and operation of the entities established as a result of ppaca , and the nature of that oversight will likely vary somewhat depending on how the relevant statutory provisions are written .

if the legislation delineates when and where the new entities are to be created , how they are to be staffed and operate , and what they are to accomplish , congressional oversight can focus on whether those statutory requirements have been met .

on the other hand , if ppaca is silent with regard to these types of issues , then the nature of congressional oversight will likely be different , and may focus on whether these new offices and advisory bodies are being established at all , whether they are duplicative of each other , and whether they are contributing to the overall purposes of the legislation .

whether specific or general , oversight of the implementation of ppaca can provide congress with the information needed to decide whether the legislation needs to be changed in the future .

