signed into law on february 17 , 2009 , section 6001 ( k ) of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) mandated the federal communications commission ( fcc ) to prepare a report containing a national broadband plan .

the impetus behind mandating a national broadband plan was derived from the widely accepted view in congress of broadband as a critical public infrastructure , increasingly important to the nation's economic development .

broadband was also viewed as playing an increasingly critical role in addressing specific challenges facing the nation in areas such as health care , energy , education , public safety , and others .

in the united states , broadband infrastructure is constructed , operated , and maintained primarily by the private sector , including telephone , cable , satellite , wireless , and other information technology companies .

although broadband is primarily deployed by private sector providers , federal and state regulation of the telecommunications industry , as well as government financial assistance programs , can have a significant impact on private sector decisions to invest in and deploy broadband infrastructure , particularly in underserved and unserved areas of the nation .

when considering broadband policy , the ongoing challenge for congressional policymakers is how to strike a balance between providing federal assistance for unserved and underserved areas where the private sector may not be providing acceptable levels of broadband service , while at the same time minimizing any deleterious effects that government intervention in the marketplace may have on competition and private sector investment .

the arra specified that the national broadband plan "shall seek to ensure that all people of the united states have access to broadband capability and shall establish benchmarks for meeting that goal," and that the plan should include: an analysis of the most effective and efficient mechanisms for ensuring broadband access by all people of the united states ; a detailed strategy for achieving affordability of such service and maximum utilization of broadband infrastructure and service by the public ; an evaluation of the status of deployment of broadband service , including progress of projects supported by the grants made pursuant to this section ; and a plan for use of broadband infrastructure and services in advancing consumer welfare , civic participation , public safety and homeland security , community development , health care delivery , energy independence and efficiency , education , worker training , private sector investment , entrepreneurial activity , job creation and economic growth , and other national purposes .

starting in the summer of 2009 , an fcc task force embarked on a massive information gathering effort consisting of 36 public workshops , 9 field hearings , 31 public notices producing 75,000 pages of public comments , and 131 online blog postings triggering almost 1,500 comments .

on march 16 , 2010 , the fcc publically released its report , connecting america: the national broadband plan .

as mandated by the arra , the report was formally submitted to the house committee on energy and commerce and the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

at the march 16 , 2010 open commission meeting , the fcc commissioners voted to approve a broadband mission statement containing goals for a u.s. broadband policy .

however , the fcc commissioners did not vote on whether to approve the plan itself .

the fcc's national broadband plan ( nbp ) is a 360-page document composed of 17 chapters containing 208 specific recommendations .

table 1 , at the end of this report , is an outline of the national broadband plan .

connecting america: the national broadband plan begins with an introduction , a statement of goals , and a discussion of the current state of the broadband "ecosystem. .

this is followed by three parts containing the bulk of the plan's recommendations: part i , "innovation and investment," part ii , "inclusion," and part iii , "national purposes. .

the nbp concludes with a chapter on implementation and benchmarks .

the nbp states that "everyone in the united states today should have access to broadband services supporting a basic set of applications that include sending and receiving e - mail , downloading web pages , photos and video , and using simple video conferencing. .

a universalization target of 4 mbps of actual download speed and 1 mbps of actual upload speed has been set as the initial target rate for public investment to ensure that these expectations will be met .

the nbp calls upon the federal universal service fund ( usf ) to undertake a major role to ensure that this goal is achieved .

most telephone calls and other electronic communications travel over more than one carrier's network to get from the originating ( or calling ) party to the terminating ( or receiving ) party , thus requiring the facilities of an originating network , a terminating network , and perhaps one or more intermediate networks .

intercarrier compensation ( icc ) is the system of rates that service providers are charged for the use of these networks to provide service to their subscribers .

there is a monopoly element to terminating a communication .

once the receiving party has chosen her local carrier ( say verizon or comcast or , in a rural area , the local rural telephone company ) , the originating party's carrier has no choice but to pay the rate charged by the terminating carrier to complete the communication .

therefore these rates are subject to price regulation — the fcc regulates interstate rates and state public utility commissions regulate intrastate rates .

intercarrier compensation rates have developed over time in an ad hoc fashion , and often were set to help foster a particular policy objective .

for example , both the fcc and state regulatory commissions purposely set the rates for terminating long distance calls to subscribers of rural telephone companies significantly above cost in order to provide those rural carriers with a large revenue source that would allow them to keep local rates low .

as a result , the revenues generated from intercarrier compensation charges imposed on long distance carriers represent approximately 25% of total rural telephone carrier revenues , but only approximately 10% of the revenues of other local telephone companies .

as another example of regulators setting intercarrier compensation rates to help meet a public policy objective , the fcc purposely has treated internet service provider ( isp ) - bound traffic differently from other traffic , not imposing termination charges on isp - bound traffic or setting lower rates for terminating isp - bound traffic than other traffic , in order to foster the development of internet services .

although the use of a terminating network's facilities is similar for each type of communication , the rate charged for terminating a communication ranges from zero to 35.9 cents a minute depending on the jurisdiction of the communication , the type of traffic carried , and the regulatory status of the terminating carrier .

these regulatory - mandated distinctions create inefficient market signals that , in addition to imposing artificial advantages or disadvantages on certain categories of services or providers , are skewing investment decisions , in some cases perhaps retarding the migration from legacy circuit - switched voice networks to internet protocol ( ip ) broadband networks .

at the same time , these artificially high termination charges generate revenues that may be needed for rural companies to be able to offer basic telephone service at affordable rates comparable to those for urban subscribers .

these high charges represent an implicit universal service subsidy imposed on long distance users .

intercarrier compensation reform that eliminates this implicit subsidy by moving terminating access rates toward cost may have to be accompanied by the creation of new sources of explicit universal service funding .

the broadband plan proposes that "the fcc should adopt a framework for long - term intercarrier compensation reform that creates a glide path to eliminate per - minute charges while providing carriers an opportunity for adequate cost recovery. .

changes would be transitioned in over ten years , starting with reductions in the highest intercarrier compensation rates , which generally are intrastate rates .

since the federal courts have ruled that the fcc does not have authority over intrastate rates , however , legislation may be needed to give the fcc explicit authority to reform intrastate intercarrier rates as well as interstate rates .

universal access to broadband networks is not an end in itself ; it is a means to give consumers access to the applications that are provided over those networks .

consumers need devices — computers , smart phones , set - top boxes — to reach both their broadband network and the applications riding over the network .

those devices help consumers navigate to the many applications .

today , consumers can turn to many different manufacturers and retailers of computers and smart phones , but they generally have few options for set - top boxes ( or , more broadly , for smart video devices ) .

virtually all such devices are provided by the consumer's multichannel video programming distributor ( mvpd — cable or satellite video service provider ) .

section 629 ( a ) of the communications act directs the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , in consultation with appropriate industry standard - setting organizations , [to] adopt regulations to assure the commercial availability ... of converter boxes , interactive communications equipment , and other equipment used by consumers to access multichannel video programming [cable or satellite video service] .

there is a consensus that fcc and industry efforts to date have not achieved this goal .

there are few devices available in the retail market ; these devices cannot work with all mvpds and , even where compatible , cannot be used to identify many video signals , particularly those of high - definition cable offerings .

in its nbp , the fcc concluded that access to video services drives broadband usage and thus actions that would foster a market for smart video devices that make it easier for consumers to access broadband - enabled video would increase consumer adoption of broadband .

the fcc therefore adopted a notice of inquiry on april 21 , 2010 , to explore the feasibility of: developing a nationally supported standard interface that is common across all mvpds , thus allowing independent equipment manufacturers to produce smart video devices that could be used by end users without regard to their choice of mvpd , and requiring each mvpd to develop a complying adapter or gateway that would allow end users to purchase in a retail market smart video devices capable of searching for all available video options — from their mvpd , from the internet , etc. — in one place .

as envisioned by the fcc: the smart video devices could be used with the services of any mvpd and without the need to coordinate or negotiate with mvpds .

the adapter or gateway would communicate with the mvpd service , performing the tuning and security decryption functions specific to a particular mvpd .

the smart video devices would perform navigation functions , including presentation of programming guides and search functionality .

the envisioned "allvid" solution would employ a nationwide interoperability standard analogous to how ethernet and the ieee industry standards have led to nationwide interoperability for customer data networks despite broadband service providers deploying differing proprietary network technologies .

critics of this gateway concept argue that the cable industry already has spent almost $1 billion attempting to implement the fcc's earlier , unsuccessful efforts to create a market for video devices and that there is no demonstrated consumer demand for these set - top boxes .

they claim that most consumers would prefer to lease set - top boxes that might become obsolete in an environment characterized by rapid product and service innovation .

the additional expenditures to construct the adapter , they claim , would be passed through to consumers in higher mvpd rates .

the critics further contend that technological change inherently outpaces any government rule or one - size - fits - all requirement .

they also question whether households that do not currently subscribe to broadband service would be motivated to do so simply because they had access to smart video devices that provide them with greater , but perhaps more complicated , access to video services .

the critics suggest that the allvid mandate would primarily serve tech - savvy individuals who already subscribe to broadband service .

proponents of the allvid solution respond that , in the absence of standards and an interoperability requirement , there have been no incentives for mvpds , manufacturers , and consumers to cooperate .

they claim that consumer demand for smart video devices and manufacturer incentives to produce such devices have been constrained by the lack of a universal standard that would allow a single device to serve all mvpds and by mvpd resistance to a device that would make it easier for consumers to access non - mvpd sources of video .

they claim simple to use smart video devices would appeal particularly to non - tech savvy households .

they dispute that the allvid solution would constrain mvpd innovation or consumer choice by prescribing a single technical solution .

rather , they claim , it would foster innovation and choice by developing an industry - wide interoperability standard open to independent equipment manufacturers and applications providers without placing restrictions on mvpd networks .

the fcc recognizes that it may be especially challenging to develop an adapter for satellite video providers because , unlike in cable networks where the intelligence resides deep in the network at the head - end , in satellite networks the intelligence resides in the set - top box at the customer premise .

it therefore might be more difficult for the satellite company to troubleshoot whether the source of a customer complaint lies in equipment under the control of the satellite operator or in the smart video device .

one nbp recommendation is that the fcc initiate a proceeding to ensure that all mvpds install a gateway device or equivalent functionality in all new subscriber homes and in all homes requiring replacement set - top boxes by december 31 , 2012 .

many observers question whether the technical and market challenges to accomplish this can be performed in that period of time .

an allvid solution will not be available for several years .

currently , cablecard technology — which only works for cable , not for satellite — is available to separate the system that customers use to gain access to video programming ( called the conditional element ) from the device customers use to navigate the programming .

this allows independent smart video device manufacturers , such as tivo , to serve end users , but there are problems with the technology , notably , it does not allow customers to receive certain high - definition cable channels .

the fcc therefore has adopted a notice of proposed rulemaking to expeditiously address some of the current problems with cablecards .

wireless broadband plays a key role in the deployment of broadband services .

because of the importance of wireless connectivity , radio frequency spectrum policy is deemed by the nbp to be a critical factor in successful planning for a national policy .

mobile broadband provides high - speed internet connectivity on the move .

other wireless technologies complement needed infrastructure for a host of national broadband goals for education , health , energy efficiency , public safety , and other social benefits .

mobile and fixed wireless broadband communications , with their rich array of services and content , require new spectrum capacity to accommodate growth .

although radio frequency spectrum is abundant , usable spectrum is limited by the constraints of technology and the cost of investment .

the nbp proposes to increase spectrum capacity by: making more spectrum licenses available for mobile broadband .

increasing the amount of spectrum available for shared use .

encouraging and supporting the development of spectrum - efficient technologies , particularly those that facilitate sharing spectrum bands .

instituting new policies for spectrum management , such as assessing fees on some spectrum licenses .

to facilitate the deployment of broadband in rural areas , the nbp also proposes: improving the environment for providing fixed wireless services .

many of the nbp proposals for wireless broadband may be achieved through changes in fcc regulations governing spectrum allocation and assignment .

other actions may require changes by federal agencies , state authorities , and commercial owners of spectrum licenses .

to assist the implementation of the nbp there are also a number of areas where congressional action might be required to change existing statutes or to give the fcc new powers .

the nbp includes the announcement of plans for the fcc to create what it refers to as a spectrum dashboard .

the initial release of the fcc's spectrum dashboard provided an interactive tool to search for information about how some non - federal frequency assignments are being used .

the dashboard could be used to meet requirements set by congress for a spectrum inventory .

in addition to the dashboard , the nbp proposes that the fcc and the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) should create methods for recovering spectrum and that the fcc maintain an ongoing spectrum strategy plan .

the ntia manages federal use of spectrum , among other responsibilities .

all of these steps will facilitate decisions about spectrum management by providing detailed information about the current and potential use of spectrum resources .

from a policy perspective , the nbp recommendations that would speed the arrival of new , spectrally efficient technologies might have the most impact over the long term .

in particular , support for exploring ways to use technologies that enable sharing could pave the way for dramatically different ways of managing the nation's spectrum resources .

the need for a robust plan to accelerate the adoption of new technologies has , however , been eclipsed by public debate over the plan's proposed steps to add 300 mhz of licensed spectrum for broadband within five years .

all of the spectrum assignment proposals put forth in the nbp are contentious in that the various parties affected by the decisions have diverging views on how technology should be used to provide access to these frequencies .

the disagreements may be in part over the cost of implementing different technological solutions , or about a shift in who controls access , but these are associated with the technical fixes the fcc has proposed to facilitate the spectrum assignment .

the nbp has laid out several opportunities for the fcc , the ntia , and other government agencies to contribute to and encourage the development of new technologies for more efficient spectrum access .

for example , congress might choose to require performance goals for improved spectrum efficiency , not unlike the way federal goals have been set for energy conservation or transportation safety .

congress might also evaluate how a detailed plan to encourage new technologies might assist in resolving current disagreements about spectrum assignment and use .

the impact of evolving technologies on spectrum management is discussed in the section "technology and spectrum management. .

among the requirements for the nbp , congress specified that it should include a plan for use of broadband infrastructure and services in advancing consumer welfare , civic participation , public safety and homeland security , community development , health care delivery , energy independence and efficiency , education , worker training , private sector investment , entrepreneurial activity , job creation and economic growth , and other national purposes .

in the plan , the fcc has made recommendations that might fulfill both social and economic goals .

in the section of the plan titled "national purposes," it has focused on social goals with an agenda of actions for federal , state , and local agencies .

the areas covered in this section are health care .

the nbp identifies stated goals of the department of health and human services that might be effectively supported with technologies that are enhanced by access to broadband communications .

education .

the nbp proposes that broadband can provide an effective tool for meeting the educational needs and ambitions of educators , students , and parents of young children as well as support the department of education's strategies to improve educational achievement .

energy and the environment .

according to the nbp , broadband has multiple applications in the field of energy , conservation , and environmental protection .

for example , smartgrid goals set by congress might not be achievable without broadband communications .

economic opportunity .

actions proposed in the nbp to further economic opportunity are centered on increasing access to information technology for small and medium - sized businesses .

the role of broadband in providing job training and employment services and supporting telework are also addressed in recommendations .

government performance .

the nbp recommendations for federal government actions encompass both ways that broadband might improve the effectiveness of government and also steps the federal government might take to increase the availability of broadband networks .

the latter included federal actions to improve cybersecurity and ways that federal agencies might assist communities and state and local governments in building broadband infrastructure .

civic engagement .

the nbp describes concepts such as government transparency that can lead to greater participation by all in the democratic process .

broadband access has been described in the plan as a useful tool for encouraging civic engagement because of the part it plays in interactive communication and providing information .

public safety .

the nbp recommendations primarily address delivering wireless broadband to the radios of first responders .

it also considered the role of broadband in upgrading the nation's 911 services and emergency alert systems .

one potential issue the fcc may face in its attempts to implement the nbp is the scope of the agency's authority to regulate broadband internet access and management .

the decision of the d.c .

circuit earlier this year in comcast v. fcc has thrown the agency's current authority to regulate these practices into doubt .

broadband internet services are currently classified as information services , to which title i of the communications act applies .

the fcc does not possess direct authority to regulate services classified under title i .

the fcc has announced the possibility of reclassifying the transmission component of broadband internet services as a telecommunications service under title ii of the communications act .

the fcc hopes this potential reclassification would ground the fcc's authority to regulate broadband internet services more firmly in the governing law .

in order to understand the current uncertainty surrounding the fcc's authority over broadband internet services , some background is needed .

after the passage of the telecommunications act of 1996 , the fcc found it necessary to determine what kind of service broadband internet service was .

the agency's choices were to classify broadband internet access as an information service , over which it would have no direct authority to regulate under title i , or as a telecommunications service , over which it would have extensive authority to regulate under title ii .

there was also an intermediate option .

the fcc contemplated classifying the transmission component of a broadband internet service as a telecommunications service , while classifying the processing component as an information service .

the fcc ultimately chose to classify broadband internet services as information services only .

at the time ( 2002 ) , the provision of broadband internet services arguably was still a nascent industry , and the fcc expressed a desire to avoid introducing into the developing market what it thought at the time could be too many regulations .

however , this was a contentious question .

the supreme court , in ncta v. brand x , made the final decision .

the question before the court was whether the fcc could define cable - modem services ( i.e. , cable broadband services ) as information services .

opponents of that classification argued that the fcc did not have discretion to define cable modem services as an information service .

the court , however , sided with the fcc .

what is important for the purposes of this discussion is that the court did not say that cable modem services are clearly and unambiguously information services .

instead , the court said that the definitions of telecommunications services and of information services were ambiguous as they related to cable modem services , and that the fcc , as the agency with jurisdiction under the communications act , had the authority to interpret those definitions .

the court gave deference to the fcc's determination that cable modem services should be defined as information services and determined that the fcc's classification of cable modem services in this way was reasonable .

however , three justices dissented .

justice scalia authored the dissent , concluding that cable modem services were actually two separate services: the computing service which was an information service , and the transmission service , which was a telecommunications service .

the classification that these justices believe the communications act clearly mandates is the classification that the fcc now proposes to apply to broadband internet services .

chairman genachowski has announced his intention to pursue what he has termed "light touch" title ii regulation of broadband services .

as explained in the statement of the fcc's general counsel , it is the intention of the fcc to commence a rulemaking to reclassify only the transmission component of broadband access services ( "internet connectivity" ) as a telecommunications service , while the data processing portion of the service would remain an information service .

the chairman argues that , in choosing only to reclassify the transmission component of broadband access services , the reach of the fcc's jurisdiction will be sufficiently narrowed so as to avoid giving the agency the authority to regulate internet content .

this plan would also avoid the imposition of regulation so pervasive as to become burdensome .

in keeping with this announcement , on june 17 , 2010 , the fcc released a notice of inquiry ( noi ) into the framework of broadband internet services .

in the noi , the agency asked for comment on a number of questions .

the fcc made clear that its ultimate goal in issuing the noi was to determine the best avenue for restoring the agency's previous understanding of its authority to regulate broadband internet services .

in other words , the fcc is seeking firmer ground for its authority to continue rulemakings along the lines of the broadband network management rulemakings and the order it issued in 2007 finding comcast to be in violation of the fcc's network management policies .

in doing so , the fcc recognizes that the d.c .

circuit's decision in comcast v. fcc has thrown the agency's assertions of ancillary authority over broadband network management into considerable doubt .

the noi lists three main potential paths forward and seeks comment on the feasibility of each .

the first question the noi asks is whether the fcc may find a better way to assert ancillary authority over broadband internet services .

the d.c .

circuit did not foreclose on the possibility of the fcc asserting ancillary authority in other ways .

it merely rejected the fcc's argument in that particular case .

therefore , the fcc asks whether broadband internet services may continue to be classified as information services while the agency asserts a different statutory basis for exercising ancillary jurisdiction .

there are a number of potential theories for ancillary jurisdiction for which the fcc seeks comment .

the other two potential paths towards firmer authority to regulate would involve direct regulation under title ii of the communications act .

therefore , it would be necessary to reclassify at least the internet connectivity portion of broadband internet services as a telecommunications service , because only telecommunications services are governed by title ii .

the fcc asks for comment on how to define internet connectivity for reclassification .

assuming the fcc chooses one of these two paths , this reclassification would likely be reviewed by the courts , in light of the fact that the supreme court upheld the agency's previous classification of broadband internet services as a unified information service .

however , as discussed earlier , brand x gave deference to the fcc's interpretation of the communications act in this area .

furthermore , in the recent case fcc v. fox television , the supreme court held that when an agency issues a new ( and different from its previous ) interpretation of a statute it has the authority to implement , the agency "need not demonstrate to a court's satisfaction that the reasons for the new policy are better than the reasons for the old one. .

the agency must show only that its current interpretation is reasonable , though in some circumstances a more detailed justification for the change must be made than would otherwise be necessary if the agency was rulemaking on a blank slate .

assuming that such a reclassification is upheld by the courts , the second potential path forward would be to apply the full force of title ii regulation to broadband internet connectivity ( as the fcc would define it ) .

the fcc seeks comment on the potential effects of such a decision .

however , the chairman and general counsel have expressed that this is not the approach the agency is likely to take .

rather , they have announced that their intention is to forbear from applying the portions of title ii to broadband access services that the fcc deems contrary to the public interest .

section 401 of the telecommunications act of 1996 requires the fcc to forbear from applying any regulation or provision under title ii to a provider of telecommunications services if the commission determines that:  ( 1 ) enforcement of such regulation or provision is not necessary to ensure that the charges , practices , classifications , or regulations by , for , or in connection with that telecommunications carrier or telecommunications service are just and reasonable and are not unjustly or unreasonably discriminatory ;   ( 2 ) enforcement of such regulation or provision is not necessary for the protection of consumers ; and  ( 3 ) forbearance from applying such provision or regulation is consistent with the public interest .

the chairman and general counsel argued , in their statements , that this provision would require forbearance from many of title ii's more onerous provisions , such as the rate regulation and tariff provisions , because applying those provisions would not be consistent with the public interest .

the noi asks for comment on this potential action .

it further asks for comment on the provisions on title ii from which the agency should not forbear .

in particular , the noi asks for comment on applying the provisions of title ii that the fcc had identified as likely to be needed to have adequate enforcement authority in its earlier press releases on this issue .

these provisions are sections 201 ( requiring service upon request and reasonable rates ) , 202 ( prohibiting unreasonable discrimination ) , 208 ( granting the fcc authority to act upon complaints ) , 222 ( protecting privacy ) , 254 ( universal service ) , and 255 ( access for disabled persons ) .

in the fcc's announcements , the general counsel identified these provisions as potentially sufficient to "do the job" of providing enough authority to accomplish the fcc's goals .

however , the noi asks for comment on other provisions that may be necessary to assert jurisdiction .

the noi also asks for comment on a number of other issues , including the method of forbearing .

currently , companies seeking forbearance from a provision of title ii ( which had heretofore presumably applied to such companies ) apply to the fcc seeking such forbearance .

under the fcc's proposal , the fcc would forbear under its own motion to maintain what is currently the status quo .

the fcc seeks comment on the process the agency should adopt for accomplishing this plan .

the agency also seeks comment on how to treat wireless broadband services ( terrestrial and satellite ) .

the agency notes that "there are technological , structural , consumer usage , and historical differences between mobile wireless and wireline / cable networks" that may require different statutory and regulatory treatment .

furthermore , the agency seeks comment on other open questions , such as the implications changes may have for state and local regulators , and the effect any action taken to reclassify might have on the communications assistance for law enforcement act .

comments are due july 15 , 2010 , and reply comments are due by august 12 , 2010 .

any decisions that the fcc may make as a result of this proceeding will likely face legal challenge .

policy issues discussed in the previous sections — universal service reform , intercarrier compensation , mandating of gateway set - top devices , spectrum policy for wireless broadband , and national purposes — all seek to address the nbp's availability and adoption goals , each in their own way .

at the same time , the debate over the fcc's authority to regulate broadband services will likely impact the fcc's ability to achieve many of the goals of the nbp .

the cumulative effect of these and other discrete policies and initiatives proposed by and related to the nbp can be viewed as pieces of an overall strategy towards achieving nbp goals .

the release of the nbp is seen by many as a precursor towards the development of a national broadband policy — whether comprehensive or piecemeal — that will likely be shaped and developed by congress , the fcc , and the administration .

viewed holistically , several themes emerge from the nbp , with each theme having implications for policymakers with respect to a national broadband policy as it goes forward: government - private sector balance — the nbp acknowledges that the growth of broadband in the u.s. has been "fueled primarily by private sector investment and innovation," and that "the role of government is and should remain limited. .

however , given the identified gaps in broadband availability and adoption , the nbp envisions an active role for government , saying that "we must strike the right balance between the public and private sectors," and that "done right , government policy can drive and has driven progress. .

specifically , the nbp states that "instead of choosing a specific path for broadband in america , this plan describes actions government should take to encourage more private innovation and investment. .

the challenge for broadband policymakers will be to assess whether an appropriate balance is maintained between the public and private sectors , and the extent to which government intervention in the broadband marketplace will help or hinder private sector investment and competition .

interconnectedness — the nbp views broadband as an "ecosystem" and suggests that many of the diverse topics and issues covered in the nbp , though seemingly distinct and separate , are in fact interconnected .

for example , the nbp contains recommendations intended to allay consumers' concerns over internet privacy , which in turn could lead to higher adoption rates and greater broadband and internet utilization , which in turn could help provide more market incentive for private sector providers to deploy broadband infrastructure .

the nbp identifies applications , devices , and networks as the key forces shaping the broadband ecosystem , and states that these three forces "drive each other in a virtuous cycle. .

the nbp's focus on the quality of interconnectedness — and the central metaphor of broadband as an ecosystem — implies that policymakers should consider the various issues not in a vacuum , but as part of an integrated whole .

national purposes — as directed by the arra , the nbp emphasizes that broadband infrastructure and services should be utilized to advance important national purposes including health care , education , energy and the environment , economic opportunity , government performance , civic engagement , and public safety .

broadband availability and adoption could both drive and be driven by the growth of these national purpose applications .

recommendations addressing national purpose applications impact different sectors of society ( eg , health care , education , energy ) , and in turn call for action by different agencies of the federal government ( eg , department of health and human services , department of education , department of energy ) .

a challenge for policymakers will be to ensure adequate coordination among the disparate agencies and entities implementing various broadband - related policies .

to achieve the goals it has set for the year 2020 , the nbp has called for moving forward on a number of specific initiatives , many of which address some of the ongoing major telecommunications policy issues likely to be debated and considered by congress , the administration , and the fcc .

a major issue for congress will be how to shape the plan's various initiatives when and if they go forward , either through oversight , through consideration of specific legislation , or in the context of comprehensive telecommunications reform .

while most agree with the general goals of the nbp — for example , that robust and affordable broadband should be available and utilized throughout the united states — disagreement persists on the best ways to reach those goals .

a key challenge for congressional policymakers will be to assess whether an appropriate balance is maintained between the public and private sectors , and the extent to which government intervention in the broadband marketplace would help or hinder private sector investment and competition .

