the united states supreme court in city of ontario v. quon overturned a federal appellate court decision which had held that officials in the city of ontario , california engaged in an unconstitutional search and seizure when they acquired and read the contents of messages sent to and from a city police officer's city - provided pager .

"though the case touches issues of far - reaching significance , the court conclude[d] it can be resolved by settled principles determining when a search is reasonable. .

the city of ontario assigned sergeant jeff quon and several other swat team members two - way text messaging pagers in 2001 .

the city's contract with the service provider , arch wireless operating co. , inc. , set a limit of 25,000 characters for each pager .

arch wireless assessed addition charges for use beyond the 25,000 character limit .

although it had no written policy on use of the pagers as such , the city did have a written policy concerning computer , internet and e - mail practices .

under the policy the use of city equipment was limited to official business ; it also informed employees that use would be monitored and that "users should have no expectation of privacy or confidentiality when using these resources. .

officers were told that the e - mail policy applied to use of the pagers .

when the city began to incur charges because the 25,000 character limit on pager use had been exceeded , its initial reaction was to assume the excess was attributable to personal use .

rather than try and sort out official from unofficial use , the lieutenant with administrative responsibility over pager use told individual officers that they would have to pay for the excess charges assessed against their pagers .

on several occasions , sergeant quon was told he had exceeded his monthly limit , and he paid the charges for the excess use .

thereafter , the chief of police became concerned and asked arch wireless to supply the city with transcripts of the messages sent from , and received by , pagers that had exceeded the monthly 25,000 character limit .

after examining the contents of the messages sent to and from sergeant quon's pager , the city determined that some were highly personal messages between sergeant quon and either his wife ( who was also a police officer ) or his girl friend ( who was a police dispatcher ) .

sergeant quon , jerilyn quon ( his wife ) , april florio ( his girl friend ) , and steve trujillo ( his fellow swat team officer ) sued arch wireless , the city , and the chief of policy , alleging , among other things , violations of the federal stored communications act ( sca ) and of the fourth amendment .

under the fourth amendment , "the right of the people to be secure in their persons , houses , papers , and effects , against unreasonable searches and seizures , shall not be violated , and no warrants shall issue , but upon probable cause , supported by oath or affirmation , and particularly describing the place to be searched , and the persons or things to be seized. .

the district court's analysis of quon's fourth amendment challenge began with the supreme court's decision in o'connor v. ortega .

there , the justices of the supreme court had all agreed that dr. ortega , a physician in a public hospital , had a reasonable expectation of privacy of his office , and that the fourth amendment applied notwithstanding his government employment .

there the consensus ended .

a majority of the court felt the lower court had used the wrong standard to assess whether hospital officials had unreasonably searched dr. ortega's office , but they did not agree among themselves on what that the standard should be .

articulating the standard subsequently followed in the lower federal courts and joined by three other members of the court , justice o'connor observed that in "the case of searches conducted by a public employer," the test must begin with a "balanc[ing of] the invasion of the employees' legitimate expectations of privacy against the government's need for supervision , control , and the efficient operation of the workplace. .

in that context , the otherwise applicable warrant requirement might be dispensed with , since "requiring an employer to obtain a warrant whenever the employer wished to enter an employee's office , desk , or file cabinets for a work - related purpose would seriously disrupt the routine conduct of business and would be unduly burdensome. .

as for the ordinarily applicable probable cause requirement , the 'special needs , beyond the normal need for law enforcement make the .

 .

 .

probable cause requirement impracticable' .

 .

 .

[p]ublic intrusions on the constitutionally protected privacy interests of government employees for noninvestigatory , work - related purposes , as well as for investigations of work - related misconduct , should be judged by the standards of reasonableness under all the circumstances .

under this reasonableness standard , both the inception and the scope of the intrusion must be reasonable. .

the four dissenting justices agreed dr. ortega had a reasonable expectation of privacy in his office , desk , and files , but they saw no "special need" sufficient to dispense with the ordinary warrant and probable cause requirements .

the ninth justice , justice scalia , felt that government employment gave rise to a special needs analysis .

he disagreed with the standard announced in the justice o'connor's plurality opinion , but agreed that the case should be returned to the lower courts for a special needs assessment of fourth amendment reasonableness .

subsequent lower federal appellate courts adopted the standard of the o 'connor plurality in public employee cases , see e.g . , the supreme court has held that the fourth amendment applies to "searches and seizures by government employers or supervisors of the private property of their employees. .

o'connor v. ortega , 480 u.s. 709 ( 1987 ) .

with respect to the scope of fourth amendment rights in the workplace , however , the court added that "[t]he operational realities of the workplace ... may make some employees' expectations of privacy unreasonable. .

id .

at 717 .

practices and procedures of a particular office or legitimate regulations may reduce the expectation of privacy that government employees enjoy in their workplace .

id .

the circumstances of a particular case matter a great deal , and each fourth amendment claim in this context has to be examined on its own .

"given the great variety of work environments in the public sector , the question whether an employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy must be addressed on a case - by - case basis. .

id .

at 718 .

once an employee demonstrates a reasonable expectation of privacy , he must then demonstrate that the search was unreasonable .

"[p]ublic employer intrusions on the constitutionally protected privacy interests of government employees for non - investigatory , work - related purposes , as well as for investigations of work - related misconduct , should be judged by the standard of reasonableness under all the circumstances. .

this standard has two requirements: first , the search must have been "justified at its inception," and second , it must have been "reasonably related in scope to the circumstances which justified the interference in the first place. .

id .

at 726 .

in a number of special needs cases decided after o 'connor , however , the supreme court made it clear that a search need not be the least intrusive possible in order to considered reasonable in scope .

the police officers sued alleging violations of the stored communications act as well as violations of the fourth amendment .

the district court found no violation of the stored communications act .

as for quon's fourth amendment allegations , it held that while the officers had a reasonable expectation of privacy in their text messages , the city's intrusion was reasonable in its inception and scope .

finally , the court concluded that had there been a fourth amendment violation , the chief of police would not have been entitled to qualified immunity .

the court of appeals found little in the district court opinion with which it could agree .

the officers did have a reasonable expectation of privacy , but the search had been unreasonable both with respect to sergeant quon and to those who participated in his pager conversations .

the chief of police , however , was entitled to qualified immunity .

moreover , the stored communications act had been violated .

the stored communications act ( sca ) permits providers of remote computing service to disclose the content of stored communications to subscribers , eg , the city , without the consent of the participants in the communication .

those who provide electronic communications services , in contrast , enjoy no such prerogative .

since arch wireless provided electronic communications services under its pager contract , when it "knowingly turned over the text - messaging transcripts to the city , which was a 'subscriber,' not an addressee or intended recipient of such communication , it violated the sca. .

the court felt the officers might have a reasonable expectation of privacy in their pager messages in the same way they might have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the content of their mail or e - mail .

the lieutenant in charge of use of the pagers asserted that he would not audit pager use and separate personal from official use , as long as officers paid for exceeding their character limit .

thus , on a number of occasions when sergeant quon had exceeded his limit , he paid for the overuse , and his account had gone unaudited .

"under these circumstances," the court declared , "quon had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the text messages archived on arch wireless's server. .

that expectation might still have been required to yield in the face of a city purpose reasonable in its inception and scope , but the court decided that was not the case .

the ortega plurality opinion had said a search was reasonable in scope when its methods were "reasonably related to the objectives of the search and not excessively intrusive in light of" the purpose for the search .

the quon purpose – ensuring that officers would not have to pay for work - related expenses – was reasonable .

the court concluded that in view of its purpose , the scope of the search – reading all of the text messages to see if any were private – was excessively intrusive , and hence unreasonable when there were less intrusive means at hand .

the quon court's decision was both criticized and defended in conjunction with the ninth circuit's decision not to reconsider the decision en banc .

judge ikuta and several of his colleagues argued that the panel decision erred both in its determination that the officers had a justifiable expectation of privacy in their text messages and that the scope of the department's search was unreasonable .

from their perspective , the officers could have no such expectation of privacy in messages transmitted on city - owned equipment whose use they had been told was for official business only , and whose use could , and likely would , be monitored and reviewed .

they also called the panel to task for the line it drew between "excessively intrusive searches" ( which are unreasonable ) and "least intrusive means" of conducting a search ( which reasonableness does not require ) .

they point out that the "supreme court has repeatedly rejected a 'least intrusive means' analysis for purposes of determining the reasonableness of a search in a 'special needs' context. .

the author of the panel decision responded that the officers had a reasonable expectation of privacy based on the "policy – formal or informal – that [the department] established and enforced. .

he further asserted that the panel had not endorsed a "least intrusive means" requirement , but had instead "mentioned other ways the opd could have verified the efficacy of the 25,000-character limit merely to illustrate .

 .

 .

that the search was 'excessively intrusive' under [ o 'connor ] , when measured against the purpose of the search .

 .

 .

. .

the debate in the ninth circuit appears to have been limited to the application of o 'connor .

the panel found that the stored communications act outlawed handing over the transcripts of the officer's pager messages to the city .

the judges who dissented from the denial of rehearing raised no objection to that finding .

neither side apparently paused to consider whether the protection of the stored communications act enhanced the sergeant quon's reasonable expectation of privacy .

nor did either side comment upon the panel's fleeting and somewhat cryptic resolution of the fourth amendment claims of the others who participated in sergeant quon's pager conversations .

rather than continue with an o 'connor official work - place analysis , the panel used the standards employed to assess the fourth amendment implications of searches and seizures in an electronic context: we see no meaningful difference between the e - mails at issue in forrester and the text messages at issue here .

both are sent from user to user via a service provider that stores the messages on its servers .

similarly , as in forrester , we also see no meaningful distinction between text messages and letters .

as with letters and e - mails , it is not reasonable to expect privacy in the information used to 'address' a text message , such as the dialing of a phone number to send a message .

however , users do have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the content of their text messages vis - a - vis the service provider .

[because jeff quon's reasonable expectation of privacy hinges on the opd's informal policy regarding his use of the odp - issued pagers , see infra pages 909-10 , this conclusion affects only the rights of trujillo , florio , and jerilyn quon] .

 .

 .

 .

had jeff quon voluntarily permitted the department to review his text messages , the remaining appellants would have no claims .

nevertheless , the opd surreptitiously reviewed messages that all parties reasonably believed were free from third - party review .

as a matter of law , trujillo , florio , and jerilyn quon had a reasonable expectation that the department would not review their messages absent consent form either a sender or recipient of the text messages .

quon v. arch w i reless operating co. , inc . , 529 f.3d at 905-906 ( footnote 6 of the court's opinion in brackets ) .

the supreme court agreed unanimously that the city search was reasonable and that the contrary ninth circuit determination should be overturned .

the court began its analysis by assuming , without deciding , that "[f]irst , quon had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the text messages sent on the pager provided to him by the city ; second , petitioners' review of the transcript constituted a search within the meaning of the fourth amendment ; and third , the principles applicable to a government employer's search of an employee's physical office apply with at least the same force when the employer intrudes on the employee's privacy in the electronic sphere. .

because the city had a legitimate work - related reason to conduct its search , the court concluded that it was reasonable under either the o'connor standard – that of justice scalia ( a search that would be considered reasonable in a private - employer context ) or that of the o'connor plurality ( a work - related purpose for a search not excessive in scope ) .

the court felt no obligation to address any separate claims the officers who had communicated with sergeant quon might have , because they had rested their claims on the reasonableness of the search of his communications .

the court left for another day two thorny issues it might have reached .

the first involves the standard used to decide the extent to which public employees and those who communicate with them enjoy fourth amendment protection in the public work place – i.e. , endorsement of the o'connor plurality test , the scalia test , or a third test for when government employees have a fourth amendment reasonable expectation of work place privacy .

the expectation of privacy test of the o 'connor plurality , previously used by the lower federal courts , is difficult to apply .

although the court declined to endorse it , it did not replace it .

the second issue involves when a communication – wire , oral , or electronic – should be understood to have been searched or seized for fourth amendment purposes , and how fourth amendment principles applicable to tangible property should be applied to such communications .

