for over 20 years , u.s. trade negotiations have followed two tracks: multilateral talks such as the doha development round of the world trade organization ( wto ) and bilateral and regional arrangements with other countries , known as free trade agreements ( ftas ) .

to date , the united states has entered into a dozen ftas with various trading partners including israel , canada , singapore , chile , and australia .

fta agreements with colombia , panama , and south korea are pending before congress now .

this report evaluates the implications of the potential u.s. agreement with south korea for american manufacturers and compares it with a similar pending free trade agreement between south korea and the european union ( eu ) .

south korea has already enacted ftas with countries such as chile , singapore , and india , and also is currently negotiating ftas with other trading partners , including australia , canada , japan , and mexico .

the implications of these arrangements for the united states are not discussed in this report .

a major outstanding issue in the commercial relationship between the united states and south korea is the three - year old pending fta , commonly referred to as the korus fta .

it was signed by the bush administration in 2007 , but has yet to be submitted to congress for approval .

if accepted , it would be the second - largest free trade arrangement approved by the united states next to the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , which entered into force in 1994 .

on december 3 , 2010 , president obama announced that cabinet - level negotiations and his discussions with south korean president lee myung - bak produced modifications in the korus fta that he believes addresses his concerns and those of congress .

in a nutshell , the pending korus fta would eliminate tariff and non - tariff barriers for u.s. and south korean manufacturers in a range of industrial sectors , including automobiles , consumer and industrial products , textiles and apparel , and pharmaceuticals and medical devices .

the main section of this report compares the manufacturing components of the two agreements .

in particular , it reviews automotive trade , the most politically and economically sensitive manufacturing sector in both agreements .

also included is a brief overview of the possible implications of the two pending ftas on other selected industrial sectors affected by the ftas: home appliances , consumer electronics , textiles and apparel , and pharmaceuticals and medical devices .

the report begins by providing a legislative outlook and reviews the positions of key stakeholders .

agricultural and services trade are not covered .

the korus fta is a candidate for fast - track legislative consideration ( automatic discharge from committee , no amendments , and limited debate ) under the bipartisan trade promotion authority act of 2002 , because the agreement was entered into before july 1 , 2007 , the date on which the president's authority to enter into qualifying agreements expired .

the implementing bill , which would be submitted to congress by the administration but , given past practice , would be drafted in consultation with congress, would include a provision to approve the fta , as well as provisions "necessary or appropriate" to implement the agreement .

under fast - track procedures , congress votes on the implementing legislation as submitted and can either approve it or reject it as whole .

in areas of concern to some members of congress such as automobiles, however , members might suggest that provisions addressing their concerns be included in the implementing legislation or seek assurances from the executive branch regarding the implementation of the agreement in these areas .

as congress considers what action it might take on the korus fta , the european union and south korea have completed their own negotiations of a comprehensive free trade agreement ( koreu fta ) .

they initialed the agreement on october 15 , 2009 .

signing and ratifying the koreu fta is a complicated process .

the fta must be formally adopted by the eu council of ministers , which represents the national governments and is the european union's main decision - making body .

thereafter , it can be submitted to the european parliament , which represents the citizens of the eu , for a vote .

the koreu fta is the first bilateral trade agreement subject to an up or down vote in the european parliament under the provisions of the lisbon treaty , which became effective in 2009 .

if approved , it means the fta is provisionally ratified in the european union and can enter into force .

provisional application is a common practice in the european union ( eu trade agreements with mexico ( 2000 ) and chile ( 2003 ) were also subject to provisional application ) .

full ratification of the koreu fta requires approval by all 27 member states .

in south korea , the process is easier since only the approval of the national assembly is required for ratification .

in many ways , the koreu fta is a similar agreement to the pending korus fta .

it is expected to facilitate manufacturing trade between the european union and south korea by eventually removing most customs duties and addressing regulatory obstacles across various sectors , including autos , consumer electronics , and pharmaceuticals .

the possible competitive impact on u.s. manufacturers of a koreu fta will likely be debated by congress when it considers whether or not to ratify the korus fta , which could be in 2011 .

likewise , the competitive implications of a korus fta for european manufacturers , particularly for european automakers , will be considered as the european parliament debates whether to approve the koreu fta .

it remains to be seen if the korus fta or koreu fta will be ratified first , or if either agreement will be approved .

some observers speculate that the auto sections of the ftas may require some form of side agreement or other arrangement , which have yet to be worked out , before either agreement can be passed by the u.s. congress or the european parliament .

a large number of u.s. and eu industry observers expect gains for their respective industrial sectors upon the implementation of the korus fta and the koreu fta .

various economic impact studies are used to support their positive assessments .

one u.s. business advocacy group , the u.s. - korea fta business coalition , which represents a broad - based group of u.s. companies , concludes the korus fta "will give u.s. exporters and investors a competitive edge. .

similarly , u.s. business groups such as the business roundtable and the national association of manufacturers ( nam ) are also supportive of the korus fta .

a cross - section of u.s. manufacturing sectors , including information technology , aircraft equipment , medical devices , and pharmaceuticals , stand to gain from the korus fta based on assessments by the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) and the u.s. department of commerce .

the itc , which generates official estimates of the likely impacts of proposed trade agreements , estimates that the reduction of tariff and non - tariff barriers to u.s. manufactured and agricultural goods under the korus fta would increase u.s. goods exports to korea by $10 billion to $11 billion and boost u.s. gross domestic product ( gdp ) by nearly $12 billion .

the administration estimates that full implementation of the korus fta could add up to 70,000 jobs in the united states .

europe's business federation , business europe , has a positive assessment of the pending koreu fta stating "the eu - korea fta will bring significant benefits to european firms. .

one study estimates the koreu fta would create up to $24.2 billion ( €19 billion ) in new trade in goods and services for eu exporters .

almost all eu and member states business confederations and sectoral groups support the agreement .

nevertheless , the business communities in the united states and the european union are not uniformly in favor of their respective pending bilateral agreements with south korea .

most prominently , until the december 2010 supplemental agreement between the u.s. and south korea , trade in automobiles remained a lingering issue .

a key stumbling block to approval of the korus fta had been complaints by ford , chrysler , and the united auto workers ( uaw ) that it did not do nearly enough to open the south korean market to u.s. auto sales .

ford changed its position on the korus fta in december 2010 and issued a statement in support of the revised agreement based on the strengthened automotive provisions .

gm issued a positive statement on the korus fta in december 2010 .

the uaw is also supportive of the revised agreement .

views also diverge among european carmakers .

some european car producers are relatively neutral on the koreu fta , particularly those that export larger european luxury cars and have created a strong market niche for their automobiles in south korea ( see appendix a ) .

european automakers of smaller and middle - sized cars , such as fiat , are most often in direct competition with south korean manufacturers like hyundai and kia .

thus , they continue to push for what they deem a balanced and symmetric liberalization of the two auto markets .

beyond a possible competitive threat , some european automakers claim their access to the south korean market might remain hampered by non - tariff barriers .

ivan hodac , secretary general of the european automobile manufacturers' association ( acea ) , claims 30,000 manufacturing jobs could be lost and 10 plants closed across europe if the koreu fta is implemented .

the steel sectors in the united states and the european union are also notable dissenters .

u.s. - based steel manufacturers argue the korus fta would weaken u.s. trade remedy laws ( i.e. , antidumping and countervailing duty ) .

eurofer , the european union's steel industry representative , has raised concerns about the koreu fta stating , "the result is sectoral winners and losers with potential negative effects for steelmaking in europe. .

initially u.s. and eu labor groups were largely opposed to their respective pending ftas with south korea .

they viewed the ftas as bad deals for their workers , possibly threatening u.s. and eu manufacturing jobs because of the asymmetrical commercial relationship , among other reasons .

unlike the positive data presented by the u.s. government and most business groups , research by the labor - oriented economic policy institute claims the u.s. trade deficit with south korea would increase by about $16.7 billion and cost 159,000 american jobs within seven years after the korus fta takes effect .

however , with the modifications announced in december 2010 the uaw issued a statement in support of the korus fta .

the uaw stated that "the changes announced to the u.s. - korea free trade agreement ( fta ) today are a dramatic step toward changing from a one - way street to a two - way street for trade between the u.s. and south korea. .

other labor groups like the united steelworkers and the international association of machinists and aerospace workers ( iam ) remain opposed .

the american federation of labor and congress of industrial organizations ( afl - cio ) also remains opposed to the agreement with south korea , citing major concerns over provisions that the union believes would encourage the offshoring of u.s. jobs .

in europe , the european metalworkers' federation ( emf ) has expressed similar apprehension explaining the pending koreu fta would further worsen the already difficult situation of the european car sector and could result in significant job losses .

they see the pending koreu fta as unbalanced , which could give south korean automakers a competitive advantage .

european trade unions representing textiles , clothing , and leather workers are also on record against the koreu fta .

motor vehicles are the most controversial manufacturing issue in both agreements because of the industry's importance as a domestic employer and source of innovation , as well as an export sector for all three trading partners .

a perceived imbalance in motor vehicle imports and exports has also raised the motor vehicle profile within the ftas .

in 2009 , the united states , germany , and south korea ranked as the third , fourth , and fifth leading motor vehicle producers , respectively , worldwide ( behind japan and china ) .

passenger car production by south korea's four domestic car manufacturers — hyundai - kia motor group , gm - daewoo , ssangyong motor , and renault samsung — was 3.2 million in 2009 .

the korea automobile manufacturers association ( kama ) forecasts passenger car production to increase to 3.3 million in 2010 , which could allow south korean carmakers to boost their domestic car sales and their motor vehicle exports to both the united states and european union as well as to other markets .

an advantage for south korean carmakers is they export two - thirds of their domestically built cars to the much larger u.s. and eu markets , which are more than 10 times larger than the south korean market .

u.s. light vehicle sales totaled 10.4 million units and new passenger car registration in the european union added up to 14.5 million units in 2009 .

this compares with the south korean auto market where u.s. and eu carmakers vie to sell their domestically built cars in a considerably smaller market of 1.2 million passenger cars in 2009 .

beyond automobiles , other manufacturing sectors could also be impacted if the korus and koreu ftas are implemented .

for u.s. manufacturers , south korea is an important market .

in 2009 , south korea ranked as the 10 th - largest market for u.s. manufactured goods by country .

both u.s. and eu manufacturers must pay tariffs of 5% or greater on almost 80% of all industrial products when exporting to south korea , with most of the tariffs ranging from 5% to 15% ( see table 4 ) .

the elimination of south korean tariffs on manufacturing products under the korus and koreu ftas should provide greater price competitiveness for u.s. and eu exporters of manufactured goods across a range of industries .

south korean manufacturers could benefit as the united states and the european union reduce or eliminate their industrial tariffs .

the two ftas also address non - tariff barriers , which remain challenging across various manufacturing sectors .

this section of the report provides a brief overview of the proposed tariff reductions .

it also examines how non - tariff barriers would be addressed in selected manufacturing sectors , namely household appliances , consumer electronics , textiles and apparel , and pharmaceuticals and medical devices .

the home appliance , or white goods , sector is a concentrated globalized industry mainly comprised of major u.s. , european , and south korean manufacturers .

u.s. - headquartered whirlpool and ge consumer and industrial compete against appliance manufacturers located in europe ( eg , electrolux , bosch and siemens hausgeräte ) and south korea ( eg , lg electronics and samsung ) .

south korea's export - oriented appliance manufacturers appear to hold a much larger u.s. and eu market share compared with the rather insignificant share for u.s. and eu companies in the south korean market .

some members of congress have expressed concerns about whirlpool's difficulties in selling u.s. - made refrigerators in south korea .

in its 2007 review of the korus fta , the itc noted that exports of u.s. appliances to south korea have been encumbered by an 8% tariff and standards and conformity assessment requirements .

also , in recent years , south korean appliance manufacturers have located production facilities in north america and the european union .

for instance , lg electronics operates plants in mexico to be closer to their u.s. customer base .

samsung is also establishing a manufacturing presence in europe , through the recent acquisition of the home appliance manufacturer , amica , which should help it to sell appliances in the european market , estimated at around $50 billion .

u.s. and european exporters of household appliances should benefit from the pending ftas through the immediate elimination of south korea's 8% tariff on large home appliances ( compared to tariffs which are either zero or well below 4% for most large appliances in the united states or european union ) .

the two pending agreements also focus on non - tariff barriers including standards and conformity assessment procedures , which currently obligate importers to duplicate cumbersome and expensive testing and certification procedures .

also , the technical barriers to trade chapters in the korus and koreu ftas provide for greater cooperation and transparency in the standards setting process .

whether the korus or the koreu ftas will provide greater benefits to u.s. or european appliance makers remains to be seen .

in both markets , the competitive advantage appears to favor south korean manufacturers .

for example , u.s. exports of household appliances to south korea totaled $46.7 million , while appliance imports from south korea were substantially higher at $1.7 billion in 2009 ( south korea was the united states's third - largest source of imports after china and mexico ) .

notwithstanding the competitiveness of south korean appliance makers , higher transportation costs and greater competition from lower - priced chinese appliance manufacturers are among the factors that also act as restraints on export flows from south korea to the u.s. and eu markets .

the u.s. electronics industry is largely supportive of the korus fta , and advocates its implementation through their various industry associations like the information technology industry council .

the european digital technology industry has expressed its reservations about the koreu fta .

its concerns center on the largely closed south korean market for electronics , while highly competitive south korean companies such as samsung and lg stand to improve their access to the european market .

their particular concerns are rules of origin and duty drawback .

despite this , europe's technology industry is not actively lobbying against the koreu fta .

tariff elimination is expected to have minimal impact on exports to south korea since the majority of information technology and electronics products , such as semiconductors , telecommunications equipment , and computer equipment , already receive duty - free access to the south korean market under the wto's information technology agreement ( ita ) .

manufacturers of electronic products not covered by the ita such as digital cameras and color tvs could increase their exports as south korea's 8% tariff on these products will be eliminated immediately upon implementation of the korus and koreu ftas .

the impact on tv manufacturers located in the united states is likely to be non - existent since there is none .

general electric stopped manufacturing televisions in the united states in 1984 ; zenith ended its u.s. production in 1992 ; and , more recently , sony shuttered its last u.s. tv manufacturing facility located in pennsylvania .

south korean consumer electronics makers stand to gain from the immediate elimination of the small number of existing eu and u.s. tariffs on consumer electronics , with a small number of exceptions for products such as microwave ovens in the case of the european union .

included in the koreu fta is a special annex on non - tariff barriers related to consumer electronics .

one provision allows most eu manufactures to sell their products in south korea based on a manufacturers' declaration of conformity with the relevant standards in south korea ( i.e. , the firm selling a product would be responsible for certifying the product meets south korean standards ) .

that process would not require them to undergo duplicative and expensive testing and certification procedures .

this should make it easier and less cumbersome for eu manufacturers to export consumer electronics to south korea , effectively reducing their costs and cutting back on bureaucratic hurdles .

a three - year transition period will apply to some products during which time third party certification will still be required .

some exceptions continue under the koreu fta for a limited number of products involving electrical safety because of the potential risks for human health and safety .

for these products — numbering just over 50 including switches , power transformers , vacuum cleaners , and dishwashers — third party certification may still be required ( covering about 15% of eu exports ) .

separate provisions on standards , testing , and certification for consumer electronics exports from the united states to south korea is not a part of the korus fta .

textiles and apparel is another example of a sensitive manufacturing sector in the trade relationship among all three markets .

the international trade commission points out that experts in the south korean textile and apparel industry agree that it would benefit substantially under the fta and that some u.s. domestic production will likely be displaced .

tariffs are in place in the united states and the european union to protect their respective textile and apparel manufacturers .

the average u.s .

most favored nation ( mfn ) tariff on textiles is 8% and the european union also maintains an mfn applied duty of 6.6% on textiles .

the south korean average applied mfn tariff on textiles is higher than the average u.s. and eu tariffs at 9.1% .

apparel tariffs in the three markets range from 11.5% to 12.6% .

implementation of the two ftas would result in the abolition of most tariffs on textiles and apparel , the overwhelming majority of which will be implemented immediately upon enforcement .

this should provide u.s. , eu , and south korean textile and apparel manufacturers greater access to each others markets , with south korean textile manufacturers likely to increase their exports to the united states and european union markets .

textile and apparel trade is governed by complex rules of origin .

the korus fta adopts the "yarn forward" rule , which means generally apparel using yarn and fabric from the united states and south korea qualifies for preferential tariff treatment .

a special textile safeguard is included , which allows the united states to impose tariffs on certain goods should injury occur due to import surges .

the koreu fta will maintain the european union's standard rules of origin on textiles with only a small number of exceptions .

the korus fta provides for the establishment of a committee on textile and apparel matters to respond to concerns , whereas the koreu fta does not include a separate committee or working group on textiles among the six specialized committees and seven working groups that would be established .

as discussed earlier , textile and apparel products manufactured in the kic are significant , but these products are not covered explicitly in the koreu fta due to political sensitivity regarding labor issues .

likewise , the proposed korus fta does not seem to provide for duty - free entry into the united states for products made in the kic , including textiles and apparel .

the u.s. textile and apparel industry appears split on their views of the korus fta according to the industry's submission to the industry trade advisory committee on textiles and clothing ( itac - 13 ) .

some u.s. textile and apparel manufacturers are concerned about increased competition from south korea's large , efficient textile industry , and see little in the way of increased access to the south korean market from what they believe is an extremely one - sided agreement .

several textile and apparel groups , including the national textile association , the national council of textile organizations , and the american fiber manufacturers association maintain the textile chapter in the korus fta will "open up the united states market to a massive one - way flow of south korean textiles , apparel , and home furnishings in the united states. .

they argue the korus fta is deficient in three areas ( tariff phase - out schedules are nonreciprocal and benefit south korean producers ; rules of origin need to be strengthened for certain components ; and customs enforcement must be improved ) .

also they note that u.s. exports to south korea are subject to a 10% valued added tax ( vat ) with no comparable vat on imports to the united states from south korea .

on the other side , the american apparel & footwear association has expressed its general support for the korus fta , with the footwear industry strongly supportive of the korus fta .

europe's textile sector is anxious about the likely repercussions of the koreu fta because of concerns about more jobs losses .

the european trade union federation: textiles , clothing , leather ( etuf: tcl ) is strongly opposed to the koreu fta citing concerns about the duty drawback provision and rules of origin .

euratex , the european apparel and textile confederation , seems to be more supportive of the agreement and views it as a means to further develop trade between the two regions .

euratex signed a cooperation agreement in december 2009 with the korea federation of textile industries which would , among other things , permit a better exchange of information and a closer monitoring and surveillance of the koreu fta , particularly on rules of origin and duty - drawback utilization .

south korea is one of the most significant markets for pharmaceuticals and medical devices in asia .

it relies heavily on imports from the united states and the european union , along with japan , to supply demand .

the south korean pharmaceutical and medical device ( p&m ) sectors are forecast to grow in the years to come as its population ages .

according to one industry report , south korea's pharmaceutical market was valued at around $9 billion in 2008 .

foreign - based pharmaceutical manufacturers account for approximately 30% of the pharmaceutical market in south korea , with industry experts forecasting that this share could rise in coming years .

similarly , future growth for u.s. and eu medical device companies is expected to come from emerging markets like south korea .

data from 2009 show south korea imported $3 billion in pharmaceutical products ; the european union comprised over 50% ( $1.5 billion ) of these sales and the united states constituted 19% ( $586 million ) .

swiss and japanese pharmaceutical manufacturers were also a significant presence , selling $261 million and $220 million in south korea , respectively , in 2009 .

given the popularity of foreign - branded drugs , south korea's pharmaceutical trade deficit grew in the past five years , jumping from $1.3 billion in 2005 to $2.1 billion in 2009 .

south korea's medical equipment and supplies market , which is broader than just medical devices , was worth $2.1 billion in 2009 and is predominantly supplied by imports ( 77% ) , according to one estimate .

a market research study by espicom found that south korea will be one of the fastest growing medical device markets in asia , forecasting a market growth rate of 11.2% between 2009 and 2014 .

u.s. trade groups , like the pharmaceutical research and manufacturers of america ( phrma ) , favor the korus fta because they expect it will facilitate increased trade with the easing of tariff and non - tariff barriers between the united states and south korea .

u.s. industry maintains current south korean government policies appear to largely favor south korean manufacturers ( eg , through pricing and reimbursement policies ) , the regulatory regime often seems non - transparent , and foreign manufacturers complain about unethical business practices .

the eu pharmaceutical industry complains about the same policies .

thus , both agreements include chapters ( or annexes ) on pharmaceuticals and medical devices to remove barriers to trade .

provisions to eliminate tariffs on pharmaceutical products and medical devices are also included , although they are not the major export obstacles for u.s. or eu manufactures .

many of south korea's tariffs on imports of pharmaceutical products of 8% are to be phased out immediately upon implementation of the pending korus and koreu ftas ; others will be eliminated within three years .

tariffs for medical device exports would also be removed – immediately for most products , phased in over three years for others , and over a longer period of time for a few selected products .

for example , south korea's 8% tariff on medical magnetic resonance imaging apparatus and ultrasonic scanning apparatus would be eliminated in five years under the koreu fta and 10 years under the korus fta .

if the european union implements its agreement with south korea before the united states , eu - made medical devices might be more cost competitive than u.s. - made products .

the two pending ftas tackle ntbs , as they are among the most important barriers to trade in pharmaceutical products and medical devices .

in the pending korus fta , among other things , the ntb provisions aim to improve transparency in the reimbursement process ; put less complex regulatory policies in place ; and , ensure adequate enforcement of pharmaceutical patent rights to specifically protect proprietary data that manufacturers must submit for market approval .

additionally , if ratified , the korus fta would establish a medicines and medical devices committee , which would meet at least once a year , to promote cooperation and to monitor the implementation of the agreement .

the koreu fta would also establish a working group on pharmaceutical products and medical devices to help further regulatory cooperation .

appendix a .

best - selling car imports in the south korean market it has been 10 years since any u.s. imported car model ranked among the top 10 imported cars in the south korean market .

only european or japanese cars ranked as the top 10 best - selling imports in 2009 ( see table a - 1 ) .

a decade ago , chrysler's grand caravan and grand cherokee ltd ranked among the top 10 imported models , and in earlier years several ford models were also among the best - selling imported cars in the south korean market .

appendix b .

comparison of automobile tariff reductions appendix c. agreements between south korea and various partner countries beyond their commercial engagement with the united states , the european union and south korea are also exploring free trade agreements with other trading partners .

for example , the european union is in the midst of negotiating a new generation of ftas with several countries including canada , india , and singapore .

vietnam is another possible preferential trade agreement partner for the european union .

also underway are negotiations on a new partnership and cooperation agreement ( pca ) between the european union and china .

as shown in table c - 1 , south korea is also seeking free trade deals with several countries , which include australia , canada , india , japan , and mexico .

the possibility of a free trade arrangement between south korea and china is also under consideration .

south korea already has ftas with chile , singapore , the european free trade association ( efta ) , and the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) .

proliferation of ftas and other preferential arrangements could present challenges for u.s. exporters if they ultimately find themselves disadvantaged in foreign markets .

