titles iii and vi of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act of 2010 , p.l .

111-203 , address certain issues that many members of congress , including the major drafters of the legislation , the house committee on financial services and the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , perceived as impediments to effective regulation of the banking industry and possible contributing factors to certain aspects of the financial crisis of 2008 .

the version of title iii reported by the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , on which the final version is based , sought "to increase the accountability of the banking regulators by establishing clearer lines of responsibility and to reduce the regulatory arbitrage in the financial regulatory system whereby financial companies 'shop' for the most lenient regulators and regulatory framework. .

the final version takes a step in that direction by abolishing one of the regulators , the office of thrift supervision ( ots ) , the agency which had supervisory authority over washington mutual and indy mac bank , the failures of which represented large losses to the deposit insurance fund .

the act distributes the ots functions , regulating savings associations ( thrifts or savings and loans ) and savings and loan holding companies .

under title x of the bill , the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) will assume much of the ots responsibility for overseeing compliance by savings and loan associations with federal consumer protection laws .

title iii allocates prudential supervision among three federal regulators .

the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) will now regulate federally chartered thrifts as well as national banks ; the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) will now regulate state - chartered thrifts as well as state - chartered banks which are not members of the federal reserve system ( frs ) ; and the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( frb ) will now regulate both bank holding companies ( including financial holding companies ) and thrift or savings and loan holding companies , as well as state - chartered banks which are members of the federal reserve system ( frs ) .

other provisions of title iii provide for reallocation of ots personnel and property among those agencies , with various safeguards respecting employee rights and status .

many of the provisions of titles iii and vi appear to be designed to correct perceived inadequacies in terms of the prudential regulation of banks , savings associations , bank holding companies , and savings and loan holding companies or discrepancies between the regulation of banks and savings associations .

for example , there are provisions preventing depository institutions under supervisory or enforcement orders from changing their charters without full consent by the existing chartering authority and a plan for meeting the requirements of the enforcement order .

there are numerous provisions requiring greater coordination among regulators and provisions enhancing the authority of frb to oversee all of the components of holding companies .

there are also provisions providing backup examination and enforcement authority in case the frb's efforts fail to meet the standards imposed under the statute .

there are various provisions designed to minimize regulatory differences applicable to different types of banking institutions and to address what have appeared to be loopholes permitting certain companies to own or control a depository institution without having to submit to consolidated regulation by the frb under the bank holding company act ( bhc act ) .

miscellaneous matters addressed in title iii include changing the basis of deposit insurance assessments imposed on banks ; permanently increasing deposit insurance coverage to $250,000 ; applying that increase retroactively to january 1 , 2008 ; and establishing offices of minority and women inclusion in the department of the treasury and in the federal financial regulatory agencies .

title vi contains a number of provisions designed to tighten regulation of banking activities possibly threatening the safety and soundness of depository institutions and their holding companies .

there are provisions tightening the controls on transactions with affiliates , derivative and swaps operations , and lending limits .

there are also restrictions on banking companies making investments in hedge funds or private equity funds or engaging in proprietary trading , patterned on a proposal by a former frb chairman and current chairman of the president's economic recovery advisory board .

title vi , the bank and savings association holding company and depository institution regulatory improvements act of 2010 , addresses some of the issues that have been viewed as possibly weakening the ability of banking companies to focus on their main business of financial intermediation — accepting retail deposits that earn a modest return at no risk of loss to depositors and transforming them into capital that is available for lending and , thereby , fostering economic growth and activity .

title vi includes a temporary moratorium on fdic approval of deposit insurance for new industrial loan companies and credit card banks ; authority to segregate into intermediate holding companies the commercial activities of unitary thrift holding companies which have been able to combine an insured depository with commercial activities under exceptions to the bhc act ; broader authority for the frb to supervise holding companies ; further lending limits on depository institution loans to insiders ; stricter capital levels for holding companies ; prohibitions on proprietary trading and investment in hedge funds by banking companies ; various requirements for studies ( including a study on subjecting savings association holding companies to the bhc act ) ; and specific provisions aimed at such particular activities or powers of banks and thrifts .

what follows is a brief summary of each of the sections of title vi except for those which are essentially technical in nature .

many of the provisions of titles iii and vi of dodd - frank require implementation by the federal banking agencies involving studies , rulemaking , and other efforts .

that process began shortly after enactment of the legislation , and each of the major federal bank regulatory agencies has provided some information on methodology .

the frb has established a web page tracking how it is proceeding .

information on frb implementation is available on the frb's website , which lists completed initiatives and planned activities , and includes links to proposed implementing regulations and comments which have been supplied to the agency in response to those proposed regulations .

the fdic has a similar web page offering information on dodd - frank implementation .

although occ appears not to have taken a similar method of informing the public on its activities , the agency provided the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs with testimony on its initiatives and plans to implement the legislation .

in january 2011 , the frb , fdic , occ , and ots published a "joint implementation plan: 301-326 of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act. .

