in the wake of the recent financial crisis , many commentators have called for systemic risk or "macroprudential" regulation to help avoid future crises .

the obama administration's financial regulatory reform proposal of 2009 included many of the proposed elements , giving many — but not all — of these responsibilities to the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( fed ) .

using the administration's plan as a starting point , congress enacted the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( h.r .

4173 ) , which was signed into law on july 21 , 2010 , as p.l .

111-203 .

the dodd - frank act was a broad - based reform package that included provisions affecting almost every part of the financial system .

this report discusses only those provisions related to systemic risk or the federal reserve , found mostly in titles i and xi of the act .

this report first discusses systemic risk issues , relating them to events in the recent crisis .

it then identifies the fed's existing powers and responsibilities for systemic risk regulation at the time of the crisis .

finally , it discusses parts of the dodd - frank act involving the fed and systemic risk , including the creation of a financial stability oversight council ; regulation of systemically significant firms ; resolution authority ; modifications to the fed's emergency lending authority and new disclosure requirements ; the consumer financial protection bureau ; the regulation of payment , clearing , and settlement systems and activities ; and limits on proprietary trading .

all financial market participants face risk — without it , financial intermediation would not occur .

some risks , such as the failure of a specific firm or change in a specific interest rate , can be addressed through diversification , insurance , or financial instruments such as derivatives .

one definition of systemic risk is risk that can potentially cause instability for large parts of the financial system .

often , systemic risk will be caused by risks that individual firms cannot protect themselves against ; some economists distinguish these types of risks as a subset of systemic risks called systematic risks .

systemic risk can come from within or outside of the financial system .

an example of systemic risk that came from outside of the financial system were fears ( that largely proved unfounded in hindsight ) that the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the nation's financial center would lead to widespread disruption to financial flows because of the destruction of physical infrastructure and death of highly specialized industry professionals .

systemic risk within the financial system is often characterized as contagion , meaning that problems with certain firms or parts of the system spill over to other firms and parts of the system .

the financial crisis that intensified in september 2008 featured many examples of systemic risk , including runs on financial institutions and illiquidity of asset classes , that will be discussed below .

many of these examples were highly unusual and had not been experienced as acutely by industry participants or financial regulators in the past .

whether firms or regulators were carelessly unprepared for what occurred , or whether these incidents truly could not be reasonably predicted , prevented , or avoided is subject to debate .

some experts , both within the regulatory community and outside of it , have argued that part of the reason regulators failed to prevent the crisis is that regulators were given a mandate to prevent microprudential risk , but no regulator had a mandate to prevent macroprudential risk .

 ( whether this is actually the case will be discussed below. ) .

microprudential regulation focuses on identifying risks to an individual firm and requiring firms to protect against those risks , whereas macroprudential regulation focuses on preventing or safeguarding against systemic risks .

a scenario can be imagined where microprudential regulators focus on the risks of a firm's actions to itself , but overlook risks posed by those same actions to the system as a whole .

proponents argue that financial regulatory reform should feature a new mandate to regulate systemic risk .

at least two arguments have been made against a systemic risk regulator .

one argument holds that regulators already had the authority to respond to the systemic risk episodes that occurred in the crisis .

thus , the failure was not the result of a lack of regulator authority but poor use of existing authority .

conversely , it has been argued that those systemic risk episodes could not have been prevented precisely because they were systemic risk episodes — by their nature , the problems that arose were unlikely to be foreseen or neutralized .

either argument produces the conclusion that even with a systemic risk regulator in place , the crisis would not have been avoided .

from this logic flows the same conclusion: the creation of a systemic risk regulator would be ineffective at best and harmful to necessary risk - taking behavior at worst because a systemic risk regulator , by design , has incentives to be overly cautious .

specific examples in the following section will help elucidate the perceived need for systemic risk regulation , while the subsequent section explains what regulators could and could not do in each area before the dodd - frank act .

policymakers can manage systemic risk only if the sources of systemic risk can be identified and regulated .

a systemic risk regulator's authority to act could be made very broad and open ended to cover all contingencies , or it could be made more narrow to limit discretion and curb "mission creep," increasing the likelihood that once a risk is identified , additional legislative action would be needed to respond to it .

this choice has implications for the balance of power between the legislative and executive branches .

this section reviews sources of systemic risk that arose during the recent crisis , with the caveat that future crises are unlikely to follow a similar path as past crises .

the examples selected below are the types of specific activities that could potentially be regulated for systemic risk .

systemic risk regulation is not a new concept .

on page one of a 2005 federal reserve document entitled federal reserve: purposes and functions , the fed identifies "maintaining the stability of the financial system and containing systemic risk that may arise in financial markets" as one of its four primary duties .

at the time of the crisis , the fed could have used its existing regulatory powers over bank holding companies and certain consumer financial products to limit the likelihood of a systemic risk episode , and it could have used its existing lender - of last - resort powers to ameliorate the fallout following a systemic risk episode .

besides its authority to lend to banks through the discount window , it had authority to provide direct assistance to any firm through its emergency authority , found in section 13 ( 3 ) of the federal reserve act .

this emergency authority was used extensively during the recent crisis to provide assistance to non - bank parts of the financial system .

finally , the fed has an overall statutory mandate to keep inflation stable and unemployment low .

arguably , it would be impossible to meet this existing mandate if the fed ignored systemic risk .

although regulators may have used their powers to attempt to prevent systemic risk before and during the crisis , it may be the case that they did not have all the legal authority needed to respond to the types of systemic issues that emerged .

this may be , in part , because regulation has not kept pace with the changes brought about by financial innovation .

this section looks at the fed's existing powers and gaps in its powers at the time of the crisis in light of the specific systemic issues raised in the previous section .

systemic events have proven to be rare in modern times .

when they occur , they are usually not predicted by many beforehand .

this hampers the evaluation of a systemic risk regulator's performance .

in years with good outcomes , it may be impossible to distinguish whether good outcomes were caused by the systemic risk regulator's vigilance or were simply the result of normal times .

there is also the risk that a systemic risk regulator who is only rewarded for avoiding instability would allow too little risk - taking , and thus stifle financial innovation and efficient intermediation .

because systemic events have proven hard to predict , a systemic risk regulator could plead that its failure to predict the systemic event accorded with conventional wisdom .

assuming that the fed's mandate provides it with systemic risk authority , the law seems not to have offered any clear - cut mechanism to discipline the fed for failure to prevent a systemic event — other than congressional intervention by amending federal law .

under the federal reserve act , fed governors serve 14-year terms and can only be removed for "cause," not for policy disputes .

the federal reserve system is self - financing ; without changing the law , congress cannot adjust its budget to influence its priorities .

adding specific systemic risk authority to the fed's current wide - ranging remit , which some see as enabling the fed to justify any action by pointing to some part of its mission , broadens the fed's already wide - ranging authority and may enhance arguments that the broad mandate hampers effective oversight .

the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( h.r .

4173 ) was signed into law on july 21 , 2010 , as p.l .

111-203 .

the dodd - frank act was a broad - based reform package that included provisions affecting almost every part of the financial system .

while the overall goal of the act was to prevent another systemic risk episode , this section discusses only those provisions of the act related to the types of systemic risk issues discussed in this report or the federal reserve .

the provisions discussed are found mostly in titles i and xi of the act .

new systemic risk responsibilities in the dodd - frank act were mostly divided between the newly created financial stability oversight council and the federal reserve , although resolution authority was largely shared between the treasury secretary and the federal deposit insurance corporation .

modifications to existing regulations generally applied to the existing regulator .

title i , subtitle a of the dodd - frank act creates the financial stability oversight council on the date of enactment .

the council is chaired by the secretary of the treasury , and the voting members consist of the heads of eight federal regulatory agencies ( including the chairman of the fed ) , the treasury secretary , and a member appointed by the president with insurance expertise .

the council is tasked with identifying risks to financial stability and responding to emerging systemic risks , while minimizing moral hazard arising from expectations that firms or their counterparties will be rescued from failure .

the council's duties include collecting information on financial firms from regulators and through the office of financial research , which is created in title 1 , subtitle b to support the council ; monitoring the financial system to identify potential systemic risks ; proposing regulatory changes to congress to promote stability , competitiveness , and efficiency ; facilitating information sharing and coordination among financial regulators ; making regulatory recommendations to financial regulators , including "new or heightened standards and safeguards" ; identifying gaps in regulation that could pose systemic risk ; reviewing and commenting on new or existing accounting standards issued by any standard - setting body ; providing a forum for the resolution of jurisdictional disputes among council members .

the council may not impose any resolution on disagreeing members , however .

the council is required to provide an annual report and testimony to congress .

in contrast to some proposals to create a systemic risk regulator , the dodd - frank act does not give the council authority ( beyond the existing authority of its individual members ) to eliminate emerging threats or close regulatory gaps it identifies .

in many cases , the council can only make regulatory recommendations — it cannot impose change .

the fact that regulators are on the council may make it less likely they would resist its recommendations , however .

in addition to the duties listed above , the council has authority to identify non - bank financial firms that are systemically significant by a "two - thirds vote of the voting members then serving," including the treasury secretary .

a firm would be deemed systemically significant on the basis of a council determination that it could pose a threat to financial stability because of material distress or because of "the nature , scope , size , scale , concentration , interconnectedness , or mix of the activities" of the firm .

foreign financial firms operating in the united states could be identified by the council as systemically significant .

the act exempts firms with consolidated assets under $50 billion , although the council and fed may raise that threshold .

the fed is given examination powers to help the council determine whether a firm is systemically significant .

a firm can contest its designation before the council and , if unsuccessful , through appeal to a federal district court , which may set aside the council's determination only if it finds it to be arbitrary and capricious .

any firm that has over $50 billion in consolidated assets and received assistance under the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) that ceases to be a bank holding company would automatically be considered a systemically significant firm .

under the new law , the council may recommend that the fed impose more stringent prudential safety and soundness standards on these firms than are applicable to other nonbank financial firms and bank holding companies which do not pose a systemic risk .

in recommending these standards , the council may recommend different standards for individual institutions or categories based on the risk they present .

under subtitle c of title i , the fed would regulate for safety and soundness the firms which the council has subjected to fed supervision on the basis of a systemic risk determination and any other bank holding company with total consolidated assets of $50 billion .

at the recommendation of the council or on its own initiative , the fed may set different standards for different systemically significant firms or categories of firms based on various risk - related factors .

the standards include risk - based capital requirements that account for off - balance - sheet activities and 15 to 1 leverage limits ( if appropriate ) , liquidity requirements , risk management requirements , and exposure limits of 25% of a company's capital per counterparty .

other prudential standards may be applied at the fed's discretion .

the firms are required to submit resolution plans ( "living wills" ) and credit exposure reports to the fed .

regulated subsidiaries would continue to be regulated by their primary functional regulator , although the fed may override the functional regulator if the fed believes the firm is not adhering to regulatory standards or poses a threat to financial stability .

the fed must consult with the primary regulator before applying heightened prudential standards to a regulated subsidiary .

the fed must conduct annual stress tests on systemically significant firms and , in consultation with the council and the fdic , issue regulations establishing remediation measures to be imposed at an early stage of a firm's "financial decline" in an effort to prevent insolvency and its potential impact on the financial system .

if the board determines , and at least two - thirds of the council confirms , that a systemically significant firm poses a "grave threat" to financial stability , it may: ( 1 ) limit the ability of the company to merge with , acquire , consolidate with , or otherwise become affiliated with another company ; ( 2 ) restrict the ability of the company to offer a financial product or products ; ( 3 ) require the company to terminate one or more activities ; ( 4 ) impose conditions on the manner in which the company conducts one or more activities ; or ( 5 ) if the board of governors determines that the actions described in paragraphs ( 1 ) through ( 4 ) are inadequate to mitigate a threat to the financial stability of the united states in its recommendation , require the company to sell or otherwise transfer assets or off - balance - sheet items to unaffiliated entities .

in addition , title vi prohibits any insured depository institution , bank holding company , or systemically significant institution from merging with or acquiring assets of another company which causes the total consolidated liabilities of the acquiring company to exceed 10% of the aggregate consolidated liabilities of all financial companies or , in the case of interstate mergers , 10% of the total amount of deposits of insured depository institutions in the united states .

the fed may make exceptions for a bank in default , an acquisition involving assistance provided by the fdic to institutions in danger of default , an acquisition that results in minimal increase in the company's liabilities , or during severe financial conditions .

title ii attempts to address the concern that failures of systemically important financial firms were too destabilizing under prior law by establishing a new system for certain financial companies whose resolution under otherwise available law is determined by various federal regulators to pose dangers to the u.s. financial system .

this resolution system is modeled after the fdic's existing receivership regime for depository institutions .

many types of financial companies and their subsidiaries are eligible for this special resolution regime ; however , subsidiaries that are insurance companies , certain broker - dealers , and insured depositories are not eligible .

in order for an eligible financial company to be resolved under the special regime , a group of regulators , including two - thirds of the federal reserve board , must recommend the company for the resolution based on standards delineated by the dodd - frank act .

after the recommendation , the treasury secretary , in consultation with the president , must make a determination that the "company is in default or in danger of default ; " the company's resolution under otherwise available law would "have serious adverse effects on financial stability of the united states ; " "no viable private sector alternative is available ; " and other considerations .

a company that disputes the determination by the treasury secretary will have limited rights to appeal the determination in federal court .

while the special resolution regime is modeled after the fdic's receivership power , there are some important distinctions between the two .

for instance , the dodd - frank act emphasizes that creditors and shareholders will bear the losses of the financial company ; management responsible for the condition of the financial company will not be retained ; and the [fdic] and other appropriate agencies will take all steps necessary and appropriate to assure that all parties , including management , directors , and third parties , having responsibility for the condition of the financial company bear losses consistent with their responsibility , including actions for damages , restitution , and recoupment of compensation and other gains not compatible with such responsibility .

the act also states that "[a]ll financial companies put into receivership under this title shall be liquidated [and n]o taxpayer funds shall be used to prevent the liquidation of any financial company under this title. .

the funding mechanism for resolutions under the dodd - frank act also differs from the conservatorship / receivership regime for depositories .

the orderly liquidation fund established by the dodd - frank act will not be prefunded .

instead , the fdic , upon being appointed receiver of a particular financial company , is authorized to borrow funds from the treasury subject to explicit caps based on the value of the failed firm's consolidated assets .

if necessary to pay off such obligations to the treasury , the fdic would have the authority to assess claimants of the failed institution that received more through the receivership than they would have received had the failed firm been liquidated in bankruptcy , as well as the power to assess certain large financial institutions ( bank holding companies and nonbank financial companies eligible for the special resolution regime that have more than $50 billion in assets and all nonbank financial institutions supervised by the fed as systemically significant ) .

the dodd - frank act also imposes a three - year time limit on any receivership with the possibility of up to two one - year extensions. .

title vi contains an outright prohibition on proprietary trading by any fdic - insured depository institution , company controlling an insured depository institution , company treated as a bank holding company for purposes of the international banking act of 1978 , and any affiliate or subsidiary of such entity .

such institutions are also barred from owning interests in or sponsoring hedge funds or private equity funds .

there are , however , certain exceptions to the prohibition — some transitional , some involving activities by foreign firms that take place solely outside the united states , and others designated as permitted activities , including purchasing and selling government or gse securities , market making activities , risk mitigating hedging activities , small business investment company investments , insurance company portfolio investments , and other investments identified by regulators .

rather than subjecting non - bank financial companies supervised by the fed to a prohibition on proprietary trading and hedge fund ownership or sponsorship , the legislation authorizes the regulators to issue rules subjecting such companies to additional capital and quantitative limits on such activities unless the activity has been identified under one of the exceptions .

in addition to the duties listed above , the council , by a two - thirds vote including the chairman , is authorized to identify systemically significant systems for payment , clearing , and settlement ( pcs ) of financial transactions ( also called utilities ) and ( pcs ) activities for regulation by the sec or the cftc if registered therewith ; otherwise , by the fed .

title viii identifies activities that could potentially be regulated , including settling and netting of financial transactions ; the provision and maintenance of trade , contract , or instrument information ; risk management activities related to continuing transactions ; transmittal and storage of payment instructions ; and the movement of funds .

the act identifies funds transfers , securities contracts , futures contracts , forward contracts , repurchase agreements , swaps , foreign exchanges contracts , financial derivatives contracts , and any similar transaction identified by the council as financial instruments whose payment , clearing , or settlement could be regulated .

it explicitly excludes designated contract markets , registered futures associations , swap data repositories , certain swap execution facilities , national securities exchanges and associations , alternative trading systems , security - based swap data repositories , broker dealers , investment companies , futures commission merchants , commodity trading advisors , and commodity pool operators from regulation .

the pcs regulator may make information requests , issue rules and take enforcement actions , and examine a designated pcs system or firm performing a pcs activity .

for pcs systems and activities regulated by the sec or cftc , the fed may make enforcement recommendations or take actions in case of "imminent risk or substantial harm. .

once a pcs system is regulated , it may borrow from the fed ; the right to borrow is limited to "unusual or exigent circumstances" and requires a showing that the firm cannot secure credit elsewhere and a majority vote of the fed board taken after consultation with the treasury secretary .

title vii seeks to remake the otc market in the image of the regulated futures exchanges .

the act includes a requirement that swap contracts be cleared through a central counterparty regulated by one or more federal agency .

clearing houses require traders to post initial margin at the time they open a contract to cover potential losses , and require subsequent deposits of cash ( called maintenance margin ) to cover actual losses to the position .

the effect of margin requirements is to eliminate the possibility that any firm can build up an uncapitalized exposure so large that default would have systemic consequences .

the size of a cleared position is limited by the firm's ability to post capital to cover its losses .

that capital protects its trading partners and the system as a whole .

counterparty risk is shifted from the firms engaged in the trade to the clearing house .

the new law provides exceptions to the clearing requirement for commercial end - users , or firms that use derivatives to hedge the risks of their nonfinancial business operations .

regulators may also provide exemptions for smaller financial institutions .

swap dealers and major swap participants — firms with substantial derivatives positions — will be subject to margin and capital requirements above and beyond what the clearing houses mandate .

trades that are cleared will also be subject to trading on an exchange , or an exchange - like "swap execution facility," regulated by either the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) or the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , in the case of security - based swaps .

all trades will be reported to data repositories , so that regulators will have complete information about all derivatives positions .

data on swap prices and trading volumes will be made public .

this would make more information available to regulators about the size and distribution of possible losses during periods of market volatility .

the act prevents insured depository institutions from dealing credit default swaps .

title i requires the federal banking regulators to establish minimum risk - based capital requirements and leverage requirements on a consolidated basis for depository institutions , depository holding companies , and firms designated as systemically significant by the council that are no lower than those were set for depository institutions as of the date of enactment .

under this provision , no longer will holding companies be authorized to include trust - preferred securities in tier i capital .

these requirements are phased in , and certain small firms are exempted .

title vi requires the federal banking regulators to make capital "requirements countercyclical , so that the amount of capital required to be maintained … increases in times of economic expansion and decreases in times of economic contraction , consistent with … safety and soundness. .

the council is required to conduct a study on the feasibility of implementing a contingent capital requirement for systemically significant firms .

contingent capital is debt that can be converted into equity by the issuing firm under certain circumstances .

following the study , if the council recommends , the fed may impose contingent capital requirements on systemically significant firms .

title xi amends section 13 ( 3 ) of the federal reserve act to require the fed to establish , in consultation with the secretary , regulations governing the use of the federal reserve act's section 13 ( 3 ) emergency lending authority , in contrast to the ad hoc use of section 13 ( 3 ) during the recent crisis .

the policies and procedures prescribed in these regulations must include measures to prevent aid to failing firms or insolvent borrowers and may require borrowers to certify that they are solvent .

any program established under this authority must be approved by the treasury secretary and must be "for the purpose of providing liquidity to the financial system , and not to aid a failing financial firm or company. .

a program that is "structured to remove assets from the balance sheet of a single and specific company" is forbidden , as is any program designed to help a single company to avoid bankruptcy or an insolvency proceeding .

the policies and procedures must ensure that any assistance be secured sufficiently to protect taxpayers from losses "consistent with sound risk management practices. .

this contrasts with the standard applicable during the recent crisis , which required that security for assistance be "indorsed [sic .

] , or otherwise secured to the satisfaction of the federal reserve [sic. .

bank. .

any program under this authority must be "terminated in a timely and orderly fashion. .

in addition to the fed , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) also set up emergency programs in response to the crisis .

on october 14 , 2008 , the fdic announced the creation of the temporary liquidity guarantee program to encourage liquidity in the banking system , including a debt guarantee program and a transaction guarantee program .

this program was not specifically authorized by congress ; it was authorized under the fdic's standing systemic risk mitigation authority , 12 u.s.c .

§ 1823 ( c ) ( 4 ) ( g ) .

the debt guarantee program guarantees debt issued by banks , thrifts , and bank holding companies , including commercial paper , interbank funding , promissory notes , and any unsecured portion of secured debt .

title xi provides more specific , explicit authority for the fdic to create a program to guarantee debt of solvent depository institutions or depository institution holding companies and their affiliates "during times of severe economic distress. .

this supersedes the authority in 12 u.s.c .

1823 ( c ) ( 4 ) ( g ) .

to institute such a program , at the treasury secretary's request , two - thirds of the fdic's board and two - thirds of fed governors must make a finding , that ( 1 ) a liquidity event exists , ( 2 ) failure to act would have serious adverse effects on financial stability , and ( 3 ) using this authority would ameliorate the effects .

the program must be "widely available" to "solvent insured depository institutions or solvent depository institution holding companies ( including any affiliates thereof" and may not include "the provision of equity in any form. .

there could , therefore , be no program under this authority similar to the capital purchase program undertaken under the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) authorized by the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 .

under the legislation , the fdic , in consultation with the treasury secretary , must establish policies and procedures governing the terms and conditions of such a program "as soon as is practicable. .

the program must be financed by assessments on participants , although temporary funding will be available to the fdic from the treasury .

upon establishing a program , the treasury secretary , in consultation with the president , is to establish a maximum amount of debt that can be guaranteed , and obtain congressional approval before any guarantees may be issued .

congressional approval is to take the form of a joint resolution to be considered under expedited procedures .

title vi makes modifications to the fed's authority to regulate bank holding companies .

it removes the strict limitations on fed authority to take direct action against functionally regulated subsidiaries of bank holding companies .

it expands fed authority to examine bank holding company subsidiaries by specifically including risks to u.s. financial stability as a focus of the examination .

it authorizes the fed to monitor how the subsidiaries , except for functionally regulated subsidiaries and depository institution subsidiaries , are complying with any other applicable federal law ( subject to the allocation of examination functions under the consumer financial protection act of 2010 , title x of the dodd - frank act ) .

title vi also sets standards for the fed to examine activities of non - depository , non - functionally regulated subsidiaries of depository institution holding companies that "are permissible for the insured depository institution subsidiaries of the depository institution holding company in the same manner , subject to the same standards , and with the same frequency as would be required if such activities were conducted by the lead insured depository institution subsidiary of the holding company. .

the regulator of the lead depository institution may request a fed examination of the non - depository , non - functionally regulated subsidiaries of the holding company , and if the fed fails to begin such an examination , the regulator of the lead depository institution may commence to conduct the examination .

recommendations for supervisory actions are to be submitted to the fed ; if the federal reserve board does not take enforcement action within 60 days , the agency making the recommendation may take action .

this section discusses major provisions of the dodd - frank act related to the federal reserve that do not involve systemic risk issues .

title x establishes a bureau of consumer financial protection ( bureau ) within the federal reserve system with authority over an array of consumer financial products and services ( including deposit taking , mortgages , credit cards and other extensions of credit , loan servicing , check - guaranteeing , collection of consumer report data , debt collection , real estate settlement , money transmitting , and financial data processing , among others ) .

it will serve as the primary federal consumer financial protection supervisor and enforcer of federal consumer protection laws over many of the institutions that offer these products and services .

the bureau will be required to consult with the prudential regulators when prescribing regulations .

the dodd - frank act authorizes the bureau to prescribe rules and issue orders and guidance .

the legislation also transfers to the bureau rulemaking authority for many of the existing federal consumer protection laws , including the truth in lending act , the real estate settlement procedures act , and the home ownership and equity protection act .

as a check on the bureau's rulemaking powers , the financial stability oversight council has the ability to set aside a regulation prescribed by the bureau if the regulation "would put the safety and soundness of the united states banking system or the stability of the financial system of the united states at risk. .

the bureau is established within the federal reserve system , but it has some measure of independence from the fed .

for instance , the fed does not have the formal authority to stop , delay , or disapprove of a bureau regulation , nor can it ( a ) intervene in any matter or proceeding before the director [of the cfpb] , including examinations or enforcement actions , unless otherwise specifically provided by law ; ( b ) appoint , direct , or remove any officer or employee of the bureau ; or ( c ) merge or consolidate the bureau , or any of the functions or responsibilities of the bureau , with any division or office of the board of governors or the federal reserve banks .

however , the bureau is not completely independent of the fed .

as an example , the act allows , but does not require , the fed to "delegate to the bureau the authorities to examine persons subject to the jurisdiction of the [board] for compliance with the federal consumer financial laws. .

the bureau is to be headed by a director appointed by the president , subject to the advice and consent of the senate , to serve for a five - year term from which s / he could only be removed for "inefficiency , neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. .

the director has authority to hire the employees necessary to carry out the duties of the bureau .

the act establishes a procedure by which the existing regulators ( including the fed ) will transfer employees to the bureau as necessary to perform the consumer financial protection functions that are transferred from those agencies to the bureau .

the bureau will be funded "from the combined earnings of the federal reserve system [in an] amount determined by the director to be reasonably necessary to carry out the authorities of the bureau" subject to specified caps .

the cap will be 10% of the total operating expenses of the federal reserve system for fy2011 , 11% for fy2012 , and 12% thereafter .

as a gauge of how much money this will be , the system's total operating expenses for fy2009 were $4.98 billion , 10% of which is just under $500 million .

these funds are not reviewable by either the house or senate committees on appropriations .

the act also authorizes appropriations if the director "determine[s] that sums available to the bureau [as specified by the caps] under this section will not be sufficient to carry out the authorities of the bureau under federal consumer financial law for the upcoming year. .

previously , the government accountability office ( gao ) was not allowed to audit monetary policy actions , including interest rate changes , transactions with foreign governments , open market operations , and loans to financial firms .

actions taken by the fed in response to the financial crisis were covered by this exemption .

title xi allows gao to audit open market operations , discount window lending , actions taken under emergency authority , and actions taken in response to the financial crisis for ( a ) the operational integrity , accounting , financial reporting , and internal controls governing the credit facility or covered transaction ; ( b ) the effectiveness of the security and collateral policies established for the facility or covered transaction in mitigating risk to the relevant federal reserve bank and taxpayers ; ( c ) whether the credit facility or the conduct of a covered transaction inappropriately favors one or more specific participants over other institutions eligible to utilize the facility ; and ( d ) the policies governing the use , selection , or payment of third - party contractors by or for any credit facility or to conduct any covered transaction .

the legislation does not authorize the gao to conduct policy evaluations of the fed's monetary actions .

gao may not disclose confidential information in its reports until that information was made public by the fed .

the gao must audit the fed's response to the recent crisis response within a year of enactment .

the legislation also calls for a separate gao audit of federal reserve bank governance to assess whether it produces conflicts of interest or potential conflicts , and whether the existing system of selecting regional federal reserve bank directors results in directors who represent "the public without discrimination on the basis of race , creed , color , sex , or national origin , and with due but not exclusive consideration to the interests of agriculture , commerce , industry , services , labor , and consumers. .

title xi of the dodd - frank act establishes , for the first time , disclosure requirements relating to federal reserve lending .

it requires that the fed provide the congressional committees of jurisdiction details on the rationale for assistance , the identity of the recipient , the material terms of the assistance , and the expected cost to the taxpayer .

this information is to be provided within seven days of an action taken under section 13 ( 3 ) , with updates every 30 days following .

the fed can request that this information be kept confidential and limited to the chairmen and ranking members of the committees .

the act calls for public disclosure of the identities of borrowers , amount borrowed , rate charged , and collateral pledged or assets transferred within one year after a credit facility is terminated and within two years after the transaction for discount window loans or open market operations .

for fed programs created during the crisis , this information must be publicly disclosed by december 1 , 2010 .

previously , one of the seven governors of the federal reserve board was designated ( by the president with senate confirmation ) chairman and one was designated vice - chairman .

in addition to these positions , title xi creates a vice - chairman for supervision , nominated by the president with senate confirmation .

the vice - chairman for supervision is required to testify to the committees of jurisdiction semi - annually .

previously , the presidents of the 12 federal reserve regional banks were chosen by each regional bank's board of directors .

the board was comprised of nine members: three chosen by the member banks from the banking industry , three chosen by the member banks to represent non - banking interests , and three chosen by the board of governors in washington to represent non - banking interests .

title xi allows only the directors representing non - banking interests to select the regional bank presidents .

as noted in the previous section , the legislation also calls for a gao audit of the selection process for regional bank directors .

previously , thrifts were regulated by the office of thrift supervision ( ots ) .

title iii abolishes ots and transfers its authority to other regulators .

the fed gains the authority to supervise , issue rules , and take enforcement actions with respect to any savings and loan holding company and any of its subsidiaries , other than a depository institution .

title vi authorizes the fed to require a grandfathered unitary thrift holding company which conducts some commercial or other non - financial activities to conduct all or part of its financial activities in an intermediate savings and loan holding company regulated by the fed .

title vi eliminates the investment bank holding company framework in section 17 of the securities exchange act of 1934 , under which a securities firm not having a depository institution subsidiary may choose to be supervised by the sec as an investment bank holding company , coincidentally satisfying a foreign law requirement for consolidated supervision by its home country .

instead , a securities holding company ( shc ) may submit to fed regulation .

it would then become subject to the record - keeping , reporting , and examination requirements imposed by the fed as specified in section 618 of the dodd - frank act .

the fed is also authorized to prescribe capital and risk management standards for shcs .

