the small business administration ( sba ) administers several programs to support small businesses , including loan guaranty programs to enhance small business access to capital ; programs to increase small business opportunities in federal contracting ; direct loans for businesses , homeowners , and renters to assist their recovery from natural disasters ; and access to entrepreneurial education to assist with business formation and expansion .

the sba has provided "technical and managerial aides to small - business concerns , by advising and counseling on matters in connection with government procurement and on policies , principles and practices of good management" since it began operations in 1953 .

initially , the sba provided its own management and technical assistance training programs .

over time , the sba has relied increasingly on third parties to provide that training .

more than 1.2 million aspiring entrepreneurs and small business owners receive training from an sba - supported resource partner each year .

the sba has argued that its support of management and technical assistance training for small businesses has contributed "to the long - term success of these businesses and their ability to grow and create jobs. .

it currently provides financial support to about 14,000 resource partners , including 63 small business development centers ( sbdcs ) and nearly 900 sbdc local outreach locations , 128 women's business centers ( wbcs ) , and 350 chapters of the mentoring program , score ( service corps of retired executives ) .

the sba receives an annual appropriation for entrepreneurial development / noncredit programs collectively ( currently $247.7 million ) .

the sba uses these funds for its management and training programs ( $226.7 million in fy2019 ) , administration of the hubzone program ( $3.0 million ) , and the state trade and export promotion program ( $18.0 million ) .

congress specifies the appropriation amount for sbdcs ( currently $131.0 million ) and the microloan technical assistance program ( currently $31.0 million ) in its annual appropriation act and includes recommended appropriation amounts for the sba's other management and training programs in either the explanatory statement or the committee report accompanying the appropriations act .

the sba is not legally required to adhere to the recommended amounts but has traditionally done so in the past .

table 1 shows the appropriation amounts congress specified for sbdcs and the microloan technical assistance program and the appropriation amounts congress recommended for the sba's other management and training programs in fy2015 ( $198.6 million ) , fy2016 ( $210.1 million ) , fy2017 ( $224.1 million ) , fy2018 ( $226.1 million ) , and fy2019 ( $226.7 million ) .

the department of commerce also provides management and technical assistance training for small businesses .

for example , the department of commerce's minority business development agency ( mbda ) provides training to minority business owners to assist them in obtaining contracts and financial awards .

in addition , the department of commerce's economic development administration's local technical assistance program promotes efforts to build and expand local organizational capacity in economically distressed areas .

as part of that effort , it funds projects that focus on technical or market feasibility studies of economic development projects or programs , which often include consultation with small businesses .

for many years , a recurring theme at congressional hearings concerning the sba's management and technical assistance training programs has been the perceived need to improve program efficiency by eliminating duplication of services and increasing cooperation and coordination both within and among its training resource partners .

for example , the obama administration recommended in its fy2012-fy2017 budget recommendations that funding for the prime technical assistance program end .

the administration argued that prime overlaps and duplicates "the technical assistance provided by sba's microlending intermediaries. .

the trump administration has also requested the program's elimination .

the house committee on small business has argued that the sba's various management and technical assistance training programs should be "folded into the mission of the sbdc program or their responsibilities should be taken over by other agencies" because they "overlap each other and duplicate the educational services provided by other agencies. .

congress has also explored ways to improve the sba's measurement of these programs' effectiveness .

this report examines the historical development of federal small business management and technical assistance training programs ; describes their current structures , operations , and budgets ; and assesses their administration and oversight , including measures used to determine their effectiveness .

this report also examines legislation to improve sba program performance and oversight , including p.l .

114-88 , the recovery improvements for small entities after disaster act of 2015 ( rise after disaster act of 2015 ) , which , among other things , authorizes the sba to provide up to two years of additional financial assistance , on a competitive basis , to sbdcs , wbcs , score , or any proposed consortium of such individuals or entities to assist small businesses located in a presidentially declared major disaster area and authorizes sbdcs to provide assistance to small businesses outside the sbdc's state , without regard to geographical proximity to the sbdc , if the small business is in a presidentially declared major disaster area .

this assistance can be provided "for a period of not more than two years after the date on which the president" has declared the area a major disaster ; and p.l .

115-141 , the consolidated appropriations act of 2018 , among other provisions , relaxed requirements that microloan intermediaries may spend no more than 25% of microloan technical assistance grant funds on prospective borrowers and no more than 25% of those funds on contracts with third parties to provide that technical assistance by increasing those percentages to no more than 50% ( originally in h.r .

2056 , the microloan modernization act of 2017 , and s. 526 , the microloan modernization act of 2018 ) .

in addition , it discusses h.r .

1774 , the developing the next generation of small businesses act of 2017 , which was introduced during the 115 th congress .

the bill would have required the sba to only use authorized entrepreneurial development programs ( score , wbcs , sbdcs , etc. ) .

to deliver specified entrepreneurial development services ; added data collection and reporting requirements for sbdcs ; authorized to be appropriated $21.75 million for wbcs for each of fy2018-fy2021 ( wbcs were appropriated $18.0 million in fy2018 ) ; increased the wbc annual grant award from not more than $150,000 to not more than $185,000 ( adjusted annually to reflect change in inflation ) ; authorized the award of an additional $65,000 to wbcs under specified circumstances ; authorized the sba to waive , in whole or in part , the wbc nonfederal matching requirement for up to two consecutive fiscal years under specified circumstances ; modified score program requirements with respect to the role of participating volunteers , program plans and goals , and reporting ; and added language concerning the provision and reporting of online counseling by score .

the sba supports a number of management and technical assistance training programs , including the following: small business development center grants program , microloan technical assistance program , women's business center grants program , veterans business development programs , score ( service corps of retired executives ) , prime technical assistance program , 7 ( j ) technical assistance program , native american outreach program , and several initiatives , including the entrepreneurial development initiative ( regional innovation clusters ) , boots to business , entrepreneurial education , and growth accelerators .

the legislative history and current operating structures , functions , and budget for each of these programs is presented in this report .

in addition , if the data are available , the program's performance based on outcome - based measures , such as their effect on small business formation , survivability , and expansion , and on job creation and retention , is also presented .

also , a brief description of each of these programs is provided in the appendix .

as mentioned previously , the department of commerce's minority business development agency ( mbda ) provides training to minority business owners to assist them in obtaining contracts and financial awards .

in addition , the department of commerce's economic development administration's local technical assistance program promotes efforts to build and expand local organizational capacity in distressed areas .

as part of that effort , it funds projects that focus on technical or market feasibility studies of economic development projects or programs , which often include consultation with small businesses .

for many years , a recurring theme at congressional hearings concerning the sba's management and technical assistance training programs has been the perceived need to improve program efficiency by eliminating duplication of services or increasing cooperation and coordination both within and among score , wbcs , and sbdcs .

for example , the house committee on small business has argued that the sba's various management and technical assistance training programs should be "folded into the mission of the sbdc program or their responsibilities should be taken over by other agencies" because they "overlap each other and duplicate the educational services provided by other agencies. .

in addition , as mentioned previously , the obama administration recommended that the prime program be eliminated , arguing that it overlaps and duplicates the sba's microloan technical assistance program .

the trump administration has also recommended that the prime program , the growth accelerators initiative , and the entrepreneurial development initiative ( regional innovation clusters ) be eliminated because they overlap private - sector "mechanisms to foster local business development and investment" or are "duplicative of other federal programs. .

in contrast , congress has approved continued funding for these programs and the boots to business and boots to business: reboot initiatives .

in recent years , congress has also explored ways to improve the sba's measurement of its management and training programs' effectiveness .

congressional interest in the federal government's small business management and technical assistance training programs has increased in recent years .

one of the reasons for the heightened level of interest in these programs is that small business has led job formation and retention during previous economic recoveries .

it has been argued that effective small business management and technical assistance training programs are needed if small businesses are to lead job creation and retention during the current economic recovery .

as then - representative heath shuler stated during a congressional hearing in 2009: we often talk about the role that small business plays in the creation of jobs and with good reason .

small firms generate between 60 and 80 percent of new positions .

following the recession in the mid - 1990s , they created 3.8 million jobs… .

we could use that growth today .

but unfortunately , many firms are struggling to make ends meet .

let's allow them to hire new workers .

in the face of historic economic challenges , we should be investing in america's job creators .

sba's entrepreneurial development programs , or ed , do just that .

of all the tools in the small business toolbox , these are some of the most critical .

they help small firms do everything from draft business plans to access capital .

the general consensus is that federal management and technical assistance training programs serve an important purpose and , for the most part , are providing needed services that are not available elsewhere .

as karen mills , then - sba administrator , stated during a press interview in 2010: we find that our counseling operations are equally important as our credit operations because small businesses really need help and advice , and when they get it , they tend to have more sales and more profits and more longevity , and they hire more people .

so we have looked forward and said , "how do we get all the tools small businesses need into their hands ? .

maybe they want to export .

maybe they want to know how to use broadband .

maybe they are veterans who are coming back and want to start a business or grow their business .

our job is to make sure all that information and opportunity is accessible for small businesses so they can do what they do , which is keep our economy strong .

there is also a general consensus that making federal management and technical assistance training programs more effective and responsive to the needs of small business would assist the national economic recovery .

however , there are disagreements over how to achieve that goal .

some advocate ( 1 ) increasing funding for existing programs to enable them to provide additional training opportunities for small businesses while , at the same time , maintaining separate training programs for specific demographic groups as a means to ensure that those groups' specific needs are met ; ( 2 ) requiring the sba to make more extensive use of outcome - based measures to better determine the programs' effect on small business formation and retention , job creation and retention , and the generation of wealth ; and ( 3 ) temporarily reducing or eliminating federal matching requirements to enable sba's management and technical assistance training resource partners to focus greater attention to service delivery and less to fund raising .

others argue for a merger of existing programs to reduce costs and improve program efficiency , to focus available resources on augmenting the capacity of sbdcs to meet the needs of all small business groups , and require the sba to make more extensive use of outcome - based performance measures to determine program effectiveness .

no case studies or empirical data are available concerning the efficiencies that might be gained by merging the sba's management and technical assistance training programs .

advocates argue that merging the programs would improve communications , reduce confusion by business owners seeking assistance by ensuring that all small business management and technical assistance training centers serve all small business owners and aspiring entrepreneurs , lead to more sustainable and predictable funding for the programs from nonfederal sources , and result in more consistent and standard operating procedures throughout the country .

opponents argue that any gains in program efficiency that might be realized would be more than offset by the loss of targeted services for constituencies that often require different information and training to meet their unique challenges and needs .

