a stable , democratic , prosperous pakistan actively working to counter islamist militancy is considered vital to u.s. interests .

current top - tier u.s. concerns regarding pakistan include regional and global terrorism ; stability in neighboring afghanistan ; domestic political stability and democratization ; nuclear weapons proliferation and security ; human rights protection ; and economic development .

pakistan remains a vital u.s. ally in u.s. - led anti - terrorism efforts .

yet the outcomes of u.s. policies toward pakistan since 9 / 11 , while not devoid of meaningful successes , have seen a failure to neutralize anti - western militants and reduce religious extremism in that country , and a failure to contribute sufficiently to stabilizing afghanistan .

domestic terrorist bombings and other militant attacks became a near - daily scourge in 2008 and continue at a high rate to date , with islamist extremism spreading beyond western tribal areas and threatening major pakistani cities .

in the assessment of a former senior u.s. government official , "pakistan is the most dangerous country in the world today .

all of the nightmares of the twenty - first century come together in pakistan: nuclear proliferation , drug smuggling , military dictatorship , and above all , international terrorism. .

when asked in early 2010 what worried him the most of all foreign policy issues , vice president joseph biden answered "pakistan," which he said has deployable nuclear weapons , "a real significant minority of radicalized population," and "is not a completely functional democracy. .

a long - time u.s. - based observer sees the fundamentals of the pakistani state in 2011 "either failing or questionable," and proffers that , with all current u.s. policies proving ineffective , pakistan is moving in a direction of "comprehensive failure," perhaps in as few as four years .

the u.s. state department issues stern warnings on the risks of travel to pakistan , and many independent country indices rank the pakistani state as a failed or failing one .

the pakistani state and people are paying a steep price for their participation in the fight against islamist militancy and extremism .

foreign minister shah mehmood qureshi claims that , in the post - 9 / 11 period , pakistan has incurred some 31,000 casualties and has "arrested , apprehended , and eliminated 17,000 terrorists. .

socioeconomic costs have been high , as well , and include massive human displacement ; increased funding for security and law enforcement institutions , and reconstruction ; sharply reduced investment and capital flight ; and all manner of less tangible infrastructural and cultural costs .

pakistani government officials estimate financial losses of up to $40 billion since 2001 .

the severe psychological toll on the pakistani people has led to an upsurge in reports of depression , anxiety , paranoia , and post - traumatic stress disorders .

pakistan's troubled economic conditions , fluid political setting , and perilous security circumstances present serious challenges to u.s. decision makers .

on the economic front , the islamabad government faces crises that erode their options and elicit significant public resentment .

on the political front , a weak civilian leadership , ongoing power struggles between the executive and judiciary , and discord in federal - provincial relations all serve to hamper effective governance .

on the security front , pakistan is the setting for multiple armed islamist insurgencies , some of which span the border with afghanistan and contribute to the destabilization of that country .

al qaeda forces and their allies remain active on pakistani territory .

the compounded difficulties faced by pakistan and those countries seeking to work with it , along with the troubling anti - american sentiments held by much of the pakistani public , thus present u.s. policy makers with a daunting task .

despite some positive signs , the progress of u.s. - pakistan relations in the post - 2001 era has produced few of the main outcomes sought in both capitals .

religious , ethnic , and political violence in pakistan has only increased , as has an already intense anti - americanism .

while a reasonably free and fair election did seat a civilian government in 2008 , that government remains weak and saddled with immense economic and other domestic problems .

meanwhile , the security institutions maintain a hold on the formulation of foreign and national security policies , and some elements appear to have lingering sympathies for the afghan taliban and other islamist militant groups .

from the u.s. perspective , pakistan's status as a hotbed of religious extremism has only become more secure in recent years , al qaeda continues to operate in the tribal areas , and afghanistan remains unstable more than nine years after the u.s. - led intervention there .

more recently , there are disturbing signs that pakistan serves as a site for the recruiting and training of american nationals intent on carrying out terrorist attacks on the u.s. homeland .

in late 2010 , an unnamed senior pakistani military official , widely believed to be pakistani army chief general ashfaq pervez kayani himself , described pakistan as having "transited from most sanctioned ally to most bullied ally. .

he located pakistani resentment in the perception that the united states continues to pursue a "transactional relationship" with pakistan , that it seeks "controlled chaos" inside pakistan , and that its true strategy is to "denuclearize" pakistan .

kayani has thus far resisted u.s. efforts at persuasion and has shown other flashes of defiance in recent months , including issuing a reportedly personal order to close the torkham border crossing after two pakistani solders were killed by a nato helicopter in september .

notwithstanding pakistan's ongoing and serious problems — including rampant domestic militancy , political and economic crises , and deep - seated resentments toward the united states and neighboring india — obama administration decision makers appear to see no viable alternative but to continue supporting the country and are ready to "double down" with additional military and economic support .

this reportedly was the message vice president biden carried with him during a january 2011 visit to islamabad .

while there , the u.s. vice president reiterated his and president obama's view that pakistan is "absolutely vital" to u.s. interests , and he took the opportunity to correct some key misconceptions held among pakistanis , including that the united states represents a threat to their sovereignty ( "i would respectfully suggest that it's the extremists who violate pakistan's sovereignty and corrupt its good name" ) , that america disrespects or is an enemy of islam , that u.s. policies favor india in ways that could lead to pakistan's weakening , and that the u.s. will "abandon" pakistan .

a key aspect of the obama administration's approach to pakistan has been development of a more coherent policy to include a tripling annual nonmilitary aid to improve the lives of the pakistani people , with a particular focus on conflict - affected regions , and on focusing increased u.s. military aid to islamabad on counterinsurgency goals while conditioning such aid on that government's progress in combating militancy .

president obama , vice president biden , and secretary of state hillary clinton all supported the enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2008 in the 110 th congress ( which was never passed ) , and they strongly encouraged the 111 th congress to pass a newer version of that legislation .

this pakistan enduring assistance and cooperation enhancement act of 2009 ( h.r .

1886 ) was passed by the full house in june 2009 , then reconciled with the senate bill passed that september .

president obama signed the resulting enhanced partnership with pakistan act ( eppa ) of 2009 into p.l .

111-73 on october 15 , 2009 .

the legislation is commonly referred to as the "kerry - lugar - berman bill. .

even as president - elect , obama asserted that afghanistan cannot be "solved" without "solving pakistan" and working more effectively with that country , saying he believed pakistan's democratically - elected government understands the threat and would participate in establishing "the kind of close , effective , working relationship that makes both countries safer. .

pakistani president asif ali zardari said his country looked forward to a "new beginning" in bilateral relations , but repeated his admonition that pakistan "needs no lectures on our commitment [to fighting terrorism] .

this is our war. .

his government repeatedly has asked the obama administration to strengthen pakistan's democracy and economic development in the interest of fighting extremism .

despite pakistani hopes that president obama would more energetically engage diplomatic efforts to resolve the kashmir problem , the administration has offered no public expressions of support for such a shift .

secretary of state clinton has recognized the dangers of rising tensions in kashmir while also deferring calls for greater u.s. involvement there , saying during her confirmation hearing that the u.s. role will continue to be as it was under the previous administration: settlement facilitation , but no mediation .

in what many observers considered to be a bracing u.s. government wake - up call to islamabad , secretary clinton told a house panel in april 2009 that "the pakistani government is basically abdicating to the taliban and to the extremists. .

secretary of defense robert gates followed with his own warning that u.s. - pakistan relations could suffer if islamabad did not "take appropriate actions" to deal with the militant threat .

days later , president obama himself expressed "grave concern" about the situation in pakistan , offering that the "very fragile" civilian government there did not appear to have the capacity to deliver basic services to the pakistani people .

he did , however , acknowledge that the pakistani military was showing more seriousness in addressing the threat posed by militants .

the administration's tone shifted considerably after pakistani forces launched major offensive operations against taliban militants in the swat valley .

senior u.s. officials — including president obama in his december 1 , 2009 , speech — laud pakistan's military operations against indigenous taliban militants .

yet these officials also want islamabad to enlarge the scope of such operations to include action against a broader array of extremist threats , including those of the greatest concern to india and western countries .

as articulated by joint chiefs chairman admiral mike mullen , "we must help pakistan widen its aperture in seeking out and eliminating all forms of extremism and terrorism — those who threaten not only pakistan , but also afghanistan , the wider south asia region , and the globe. .

secretary gates paid an unannounced visit to pakistan in early 2010 with a central wish to "relinquish the grievances of the past ... and instead focus on the promise of the future. .

in speaking to an audience of pakistani military officers , he sought to push back against the rumors fuelling anti - americanism there , stating unequivocally that the united states "does not covet a single inch of pakistani soil [nor] military bases," nor does it "desire to control pakistan's nuclear weapons. .

more intensive diplomacy and u.s. assurances that pakistan will play a major role in the political future of afghanistan may have contributed to persuading pakistani leaders — especially military officers — that they need no longer rely on extremist groups to maintain influence .

the u.s. special representative for afghanistan and pakistan , richard holbrooke , who died in december 2010 , attributed pakistan's early 2010 moves against the afghan taliban to the "cumulative effect" of hard work and multiple visits to pakistan by numerous senior u.s. officials .

yet some in congress express continuing skepticism about islamabad's commitment to resolving the afghan insurgency and to a genuine partnership with the united states .

meanwhile , many observers in pakistan complain that u.s. diplomacy remains too skewed toward security issues and overly reliant on military - to - military relations , at some cost to public diplomacy .

reports suggest that even those pakistanis with traditionally strong ties to the united states have begun seeking alternative destinations for work , education , and travel , a sign of troubled u.s. - pakistan relations in the new decade .

islamist extremism and militancy has been a menace to pakistani society throughout the post - 2001 period , becoming especially prevalent since 2007 , but the rate of attacks and number of victims may have peaked in 2009 .

the u.s. national counterterrorism center reports a major decline in terrorist incidents in 2010 as compared to the previous year , with 687 terrorist incidents in pakistan in 2010 ( down from 1,915 in 2009 ) resulting in 1,051 fatalities ( down from 2,670 ) .

despite the declined rate , the figures again placed the country third in the world on both measures , after afghanistan and iraq .

suicide bombing is a relatively new scourge in pakistan .

only two such bombings were recorded there in 2002 ; that number grew to 59 in 2008 and 84 in 2009 , before dropping to 29 in 2010 ( the lowest level since 2005 ) .

still , pakistan was last year the site of far more deaths caused by suicide bombing ( 556 ) than any other country and accounted for about one - quarter of all the world's such bombings .

a particularly alarming development in recent years is the significantly increased incidence of militants making direct attacks on pakistani security institutions .

there have also been more attacks on foreign - based charitable organizations , such as the march assault of the kpk offices of the american christian group world vision by about a dozen masked gunmen , which left six pakistani employees dead .

according to the state department's most recent country reports on terrorism ( august 2010 ) , foreign terrorist organizations , including al qaeda and its affiliates , continued to operate and carry out attacks in pakistan .

violence stemming from sunni - shia sectarian strife and ethnic tensions , limited to certain geographical areas , claimed civilian lives .

similar to last year , attacks occurred with greatest frequency in the regions bordering afghanistan , including baluchistan , the federally administered tribal areas ( fata ) , and the north - west frontier province ( nwfp ) .

attacks targeting the country's major urban centers , including lahore , islamabad , peshawar , karachi , and rawalpindi , continued to increase .

the coordination , sophistication , and frequency of suicide bombings continued to climb in 2009 .

the myriad and sometimes disparate islamist militant groups operating in pakistan , many of which have displayed mutual animosity in the past , appear to have become more intermingled and mutually supportive since 2009 ( see "islamist militant groups in pakistan," below ) .

according to u.s. joint chiefs chairman admiral mullen , speaking in december 2009 , it's very clear to me , over the last 12 to 24 months , that these organizations are all much closer than they used to be , whether it's pakistan taliban and al qaida , or al qaida / afghan taliban , [lashkar - e - taiba , jamaat - ud - dawa , jaish - e - mohammed] — they're all working much more closely together .

so i think it doesn't accurately reflect the need or the strategy to single out one group or another .

they're very much all in this in ways , together , that they weren't as recently as 12 months ago .

this developing "syndicate" of armed islamist extremist in pakistan even incorporates the apparently tactical joining of ttp and let forces .

an extensive 2010 study found that pakistan - based militant groups continue to present a significant threat to pakistan , the united states , and other countries .

this threat persists , according to the report , due mainly to islamabad's lack of an effective "population - centric" strategy , the government's refusal to make a systematic break with all militant groups , and the inability of pakistan's army and paramilitary forces to clear and meaningfully hold territory .

the study determined that pakistan will continue to be unsuccessful in addressing its indigenous militant threat over the long term unless its government undertakes two major changes .

first , islamabad is urged to take a "population - centric" approach to counterinsurgency that makes civilian security the central goal .

reforming and strengthening local police forces would be central to this effort .

second , pakistan must conclusively relinquish militancy as a policy tool .

this process could be facilitated by a u.s. policy that focuses on altering pakistan's strategic calculus .

for its part , washington is urged to reduce its reliance on pakistan , especially through development of alternative supply lines to afghanistan , and to be more willing to use foreign policy "sticks" such as withholding of aid in the absence of measureable progress , while also seeking means of offering the strategic "carrots" most valued by islamabad .

over the past one or two years , pakistani public sentiments toward both islamist militancy and the united states appear to have grown measurably less favorable .

during the first several months of 2009 , the fata - based taliban launched numerous suicide bombings and other terrorist attacks across pakistan in retaliation for the army operations against their allies in swat .

they took responsibility for multiple bomb explosions and warned people to evacuate several large cities , saying major attacks would be forthcoming .

taliban militants and their allies had been terrorizing the people of western pakistan for some time before 2009 , but they may have gone one step too far by quickly violating the swat accord with incursions into neighboring districts .

moreover , in april 2009 , video footage of taliban militants in swat flogging a teenaged girl accused of having an affair was widely viewed on television and the internet , and contributed to turning public sentiment against the extremists .

available evidence now strongly indicates a major shift in pakistani public attitudes toward religious militancy and extremism has occurred , with a majority of citizens now supporting military operations that were only recently and for many years seen to have come only at the behest and in the interests of the united states .

anti - american sentiments and xenophobic conspiracy theories remain rife among ordinary pakistanis , however .

a pew research center survey released in june 2010 showed only 17% of pakistanis holding a favorable opinion of the united states , as low a percentage as in any of the 22 countries surveyed , and roughly the same as in the three previous years .

many across the spectrum of pakistani society express anger at u.s. global foreign policy , in particular when such policy is perceived to be unfriendly or hostile to the muslim world ( as in , for example , palestine , afghanistan , and iraq ) .

some popular , mainstream pakistani tv talk - show hosts routinely promote anti - american conspiracy theories , call for more islamist - influenced governance , and bash religious and ethnic minorities .

pakistan's urdu - language press is much more widely read than are english - language sources , and the urdu press is much more willing to convey exaggerated and / or distorted views on both the united states and india , including conspiracy theories only tenuously linked to facts .

in late 2009 , the u.s. embassy in islamabad began issuing statements to immediately and directly counter false or misleading information about american foreign policy in the pakistani media .

allegations of u.s. malfeasance inside pakistan abound .

the alleged presence of thousands of american security contractors in pakistan is a key focal point of the paranoia .

fears that private contractors were pouring into pakistan has added to the growing sense that a larger american footprint has potentially sinister aspects .

u.s. plans to significantly expand its embassy compound in islamabad only fuel theories among pakistanis convinced that americans are seeking to dominate their country .

a november 2009 u.s. press report claimed that employees of the private security contractor blackwater — now called xe services — work closely with u.s. special operations anti - terrorism missions on pakistani soil , by at least one account in a pentagon effort to bypass congressional oversight .

while in pakistan in january 2010 , secretary of defense gates made a statement inadvertently fueling rumors of blackwater's presence there ; pentagon clarifications did not fully repair the damage .

pakistan's islamist politicians commonly blame blackwater — as a representation of covert u.s. operations inside pakistan — as actively fomenting terrorism in their country .

the spread of islamist militancy in pakistan has elicited acute u.s. government attention , multiple high - level visits , and increasingly large amounts of security - related assistance .

the new york times reported that , during president g.w .

bush's second term , the u.s. military used secret authority to carry out covert attacks against al qaeda and other militants in several countries , including pakistan .

then - president musharraf rejected suggestions that u.s. troops could be more effective than pakistanis in battling militants , saying a direct u.s. military presence in pakistan was neither necessary nor acceptable .

upon assuming the presidency , asif zardari warned that pakistan "will not tolerate the violation of [its] sovereignty and territorial integrity by any power in the name of combating terrorism. .

he , too , insisted that , with the provision of u.s. intelligence , pakistani forces are better suited to combating terrorists in the border region .

in mid - 2009 , it was reported that the cia had recently halted a program to insert special forces teams into pakistan ( and other countries ) to capture or kill top al qaeda leaders .

the plans , which were never operational , reportedly had been kept secret from congress for nearly eight years on the orders of former vice president dick cheney .

past u.s. military incursions into pakistan ( see below ) put tremendous pressure on both islamabad's civilian government and on the country's military .

pakistan's ambassador to the united states warned that such attacks are counterproductive to the extent that they turn pakistani public opinion against the counterterrorism effort .

a line of argument exists that u.s. efforts to strengthen the civilian government in islamabad and improve the u.s. image in pakistan suffer major setbacks with even one occurrence of western airstrikes on pakistani territory , and may ultimately be rendered futile by continued drone strikes on pakistani territory .

three full - scale wars — in 1947-1948 , 1965 , and 1971 — and a constant state of military preparedness on both sides of their mutual border have marked six decades of bitter rivalry between pakistan and india .

the acrimonious partition of british india into two successor states in 1947 and the unresolved issue of kashmiri sovereignty have been major sources of tension .

both countries have built large defense establishments at significant cost to economic and social development .

the kashmir problem is rooted in claims by both countries to the former princely state , divided since 1948 by a military line of control ( loc ) into the indian state of jammu and kashmir and pakistan - held azad [free] kashmir .

india blames pakistan for supporting a violent separatist rebellion in the muslim - dominated kashmir valley that has taken up to 66,000 lives since 1989 .

pakistan admits only to lending moral and political support to the rebels , and it criticizes india for human rights abuses in "indian - occupied kashmir. .

a major factor in u.s. interest in south asia is the ongoing tension between pakistan and india rooted largely in competing claims to the kashmir region and in "cross - border terrorism" in both kashmir and major indian cities .

in the interests of regional stability , the united states strongly endorses an existing , but recently moribund india - pakistan peace initiative , and it remains concerned about the potential for conflict over kashmiri sovereignty to cause open hostilities between these two nuclear - armed countries .

most observers assert that u.s. success in afghanistan is to a significant degree dependent on improved india - pakistan relations , the logic being that pakistan will need to feel more secure vis - à - vis a perceived existential threat on its eastern front in order to shift its attention and military resources more toward the west .

some in pakistan believe that , by feeding their country's insecurities , the increasingly warm u.s. - india relationship actually foments regional instability .

the security of pakistan's nuclear arsenal , materials , and technologies continues to be a top - tier u.s. concern , especially as islamist militants have expanded their geographic influence there .

the illicit nuclear proliferation network allegedly overseen by pakistani metallurgist a.q .

khan was disrupted after its exposure in 2004 , but neither khan himself — a national hero in pakistan — nor any of his alleged pakistani co - conspirators have faced criminal charges in the case , and analysts warn that parts of the network may still be intact .

some in congress demand direct access to khan by u.s. and international investigators ( see , for example , h.r .

1463 in the 111 th congress ) , but pakistani authorities refuse such cooperation and insist that the case is closed .

in august 2010 , a state department spokesman said suspected ongoing operations by khan's network is "an area of ongoing concern. .

while most analysts and u.s. officials believe pakistan's nuclear security is much improved in recent years , there is ongoing concern that pakistan's nuclear know - how or technologies remain prone to leakage .

two 2009 assessments both concluded that , despite elaborate safeguards put in place by the pakistani government , serious weaknesses and vulnerabilities still exist in the country's nuclear safety and security structures .

insider threats are considered especially potent , along with the dispersion and increasing size of nuclear material and facilities .

china apparently intends to build two new civilian nuclear reactors in pakistan in what would be an apparent violation of nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) guidelines ( china has been an nsg member since 2004 ) .

the deal poses a challenge for the obama administration , which may tacitly allow it to go forward while seeking beijing's cooperation on other issues .

some analysts urge the administration to actively oppose the deal , contending that china has little reason to engage a quid pro quo and that the transfers would do harm to u.s. regional interests , in part by indirectly helping pakistan to build its nuclear weapons arsenal .

others have advocated changing u.s. law to allow for civilian nuclear trade with pakistan as a means of building bilateral trust , the argument being that overt u.s. acceptance of pakistan's nuclear program would instill a confidence that billions of dollars in u.s. aid cannot .

in mid - 2010 , the obama administration suggested that the proposed pakistan - china nuclear deal would require nsg consensus approval , and the state department raised concerns that beijing was not planning to seek what u.s. officials see as a required special exemption by the nsg as had been done for india in 2008 .

in september , beijing provided its clearest statement of intentions to date by asserting that it would seek to build two new nuclear reactors in the punjab province , saying the arrangement was consistent with a 2003 bilateral agreement on civil nuclear cooperation .

this spurred the chief of the u.s. national nuclear security administration to suggest the nsg directly address the issue .

many analysts warn that if the deal goes through , it could have serious negative implications on nuclear rivalries in south asia and beyond .

some see the arrangement as a clear abrogation of china's nsg obligations and urge washington to convey "strong concern" as a means of prompting beijing to reconsider its plans .

soaring inflation and unemployment , along with serious food and energy shortages , elicit considerable economic anxiety in pakistan and weigh heavily on the civilian government .

all of these existing problems were hugely exacerbated by devastating flooding in mid - 2010 .

a leading pakistani economist has called his country's economy the worst - performing in asia , and most experts do not see infusions of foreign aid and loans as having any lasting impact .

about two - thirds of pakistanis name economic issues , specifically inflation and unemployment , as the country's foremost problems .

the federal government's 2010-2011 budget raised taxes on numerous sectors while also cutting some subsidies on energy and food .

the finance ministry's most recent annual economic survey ( may 2010 ) reported provisional gdp growth of 4.1% in the outgoing fiscal year , up from a dismal 1.2% in 2008-2009 , but called the "recovery" fragile and far from assured , and noting that "not all sectors of the economy or regions of the country appear to have participated so far in the modest upturn. .

according to analyses by ihs global insight following the floods , "a major correction to real growth will take place during fy2011.… major supply setbacks stem from direct losses in agriculture and manufacturing , as well as indirect effects of the lost capital stock on the industrial production. .

however , a short - term boost in aggregate supply may partially counteract this , leading to an estimated growth rate of about 2% in the current fiscal year .

clearly , even before the floods , pakistan was in dire economic shape .

in 2008 , pakistan was seen to require substantial external financing to stabilize its economy .

pakistani leaders approached the imf to discuss infusions of desperately sought capital .

in november of that year , the imf reached a stand - by arrangement to provide a $7.6 billion loan to pakistan aimed at resolving the country's serious balance of payments difficulties .

total imf support was later raised to $11.3 billion .

at 2010's end , the imf agreed to extend pakistan's loan , providing another nine months for officials there to complete the tax and other fiscal reforms .

according to a 2010 world bank report , islamabad's stabilization efforts since 2008 combined with lower world commodities prices to reduce external imbalances , rebuild foreign exchange reserves , and reduce inflation .

yet the government still has more work to do in a difficult security environment to further reduce inflation and the fiscal deficit , particularly to eliminate the large losses of public sector entities in the power , transport and manufacturing industries , and increase public revenues through the introduction of a value added tax and better tax administration .

repayment of imf loans will place significant constraints on islamabad's federal budget .

moreover , the world bank provided more than $2 billion worth of loan assistance to pakistan in fy2009 and fy2010 , the institution's highest ever annual support for the country .

foreign direct investment dropped by nearly 10% in the quarter ending september 2010 , with u.s. investors falling just behind those from the united arab emirates as leading contributors .

a june 2010 pakistani government report on poverty reduction identified three main structural weakness in the national economy: ( 1 ) the large fiscal deficit ; ( 2 ) the large trade deficit ( with the value of imports far exceeding that of exports ) ; and ( 3 ) inadequate social services .

further causes of economic instability included a poor law and order situation , a global spike in the prices of oil and other key commodities , uncertainty in international financial markets , and , "most importantly," the direct and indirect costs of pakistan's role as a frontline state in the "war on terror," which have included significant capital flight .

the report calculates that this latter cost has exceeded $25 billion for the period 2004-2009 .

consumer prices in 2008 reached their highest levels since 1975 , with an inflation rate above 25% for many months .

the rupee's value also hit record lows , down more than 20% against the u.s. dollar for that year , and net international reserves declined by more than half to below $7 billion .

inflation rates have declined from their 2008 peak , although they rose again in early 2010 and have remain in the double - digit range .

the rupee's value is partly recovered , and imf injections boosted foreign exchange reserves back to more than $17 billion by the end of 2010 .

two major international investor rating indices cut pakistan's sovereign debt rating to "negative" in 2008 and the county's rating remains six levels below investment grade .

democracy has fared poorly in pakistan , with the country enduring direct military rule for more than half of its existence .

from 1999 to 2008 , army chief general pervez musharraf ran the government after leading a bloodless coup unseating the democratically elected prime minister nawaz sharif .

musharraf assumed the presidency and later oversaw passage of the 17 th amendment to pakistan's constitution , greatly increasing the power of that office .

in march 2008 , however , only months after the assassination of former prime minister benazir bhutto , a coalition led by bhutto's pakistan people's party ( ppp ) was elected in a sweeping rejection of the musharraf - allied parties .

the pakistan muslim league led by sharif ( pml - n ) also fared well , especially in the densely - populated punjab province , and joined the ppp in an unprecedented coalition that collapsed only after musharraf's august 2008 resignation from the presidency and exit from pakistan's political stage .

bhutto's widower , asif zardari , subsequently won electoral college vote for the presidency .

although prime minister gilani was seated in early 2008 , zardari retained most of the powers of the musharraf presidency until april 2010 .

u.s. officials had for some time expected zardari's powers to wane and reportedly readied themselves for this by developing ties with other leaders in both the ruling and oppositions parties , as well as in the pakistani military .

indeed , the demise of zardari's influence could make the u.s. government increasingly reliant on the pakistani army .

prime minister gilani has been able to step into the political space opened by zardari's woes and has managed to balance well competing pressures from the opposition , members of his own party and coalition allies , and the army , which may find him more amenable and trustworthy than zardari .

although april's passage of the 18 th amendment gives him new and sweeping powers , prime minister gilani , a consensus - builder and a staunch ally of zardari , has not radically altered the dynamics of their relationship .

still , the civilian government has remained weak , and some analysts even expected the ppp - led coalition to collapse during 2010 .

nearly three years after pakistan's relatively credible national elections seated a civilian government , the country's military establishment is still seen to be where pakistan's foreign policy and national security policies originate .

hand - picked by president - general musharraf to lead the army , general kayani has since his 2007 appointment taken concrete measures to withdraw the military from direct involvement in the country's governance .

many analysts saw the moves being motivated by a desire to improve the institutional image of the military after a serious erosion of its status under musharraf .

yet there remain no signs of meaningful civilian control of the army or isi , and analytic views of kayani's role as a secular - and democratic - minded figure appear to have shifted away from guarded optimism toward a perception that he , like the generals who came before him , will place the interests of the security services above all others , and may not be fully trustworthy partner in efforts to battle islamist extremism .

by all accounts , since musharraf's 2008 departure the influence of what one commentator calls pakistan's "biggest and best organized political party , the pakistani army," has only increased .

pakistan is the setting for serious perceived human rights abuses , some of them perpetrated and / or sanctioned by the state .

according to the u.s. department of state , the islamabad government is known to limit freedoms of association , religion , and movement , and to imprison political leaders .

notable recent abuses have been related to violent attacks on religious minorities , indefinite government detention of detainees related to anti - terrorism efforts , and alleged extrajudicial executions perpetrated by the pakistani military in conflict areas .

most recently , specific u.s. government attention to human rights abuses in pakistan have centered on press freedoms , abuses perpetrated by security forces , and religious freedoms threatened by pakistan's "blasphemy law. .

pakistan is today among the world's leading recipients of u.s. aid .

since the 2001 renewal of large u.s. assistance packages , pakistan by the end of fy2010 had obtained more than $10.7 billion in overt assistance since 2001 , including about $6 billion in development and humanitarian aid , and some $4.4 billion for security - related programs .

 ( this does not include reimbursements for militarized counterterrorism efforts .

see table 1 . ) .

in september 2009 , both chambers of congress passed their own pakistan - specific bills authorizing increased nonmilitary aid to pakistan ( to $1.5 billion per year for five years ) and placing certain conditions on future security - related aid to that country .

the enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2009 became p.l .

111-73 on october 15 .

earlier in 2009 , congress established a new pakistan counterinsurgency capability fund ( pccf ) that is being used to enhance the ability of pakistani security forces to effectively combat militancy .

to date , pccf appropriations have totaled $1.1 billion .

moreover , since fy2002 congress has appropriated billions of dollars to reimburse pakistan ( and other nations ) for their operational and logistical support of u.s. - led counterterrorism operations .

at more than $8 billion , these "coalition support funds" ( csf ) have accounted for nearly half of all overt u.s. financial transfers to pakistan since 2001 .

the obama administration's fy2010 budget request had already reflected a major new emphasis on nonmilitary assistance to pakistan , most notably by greatly increasing funds meant for economic development ( the esf request of more than $1 billion nearly doubled that of the previous fiscal year ) .

in addition , both law enforcement and military training funding were roughly doubled .

for fy2011 , the administration has requested further boosts in foreign assistance for pakistan , including a doubling of global health and child survival funds ( to $67 million ) and increased economic support .

security - related assistance may also increase significantly , most notably with the administration seeking to fund the pccf — now overseen by the state department — with $1.2 billion .

the total assistance to pakistan channeled through state is thus set to increase by about 20% ( from $2.5 billion in fy2010 to more than $3 billion in fy2011 ) , even when fy2010 supplemental requests are included .

in addition to boosting development aid and placing conditions on future military aid to that country , major pakistan - specific legislation in the 111 th congress ( p.l .

111-73 ) , also known as the "kerry - lugar - berman" bill , contains numerous reporting requirements , most aimed at ensuring maximal accountability and transparency for u.s. future assistance funds .

the act caused major controversy in pakistan , where elements of the military and political opposition parties criticized it as an "infringement on pakistani sovereignty. .

many independent observers saw the unexpectedly strong pakistani reaction as being fueled and perhaps even generated by a combination of military elements and opposition political forces who shared a common cause of weakening the ppp - led government .

more specifically , this perspective had army chief general kayani engaged in an ongoing struggle with president zardari and prime minister gilani over ultimate control of the country's military .

one effect of the u.s. legislation was to place the united states in the middle of this battle , which dissipated as quickly as it had arisen .

there is an ongoing debate about how best to channel large increases in foreign assistance to pakistan .

it is claimed that roughly half of all u.s. aid pledged for pakistan is spent on administrative costs , including highly - paid foreign experts , thus forwarding the argument that aid flows would be more effective if channeled through pakistani agencies .

pakistani officials believe that administrative costs can be further reduced by channeling aid primarily through pakistani government agencies rather than through nongovernmental organizations .

the state department has planned to significantly scale back its use of u.s. aid contractors in pakistan and begin channeling more money directly to pakistani officials and local groups .

yet there are energetic opponents of such a shift .

representative is a "dissent cable" from a senior economist working for usaid in pakistan warning that pakistani aid contractors and ngos are inexperienced and ill - equipped to effectively deliver aid: "directing an immediate shift away from u.s. contractors already on the ground to local implementers without an appropriate transition period will seriously compromise the more important requirements for quick counterinsurgency and economic impacts. .

some nongovernmental u.s. aid experts have issued similar warnings .

even some in pakistan believe that experienced western aid professionals are likely to produce better results than "low - paid government functionaries. .

senator john kerry is concerned that large - scale corruption could seriously undermine the u.s. aid effort in pakistan and he has pressed the state department to carefully track aid flows to that country .

the senate foreign relations committee chairman has warned ambassador holbrooke that plans to shift a majority of assistance funds directly though pakistani organizations and government agencies increases the possibility that those funds will be stolen or poorly spent .

a "friends of democratic pakistan" ( fodp ) group was launched in september 2008 , when president zardari and the top diplomats of the united arab emirates , britain , and the united states were joined by foreign ministers from australia , canada , france , germany , italy , japan , and turkey , and representatives of china , the european union , and the united nations .

a resulting statement expressed agreement to work in strategic partnership with pakistan to combat violent extremism ; develop a comprehensive approach to economic and social development ; coordinate an approach to stabilizing and developing border regions ; address pakistan's energy shortfall ; and support democratic institutions .

in april 2009 , 31 countries and 18 international institutions sent representatives to an fodp / donors' conference in tokyo .

there ambassador holbrooke announced the administration's intent to provide a total of $1 billion in assistance to pakistan over the 2009-2010 period , bringing to more than $5 billion the total offered by the international community on top of the imf package .

at an fodp summit meeting in new york in september co - chaired by president obama , president zardari , and british prime minister [author name scrubbed] , the forum reiterated its central goals , but no further specifics were discussed pending more detailed pakistani development proposals .

the fodp's third ministerial meeting took place in october , when donors continued to press pakistan to reform its economy , especially through an expansion of the tax base .

the obama administration's congressionally - mandated pakistan assistance strategy report , issued in december 2009 , lays out the principal objectives of nonmilitary u.s. assistance to pakistan ( to help "in building a stable , secure , and prosperous pakistan" ) , a general description of the programs and projects designed to achieve these goals , and a plan for monitoring and evaluating the effort .

for fy2010-fy2014 , it proposes to devote $3.5 billion — nearly half of the $7.5 billion of the aid authorized by the enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2010 — to "high - impact , high - visibility" infrastructure programs , especially in the energy and agriculture sectors .

another $2 billion will fund health , education , and humanitarian programs , while the remaining $2 billion will seek to develop pakistani government capacity by improving national and local governance , and security and legal institutions .

a focus on infrastructure projects is meant to "provide tangible benefits to pakistani citizens and help pakistan ameliorate energy and water shortages , and to demonstrate that "the united states is committed to helping address some of the problems that most affect the everyday lives of pakistanis. .

geographically , u.s. programs concentrate on the kpk province and fata , along with other areas "vulnerable to extremism," such as southern punjab .

the special representative for afghanistan and pakistan ( srap ) presents five goals for civilian assistance to pakistan: ( 1 ) helping to address urgent energy and water crises ; ( 2 ) supporting broader economic and political reforms necessary for sustainable growth ; ( 3 ) improving pakistanis' prospects for better health care and education ; ( 4 ) helping respond to humanitarian challenges ; and ( 5 ) combating extremism .

in this effort , reliance on large international contractors will be reduced in favor of building local capacity through pakistani implementing partners that will be carefully vetted by american and pakistani accountants .

to mitigate the risk of increased corruption , the numbers of direct - hire contracting staff and inspector - general personnel inside pakistan will be increased .

in mid - 2009 , the obama administration began emphasizing the importance of upgrading pakistan's struggling energy sector .

u.s. - pakistan security cooperation accelerated rapidly after 2001 , and president bush formally designated pakistan as a major non - nato u.s. ally in 2004 .

the close u.s. - pakistan security ties of the cold war era , which came to a near halt after the 1990 aid cutoff , were restored as a result of pakistan's role in the u.s. - led anti - terrorism campaign .

in 2002 , the united states began allowing commercial sales that enabled pakistan to refurbish at least part of its fleet of american - made f - 16 fighter aircraft and , three years later , washington announced that it would resume sales of new f - 16 fighters to pakistan after a 16-year hiatus .

during the g.w .

bush administration , a revived u.s. - pakistan defense consultative group ( dcg ) — moribund from 1997 to 2001 — sat for high - level discussions on military cooperation , security assistance , and anti - terrorism .

the forum has continued under the obama administration ; its 19 th and most recent session came in august 2010 , when an american delegation led by under secretary of defense for policy michelle flournoy met with their pakistani counterparts to continue dialogue on strategic security issues and seek means to accelerate counterterrorism cooperation .

pentagon officials have for some time been frustrated by the allegedly feckless counterinsurgency efforts of the internally squabbling islamabad government in the recent past .

reports indicate that u.s. officials have been disheartened by signs that the pakistani military is slow to shift away from a conventional war strategy focused on india , and they have made clear the united states stands ready to assist pakistan in reorienting its army for counterinsurgency efforts .

this is not clearly a task the pakistani military leadership has been eager to complete .

in an effort to more effectively channel u.s. security assistance so as to specifically strengthen pakistan's counterinsurgency capabilities , the pentagon proposed — and congress later endorsed — creation of a dedicated fund , the pccf .

there are concerns that allegedly serious human rights abuses by the army in swat , including extrajudicial killings and the holding of some 2,500 suspected militants in indefinite detention , could trigger so - called "leahy amendment" restrictions on future u.s. security assistance .

major u.s. arms sales and grants to pakistan since 2001 have included items useful for counterterrorism operations , along with a number of "big ticket" platforms more suited to conventional warfare .

in dollar value terms , the bulk of purchases are made with pakistani national funds , but u.s. grants are currently eclipsing this in recent years .

the pentagon reports total foreign military sales agreements with pakistan worth $5.4 billion for fy2002-fy2010 ( in - process sales of f - 16 combat aircraft and related equipment account for more than half of this ) .

the united states also has provided pakistan with more than $2.1 billion in foreign military financing ( fmf ) since 2001 ( including scheduled fy2010 funds ) .

these funds are used to purchase u.s. military equipment for longer - term modernization efforts .

pakistan also has been granted u.s. defense supplies as excess defense articles ( eda ) .

major post - 2001 defense supplies provided or soon - to - be provided under fmf include: eight p - 3c orion maritime patrol aircraft and their refurbishment ( valued at $474 million ; two delivered ) ; about 6,312 tow anti - armor missiles ( $186 million ; at least 2,007 delivered ) ; more than 5,600 military radio sets ( $163 million ) ; six an / tps - 77 surveillance radars ( $100 million ) ; six c - 130e transport aircraft and their refurbishment ( $76 million ) ; five refurbished sh - 2i super seasprite maritime helicopters granted under eda ( $67 million ) ; the uss mcinerney , an ex - perry class missile frigate ( via eda , $65 million for refurbishment ) ; 20 ah - 1f cobra attack helicopters via eda ( $48 million , 12 refurbished and delivered ) ; and 121 refurbished tow missile launchers ( $25 million ) .

supplies paid for with a mix of pakistani national funds and fmf include: up to 60 mid - life update kits for f - 16a / b combat aircraft ( valued at $891 million , with $477 million of this in fmf ; pakistan's current plans are to purchase 35 such kits ) ; and 115 m - 109 self - propelled howitzers ( $87 million , with $53 million in fmf ) .

notable items paid for entirely with pakistani national funds include: 18 new f - 16c / d block 50 / 52 combat aircraft , with an option for 18 more ( valued at $1.43 billion , 17 delivered to date ) ; f - 16 armaments including 500 amraam air - to - air missiles ; 1,450 2,000-pound bombs ; 500 jdam bomb tail kits for gravity bombs ; and 1,600 enhanced paveway laser - guided bomb kits , also for gravity bombs ( $629 million ) ; 100 harpoon anti - ship missiles ( $298 million ) ; 500 sidewinder air - to - air missiles ( $95 million ) ; and six phalanx close - in weapons system naval guns ( $80 million ) .

major articles transferred via eda include: 14 f - 16a / b combat aircraft ; 59 t - 37 military trainer jets ; and 550 m - 113 armored personnel carriers .

under 1206 , frontier corps , and pakistan counterinsurgency capability fund authorities , pakistan has received four mi - 17 multirole helicopters ( another six were provided temporarily at no cost ) , two king air 350 surveillance aircraft , 450 vehicles for the frontier corps , 20 buffalo explosives detection and disposal vehicles , hundreds of m - 141 bunker defeat munitions , helicopter spare parts , sophisticated explosives detectors , night vision devices , radios , body armor , helmets , first aid kits , litters , and large amounts of other individual soldier equipment .

pakistan is eager to receive more counterinsurgency hardware for use in western pakistan , including armored personnel carriers , laser target designators , laser - guided munitions , and more night - vision goggles and surveillance gear .

they also request better and more sophisticated surveillance and communications equipment , along with more attack and utility helicopters .

the defense department has characterized f - 16 fighters , p - 3c patrol aircraft , and anti - armor missiles as having significant anti - terrorism applications .

the state department has claimed that , since 2005 , fmf funds have been "solely for counterterrorism efforts , broadly defined. .

such claims elicit skepticism from some observers , and analysts who emphasize the importance of strengthening the u.s. - india strategic partnership have called u.s. military aid to pakistan incompatible with u.s. strategic goals in the region .

moreover , u.s. officials are concerned that pakistan has altered some conventional u.s. - supplied weapons in ways that could violate the arms export control act .

such alleged modification include expanding the capability of both harpoon anti - ship missiles and p - 3c naval aircraft for land - attack missions .

the islamabad government categorically rejects the allegations .

indian observers were unsurprised by the claims ; new delhi's leaders continuously complain that pakistan diverts most forms of u.s. assistance toward india .

some more suspicious analysts even see purpose in such a dynamic: a u.s. wish to maintain pakistan's viability as a regional balancer to indian hegemony .

in the summer and fall of 2009 , some reports had pakistani officials claiming the military could not take immediate advantage of ttp chief baitullah mehsud's death due to a shortage of counterinsurgency equipment it needed from the united states .

some analysts complained that a delay in the expected south waziristan offensive could in part be traced to u.s. "withholding" of equipment .

pentagon officials deny that pakistan has been prevented or deterred from acquiring the counterinsurgency equipment it wants and needs .

indeed , during the course of the fighting in south waziristan , pakistan received low - profile but significant u.s. assistance in the form of transport helicopters , parts for helicopter gunships , and infantry equipment , along with unprecedented intelligence and surveillance video sharing from american uavs .

in anticipation of new counterinsurgency operations in 2010 , the united states provided the pakistani air force with about 1,000 quarter - ton bombs , along with up to 1,000 kits for making gravity bombs laser - guided - capable .

as noted above , transfers to pakistan of such offensive weaponry are viewed with a wary eye by the indian government .

pakistani officials have continued to complain that u.s. - supplied defense equipment , especially that most needed for counterinsurgency operations such as attack and utility helicopters , has been too slow in coming .

the pakistani ambassador to the united states has himself been quoted as claiming that , in his first two years in washington , pakistan received only eight used mi - 17 transport helicopters and that pakistan's military operations have been hindered by a lack of equipment .

such claims rile u.s. officials , who document that the united states has provided pakistan with at least 50 helicopters since 2006 — 12 of them armed cobra models — and who note that the delivery of more top - line attack helicopters has come under delay because of pakistani inaction .

former joint chiefs chairman and secretary of state colin powell has urged the obama administration to do a better job of providing the pakistani military with the mobility and intelligence capabilities needed for counterinsurgency operations .

in september 2010 , the pentagon notified congress of a potential sale to pakistan of 30 bell 412 utility helicopters and related support and training worth up to $397 million .

the bush administration launched an initiative to strengthen the capacity of the frontier corps ( fc ) , an 65,000-man paramilitary force overseen by the pakistani interior ministry .

the fc has primary responsibility for border security in the kpk and baluchistan provinces .

the pentagon in 2007 began using its funds to train and equip the fc , as well as to increase the involvement of the u.s. special operations command in assisting with pakistani counterterrorism efforts .

americans are also engaged in training pakistan's elite special service group commandos with a goal of doubling that force's size to 5,000 .

the u.s. program to train pakistan's paramilitary forces reportedly has been hampered by pakistan's reluctance to send troops who are needed for urgent operations elsewhere .

some analysts also contend that only u.s. military personnel ( as opposed to contractors ) can effectively train pakistani soldiers .

other security - related programs for pakistan are aimed especially at bolstering islamabad's counterterrorism and border security efforts , and have included u.s. - funded road - building projects in the kpk and fata .

the united states also has undertaken to train and equip new pakistan army air assault units that can move quickly to find and target terrorist elements .

u.s. - funded military education and training programs seek to enhance the professionalism of pakistan's military leaders , and develop respect for rule of law , human rights , and democratic values .

at least 300 pakistani officers have received such training since 2001 .

u.s. security assistance to pakistan's civilian sector is aimed at strengthening the country's law enforcement capabilities through basic police training , provision of advanced identification systems , and establishment of a new counterterrorism special investigation group .

u.s. efforts may be hindered by pakistani shortcomings that include poorly trained and poorly equipped personnel who generally are underpaid by ineffectively coordinated and overburdened government agencies .

pakistan's weak criminal justice sector is marked by conviction rates below 10% , poorly trained investigators , and rampant corruption .

some analysts link the problem to democratization more broadly , and urge much greater u.s. and international attention to bolstering pakistan's civilian security sector .

the findings of a 2008 think - tank report reflected a widely held view that pakistan's police and civilian intelligence agencies are better suited to combating insurgency and terrorism than are the country's regular army .

the report found that pakistan's police forces are "incapable of combating crime , upholding the law , or protecting citizens and the state against militant violence," and placed the bulk of responsibility on the politicization of the police forces .

the report recommended sweeping reforms to address corruption and human rights abuses .

p.l .

111-8 : the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( became public law on march 11 , 2009 ) : limits fy2009 foreign military financing for pakistan to "border security , counterterrorism , and law enforcement activities directed against al qaeda , the taliban , and associated groups. .

bars the use of such funds for any program initially funded under the authority of section 1206 of the 2006 defense authorization ( p.l .

109-163 ) , which pertains to pentagon programs for training and equipping foreign military forces .

p.l .

111-32 : the supplemental appropriations act , 2009 ( became public law on june 24 , 2009 ) : appropriates $672 million in supplemental fy2009 assistance funds for pakistan .

appropriates $1 billion for continuing coalition support reimbursements to key cooperating nations ( pakistan typically receives roughly 80% of such funds ) .

establishes new u.s. treasury funds providing a total of $1.1 billion for strengthening pakistani counterinsurgency capabilities through fy2011 .

requires the president to report to congress an assessment of the extent to which the afghan and pakistani governments are demonstrating the necessary commitment , capability , conduct and unity of purpose to warrant the continuation of the president's policy announced in march 2009 .

requires the president to report to congress a clear statement of the objectives of united states policy with respect to afghanistan and pakistan , and the metrics to be used to assess progress toward achieving such objectives .

p.l. - 111-73 : the enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2009 ( became public law on october 15 , 2009 ) : authorizes $1.5 billion per fiscal year for nonmilitary assistance to pakistan for fy2010-fy2014 , and establishes a sense of congress that , subject to an improving political and economic climate in pakistan , such aid levels should continue through fy2019 .

prohibits military assistance and arms transfers to pakistan during fy2010-fy2014 unless the secretary of state annually certifies for congress that ( 1 ) pakistan is continuing to cooperate with the united states to dismantle illicit nuclear proliferation networks ; ( 2 ) pakistan's government is making significant efforts to combat terrorist groups ; and ( 3 ) pakistan's security forces are not subverting pakistan's political or judicial processes .

directs the secretary of state to submit a pakistan assistance strategy report to congress containing descriptions of objectives , and monitoring and accountability mechanisms .

p.l .

111-84 : the national defense authorization act for fy2010 ( became public law on october 28 , 2009 ) : directs the secretary of state to carry out a program to provide for the registration and end - use monitoring of defense articles and services transferred to pakistan ( and afghanistan ) , and to prohibit the retransfer of such articles and services without u.s. consent .

requires the secretary to ( 1 ) assess possible alternatives to reimbursements to pakistan for logistical , military , or other support provided to or in connection with u.s. military operations ; and ( 2 ) report assessment results to the defense , appropriations , and foreign relations committees .

directs the secretary to report semiannually to congress on progress toward long - term security and stability in pakistan .

p.l .

111-118 : the department of defense appropriations act , 2010 ( became public law on december 19 , 2009 ) requires the director of the office of management and budget , in consultation with the secretary of defense and other defense officials , to submit to congress a quarterly report on the proposed use of all pakistan counterinsurgency fund ( pcf ) spending on a project - by - project basis .

requires the secretary of defense to notify congress of any new pcf projects or fund transfers in excess of $20 million .

h.r .

1463 : to restrict u.s. military assistance to pakistan ( referred to house committee on march 12 , 2009 ) : would have prohibited u.s. military assistance to pakistan unless the president certified for congress that the islamabad government was making a.q .

khan available for questioning by u.s. officials and that it was adequately monitoring khan's activities so as to prevent his participation in any further nuclear proliferation .

s. 496 : afghanistan and pakistan reconstruction opportunity zones act of 2009 ( referred to senate committee on february 26 , 2009 ; a related bill , h.r .

1318 , was passed by the house as part of h.r .

1886 on june 11 , 2009 ) : would have provided duty - free treatment for certain goods from designated reconstruction opportunity zones in afghanistan and pakistan .

