the concentration of rare earth elements ( rees ) production in china raises the important issue of supply vulnerability .

rees are used for many commercial applications including new energy technologies , electronic devices , automobiles , and national security applications .

is the united states vulnerable to supply disruptions ? .

are these elements essential to u.s. national security and economic well - being ? .

the examination of rees for new energy technologies reveals a concentrated and complex global supply chain and numerous end - use applications .

placing the ree supply chain in the global context is unavoidable .

the current goal of u.s. mineral policy is to promote an adequate , stable , and reliable supply of materials for u.s. national security , economic well - being , and industrial production .

u.s. mineral policy emphasizes developing domestic supplies of critical materials and encourages the domestic private sector to produce and process those materials .

but some raw materials do not exist in economic quantities in the united states , and processing , manufacturing , and other downstream ventures in the united states may not be cost competitive with facilities in other regions of the world .

however , there may be public policies enacted or executive branch measures taken to offset the u.s. disadvantage of its potentially higher - cost operations .

the private sector may achieve lower - cost operations with technology breakthroughs .

based on this policy framework , congress and the administration are discussing the impact of china's near - monopoly position in rare earth elements and a range of potential federal investments that would support the development of a vertically integrated rare earth supply chain in the united states .

aside from a small amount of recycling , the united states is 100% reliant on imports of rees and highly dependent on many other minerals that support its economy .

for example , the united states is more than 90% import - reliant for the following minerals: manganese ( 100% ) , bauxite ( 100% ) , platinum ( 94% ) , and uranium ( 90% ) .

while import reliance may be a cause for concern , high import reliance is not necessarily the best measure , or even a good measure , of supply risk .

the supply risk for bauxite , for example , may not be the same as that for rees due to the multiplicity of potential sources .

in the case of rees , the dominance of china as a single or dominant supplier of the raw material , downstream oxides , associated metals , and alloys may be a cause for concern because of china's export restrictions and growing internal demand for its rees .

this report provides a discussion of the major issues and concerns of the global supply chain for rees , their major end uses , and legislative and other policy proposals that congress may consider to improve the u.s. rare earth position .

an appendix section provides a summary of rare earth - related legislation in the 113 th congress .

there are 17 rare earth elements ( rees ) , 15 within the chemical group called lanthanides , plus yttrium and scandium .

the lanthanides consist of the following: lanthanum , cerium , praseodymium , neodymium , promethium , samarium , europium , gadolinium , terbium , dysprosium , holmium , erbium , thulium , ytterbium , and lutetium .

rare earths are moderately abundant in the earth's crust , some even more abundant than copper , lead , gold , and platinum .

while some are more abundant than many other minerals , most rees are not concentrated enough to make them easily exploitable economically .

the united states was once self - reliant in domestically produced rees , but over the past 15 years has become 100% reliant on imports , primarily from china , because of lower - cost operations .

the lanthanides are often broken into two groups: light rare earth elements ( lrees ) — lanthanum through europium ( atomic numbers 57-63 ) and the heavier rare earth elements ( hrees ) — gadolinium through lutetium ( atomic numbers 64-71 ) .

yttrium is typically classified as a heavy element .

currently , the dominant end uses for rare earth elements in the united states are for automobile catalysts and petroleum refining catalysts , use in phosphors in color television and flat panel displays ( cell phones , portable dvds , and laptops ) , permanent magnets and rechargeable batteries for hybrid and electric vehicles , and numerous medical devices ( see table 1 ) .

there are important defense applications such as jet fighter engines , missile guidance systems , antimissile defense , and satellite and communication systems .

permanent magnets containing neodymium , gadolinium , dysprosium , and terbium ( ndfeb magnets ) are used in numerous electrical and electronic components and new - generation generators for wind turbines .

about 75% of the ndfeb permanent magnet production is concentrated in china .

another 22% is produced in japan .

see table 1 for selected end uses of rare earth elements .

it has been estimated that the department of defense ( dod ) uses about 5% of domestic consumption of rare earths .

however , no firm estimates are available at this time .

rare earth elements used for defense purposes are primarily found in two types of commercially available , permanent magnet materials .

they are samarium cobalt ( smco ) and neodymium iron boron ( ndfeb ) .

ndfeb magnets are considered the world's strongest permanent magnets and are essential to many military weapons systems .

smco retains its magnetic strength at elevated temperatures and is ideal for military technologies such as precision - guided missiles , smart bombs , and aircraft .

the superior strength of ndfeb allows for the use of smaller and lighter magnets in defense weapon systems .

permanent magnets containing neodymium , gadolinium , dysprosium , and terbium are also used in numerous electrical and electronic components and generators for wind turbines .

with the exception of small amounts of yttrium , rare earths have yet to be included in the strategic materials stockpile for national defense purposes .

generally , strategic and critical materials have been associated with national security purposes .

in the strategic materials protection board's ( smpb's ) last report ( december 2008 ) , the smpb defined critical materials in this way: "the criticality of a material is a function of its importance in dod applications , the extent to which dod actions are required to shape and sustain the market , and the impact and likelihood of supply disruption. .

dod's current position on strategic materials was largely determined by the findings of the smpb .

many scientific organizations have concluded that certain rare earth metals are critical to u.s. national security and becoming increasingly more important in defense applications .

some experts are concerned that dod is not doing enough to mitigate the possible risk posed by a scarcity of domestic suppliers .

as an example , the united states magnet materials association ( usmma ) , a coalition of companies representing aerospace , medical , and electronic materials , has recently expanded its focus to include rare earth metals and the rare earth magnet supply chain .

in february 2010 , usmma unveiled a six - point plan to address what they describe as the "impending rare earth crisis," which they assert poses a significant threat to the economy and national security of the united states .

however , it appears that dod's position assumes that there are a sufficient number of supplier countries worldwide to mitigate the potential for shortages .

the defense authorization act of 2014 ( h.r .

1960 ) , passed by the house on june 14 , 2013 , would require the dod to develop rare earth supply chain risk mitigation strategies , among other things .

rare earth elements often occur with other elements , such as copper , gold , uranium , phosphates , and iron , and have often been produced as a byproduct .

the lighter elements , such as lanthanum , cerium , praseodymium , and neodymium , are more abundant and concentrated and usually make up about 80% - 99% of a total deposit .

the heavier elements — gadolinium through lutetium and yttrium — are scarcer but very "desirable," according to usgs commodity analysts .

most rees throughout the world are located in deposits of the minerals bastnaesite and monazite .

bastnaesite deposits in the united states and china account for the largest concentrations of rees , while monazite deposits in australia , south africa , china , brazil , malaysia , and india account for the second - largest concentrations of rees .

bastnaesite occurs as a primary mineral , while monazite is found in primary deposits of other ores and typically recovered as a byproduct .

over 90% of the world's economically recoverable rare earth elements are found in primary mineral deposits ( i.e. , in bastnaesite ores ) .

concerns over radioactive hazards associated with monazites ( because it contains thorium ) have nearly eliminated it as an ree source in the united states .

there are high costs associated with thorium disposal .

bastnaesite , a low - thorium mineral ( dominated by lanthanum , cerium , and neodymium ) , was shipped from stocks in mountain pass , ca , prior to new mine production at mountain pass .

the more desirable hrees account for only 0.4% of the total stock .

monazites have been produced as a minor byproduct of uranium and niobium processing .

rare earth element reserves and resources are found in colorado , idaho , montana , missouri , utah , and wyoming .

hrees dominate in the quebec - labrador ( strange lake ) and northwest territories ( thor lake ) areas of canada .

there are high - grade deposits in bayan obo , inner mongolia , china ( where much of the world's ree production is taking place ) and lower - grade deposits in south china provinces providing a major source of the heavy rare earth elements .

areas considered to be attractive for ree development include strange lake and thor lake in canada ; karonga , burundi ; and wigu hill in southern tanzania .

table 2 and figure 4 illustrate china's near - monopoly position in world rare earth production .

however , ree reserves and the reserve base are more dispersed throughout the world .

china holds 50% of the world's reserves ( 55 million metric tons out of 110 million metric tons ) and the united states holds about 13% , according to the most recent usgs estimate .

south africa and canada ( included in the "other" category ) have significant ree potential , according to the usgs .

ree reserves are also found in australia , brazil , india , russia , south africa , malaysia , and malawi .

according to some geologists , careful consideration should be given to the feasibility of mining and processing of rees as a byproduct of phosphorus deposits and from titanium and niobium mines in brazil and elsewhere in the world .

canadian , chinese , and u.s. firms have recently assessed various ree deposits associated with development of primary minerals such as gold , iron ore , and mineral sand projects in the united states .

there is currently significant rare earth mine production at mountain pass , ca , in the united states .

u.s. - based molycorp operates a mine and separation plant at mountain pass , ca , and sells the rare earth concentrates and refined products from previously mined above - ground stocks and recent new mine production .

neodymium , praseodymium , and lanthanum oxides are produced for further processing , but these materials are not turned into rare earth metal in the united states .

while molycorp exports much of its rees to japan and china , the previously mined material was never counted in the trade equation for import reliance because the material was not produced from a primary source .

molycorp , which has an exploration program underway to further delineate its rare earth mineral deposits , continues to ramp up for full production in 2014 and recently commissioned its new separation facilities .

molycorp's mountain pass deposit contained an estimated 30 million tons of ree reserves and once produced as much as 20,000 tons per year .

mountain pass cut - off grade ( below which the deposit may be uneconomic ) is , in some parts , 5.0% , while the average grade is 9.2% .

molycorp anticipates becoming the low - cost producer .

u.s. rare earth ( another u.s. based company ) , in the pre - feasibility stage of mine development , has long - term potential because of its large deposits in idaho , colorado , and montana .

canadian deposits contain the heavy rare earth elements dysprosium , terbium , and europium , which are needed for magnets to operate at high temperatures .

great western minerals group ( gwmg ) of canada and avalon rare metals have deposits with an estimated high content ( 7% and 20% respectively ) of heavy rare earth elements .

avalon is developing a rare earth deposit at thor lake in the northwest territories of canada .

drilling commenced in january 2010 .

thor lake is considered by some in the industry to contain one of the largest ree deposits in the world with the potential for production of heavy rees .

gwmg owns a magnet alloy producer in the u.k .

when gwmg begins production in canada and elsewhere , they plan to have a refinery near the mine site allowing greater integration and control over the supply chain .

gwmg's biggest competitive advantage could be its potential for a vertically integrated operation .

the japan oil , gas , and metals national corporation ( jogmec ) signed an agreement with midland exploration inc. for development of the ytterby project in quebec , canada .

jogmec is under the authority of the japanese ministry of economy , trade , and industry with a mandate to invest in projects worldwide to receive access to stable supplies of natural resources for japan .

the lynas corp. , based in australia , has immediate potential for light rare earths development , according to investor analyst jack lifton .

development of lynas's mt .

weld deposit in australia began new mine production in 2012 .

also , there is a feasibility study underway on whether to reopen the rare earth mine steenkampskraal ( skk ) in south africa .

an agreement between gwmg and rare earth extraction co. ltd. of stellenbosch to develop the mine is in progress .

access to a reliable supply to meet current and projected demand is an issue of concern .

in 2011 , china produced 95% of the world's rare earth elements ( measured in rare earth oxide content ) and continues to restrict exports of the material through quotas and export tariffs .

china has plans to reduce mine output , eliminate illegal operations , and restrict ree exports even further .

china has cut its exports of rare earth elements from about 50,000 metric tons in 2009 to 30,000 metric tons in 2010 — a 60% reduction from 2009 .

the chinese ministry of commerce announced export quotas of about 30,000 mt for 2011 , and they were established at 31,438 mt for 2012 and 2013 .

actual chinese rare earth exports were closer to 13,000 mt in 2012 because of lower demand .

the 2012 export allocations are awarded to companies if they meet government - established environmental / pollution controls standards .

according to china's ministry of commerce , its rare earths export quotas for the first half of 2014 will be 15 , 110 mt , slightly lower than the first half of 2013 ( 15,499 mt ) .

while limited production and processing capacity for rare earths currently exists elsewhere in the world , additional capacity is expected to be developed in the united states , australia , canada , and asia within one to five years , according to some experts .

chinese producers are also seeking to expand their production capacity or seek long - term supply agreements in areas around the world , particularly in africa and australia .

there are only a few exploration companies that develop the resource , and because of long lead times needed from discovery to refined elements , supply constraints are likely in the short term .

a department of energy report highlights mines that could potentially come on - stream in the next five years ( not including mt .

weld ( australia ) and mountain pass ( usa ) already on - stream ) : eastern coast ( brazil ) ; nolans bore ( australia ) ; nechalacor ( canada ) ; domng pao ( vietnam ) ; hoidas lake ( canada ) ; and dubbo zirconia ( australia ) .

this section provides a discussion of selected policy options that are included in legislation that has been introduced in the 112 th congress .

the appendix section of this report summarizes much of the rare earth - related legislation .

the house subcommittee on energy and mineral resources held a hearing on rare earth elements and critical materials legislation ( h.r .

761 and h.r .

1063 ) on march 21 , 2013 .

the hearing was held to address potential supply risk associated with rees , rare metals , and other critical materials .

the witness testimony covered themes such as the potential impacts of supply disruption , the need for a more efficient regulatory and permitting framework for domestic minerals and downstream processing development , more complete information and analysis of the global ree space , and the role of the u.s. government .

on september 18 , 2013 , the house passed h.r .

761 by a vote of 246-178 .

discussion of the u.s. government role focused on permitting timelines for domestic mineral development and the ability of the united states to meet its critical mineral needs .

below is a summary of selected current research , development , information , and analysis activities on rare earth elements at federal agencies .

the fy2014 budget request included funding for r&d on rare earth and other critical materials .

the doe recently announced the proposed funding for the "critical materials hub" to conduct r&d on a number of critical material challenges , including "end of life" recycling to help mitigate any possible supply chain disruptions .

in previous years , the office of science was funded to conduct a materials science and engineering program ( fy2010 enacted , $5 million ) at the ames national laboratory , and an energy innovation hub program to focus on critical materials r&d ( fy2012 enacted , $19.4 million ; fy2013 request , $24.2 million ) .

within the office of energy efficiency and renewable energy there is an applied magnet research program ( fy2010 , $2 million ) at ames laboratory and an alternative motor design program designing motors without rare earth permanent magnets ( fy2010 , $1.4 million ) at oak ridge national laboratory .

the advanced research projects agency - energy ( arpa - e ) ( fy2011 enacted , $179.6 million ; fy2012 enacted , $275 million ) is conducting research on batteries for electric energy storage ( fy2010 , $35 million ) and substitutes for rare earth magnets ( fy2009 , $6.6 million ) .

in december 2010 and december 2011 , the department of energy issued its critical materials strategy report .

these reports examine and provide demand forecasts for rare earths and other elements required for numerous energy and electronic applications .

the national minerals information center housed within the usgs provides an annual summary of rare earth activity in its mineral commodities summaries report and minerals yearbook .

the usgs also provides mineral resource assessments and has recently published a study on recycling of rare earths .

its most recent resource assessment of rare earth potential in the united states was published in a november 2010 usgs report .

the office of industrial policy is currently reviewing the rare earth mineral supply chain .

the office of the secretary of defense reviewed its national defense stockpile and issued a report in 2009: reconfiguration of the national defense stockpile report to congress , washington dc , u.s. department of defense .

as part of the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fy2011 ( section 843 of p.l .

111-383 ) , the dod was required by congress to prepare an "assessment and plan for critical rare earth materials in defense applications" to a number of congressional committees by july 6 , 2011 .

because the report was not yet available to congress , several members of the house armed services committee sent a letter on august 5 , 2011 , requesting an interim report from dod by august 19 , 2011 .

in march 2012 , dod released a seven - page report .

the report stated that "seven of the 17 rare earth elements were found to meet the criteria established in section 843. .

they are dysprosium , erbium , europium , gadolinium , neodymium , praseodymium , and yttrium .

dod's assessment of the forecast for a domestic supply for key rare earths concluded: "by 2012 u.s. production ( for seven rare earths used in military applications ) could satisfy the level of consumption required to meet defense procurement needs , with the exception of yttrium. .

in an april 2012 interview with bloomberg news , the dod head of industrial policy confirmed that dod uses less than 5% of rare earths used in the united states , and that dod was closely monitoring the rare earth materials market for any projected shortfalls or failures to meet mission requirements .

brett lambert , deputy assistant secretary of defense for manufacturing and industrial base policy , suggested that if material shortages were projected , dod would seek congressional approval to stockpile materials .

other measures could include the use of contingency contracting to meet dod requirements .

other executive branch agencies involved with rare earths and critical materials include the department of commerce and office of the u.s. trade representative , which reviews global trade policy ( eg , china's rare earth export policy ) and did initiate action ( march 2012 ) under world trade organization ( wto ) rules ; the department of state , which reports on host government policies , private sector activities , and domestic markets ; and the environmental protection agency , which establishes federal environmental standards for numerous activities , including mining .

the white house office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) has formed an interagency working group on critical and strategic minerals supply chains .

its participants include representatives from department of energy , department of defense , department of the interior , department of commerce , environmental protection agency , department of state , department of justice , and the office of the u.s. trade representative .

the group's focus is to establish critical mineral prioritization and an early warning mechanism for shortfalls , to establish federal r&d priorities , to review domestic and global policies related to critical and strategic minerals ( eg , stockpiling , recycling , trade , etc .

 ) , and to ensure the transparency of information .

h.r .

761 , the national strategic and critical minerals production act of 2013 introduced by mark e. amodei on february 15 , 2013 , and referred to house committees on natural resources and the judiciary .

h.r .

761 passed by a vote of 246-178 on september 18 , 2013 .

the bill defines critical and strategic minerals and would seek to streamline the federal permitting process for domestic mineral exploration and development .

it would establish responsibilities of the "lead" federal agency to set clear mine permitting goals , minimize delays , and follow time schedules when evaluating a mine plan of operations .

the review process would be limited to 30 months , and the priority of the lead agency would be to maximize the development of the mineral resource while mitigating environmental impacts .

s. 1600 , critical minerals policy act of 2013 introduced by senator lisa murkowski on october 29 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on energy and natural resources .

the bill would define what critical minerals are , but would request that the secretary of the interior establish a methodology that would identify which minerals qualify as critical .

the secretary of the interior shall maintain a list of critical minerals not to exceed 20 at any given time .

the bill would establish analytical and forecasting capability on mineral / metal market dynamics as part of u.s. mineral policy .

the secretary of the interior would direct a comprehensive resource assessment of critical mineral potential in the united states , assessing the most critical minerals first and including details on the critical mineral potential on federal lands .

s. 1600 would require the national academy of sciences to update its 1999 report hardrock mining on federal lands , examine the regulatory framework for mineral development in the united states , and provide the number and location of abandoned hardrock mines .

agency review and reports would be intended to facilitate a more efficient process for critical minerals exploration on federal lands , and specifically would require performance metrics for permitting mineral development activity and report on the timeline of each phase of the process .

the department of energy would establish an r&d program to examine the alternatives to critical minerals and explore recycling and material efficiencies through the supply chain .

the department of the interior ( doi ) would produce an annual critical minerals outlook report that would provide forecasts of domestic supply , demand , and price for up to 10 years .

the proposed annual critical minerals outlook would also assess critical mineral requirements for national security , energy , and economic well - being , and provide analyses of the implications of potential supply shortfalls .

it would provide projections for recycling and market penetration of alternatives and international trends associated with critical minerals .

section 110 proposes greater international cooperation with allies on critical minerals and supply chain issues .

if it were determined that there is no viable production capacity in the united states , a series of activities may occur with allies , led by the secretary of state and secretary of the interior .

the secretary of labor would lead research and development on critical minerals and workforce development that would support a fully integrated supply chain in the united states .

title ii of the bill recommends mineral - specific action ( led by doe ) for cobalt , lead , lithium , thorium , and non - traditional sources for rare earth elements .

for example , there would be r&d for the novel use of cobalt , grants for domestic lithium production r&d , and a study on issues associated with establishing a licensing pathway for the complete thorium nuclear fuel cycle .

title iii would repeal the 1980 minerals policy act and the critical minerals act of 1984 and would authorize for appropriation $60 million .

h.r .

981 , the resource assessment of rare earths ( rare ) act of 2013 introduced by representative hank johnson on march 6 , 2013 , and referred to house committee on natural resources .

on may 15 , 2013 , it was ordered to be reported by unanimous consent .

the bill would direct the director of the u.s. geological survey through the secretary of the interior to examine the need for future geological research on rare earth elements and other minerals and determine the criticality and impact of a potential supply restriction or vulnerability .

h.r .

1063 , national strategic and critical minerals policy act of 2013 introduced by representative doug lamborn on march 12 , 2013 , and referred to the house committee on natural resources .

on may 15 , 2013 , ordered reported by unanimous consent .

the bill would direct the secretary of the interior to prepare a report on public lands that have been withdrawn or are otherwise unavailable for mineral exploration and development , mineral requirements of the united states , the nation's import reliance on those minerals , a timeline for permitting mineral - related activities on public lands , and the impacts of litigation on issuing mineral permits , among other things .

the bill provides an authorization for appropriation , to the secretary of the interior , of $1 million for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 .

h.r .

1022 , securing energy critical elements and american jobs act of 2013 introduced by representative eric swalwell on march 6 , 2013 , and referred to the house subcommittee on energy on march 21 , 2013 .

the bill would establish an r&d program within the department of energy focused on the long - term supply security of energy critical elements needed for u.s. national security , economic development , and industrial production .

the president of the united states would direct the office of science and technology policy to coordinate interagency actions that would promote an adequate and stable supply of energy critical elements , establish early warning systems for supply disruptions , evaluate federal energy critical needs , and encourage the private sector in developing a stable supply chain for energy critical elements .

the bill would authorize the secretary of energy to make loan guarantee commitments for specified commercial rare earth materials projects .

h.r .

1960 , national defense authorization act for fy2014 introduced by representative howard p. mckeon on may 14 , 2013 .

in the house - passed version of the national defense authorization act for fy2014 ( h.r .

1960 ) , congress has proposed legislation that would give the president more authority to conserve strategic and critical materials , as well as direct the secretary of defense to report on plans to assess the supply chain diversification for rare earth substitutes and develop risk mitigation strategies .

subtitle b — national defense stockpile section 1411 would modify the president's authority to maintain and manage a national defense stockpile , and allow the defense logistics agency to more proactively engage in the market .

these changes would grant the president the authority to conserve strategic and critical materials .

section 1412 would provide authority to acquire certain additional strategic and critical materials for the national defense stockpile .

the materials anticipated to be acquired ( eg , ferroniobium , dysprosium metal , yttrium oxide , among others ) have been identified to meet the military , industrial , and essential civilian needs of the united states .

directive report language in h.r .

1960 , under title xvi , industrial base matters , there are two reporting requirements required by the house armed services committee that address congressional concerns over maintaining secure access and a diverse supply chain for rare earth elements to be used for national security purposes and in defense weapon systems .

the first directive requires the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics to submit a report to the congressional defense committees , by february 1 , 2014 , to outline a risk mitigation strategy focused on securing the necessary supplies of rare earth elements .

the second directive requires dod to perform an assessment of the potential for incorporating the substitution of non - rare earth materials into components of the joint strike fighter , based on the supply chain challenges faced in securing components containing rare earth materials .

