u.s. - turkey ties , always complicated , appear to have reached crisis levels in the summer of 2018 .

although the united states and turkey , nato allies since 1952 , share some vital interests , harmonizing priorities can be difficult .

these priorities sometimes diverge irrespective of who leads the two countries , based on contrasting geography , threat perceptions , and regional roles .

current points of tension in the relationship include the following: sanctions and worsening u.s. - turkey relations .

policy differences and public acrimony between the two countries have fueled concern about their relationship and about turkey's status as a u.s. ally .

in august 2018 , the trump administration levied sanctions against turkey in connection with the continued detention of andrew brunson , an american pastor charged with terrorism .

the sanctions appear to have quickened the decline in value of turkey's already depreciating currency , which has lost considerable value against the dollar ( see " currency decline: u.s. - turkey crisis and sanctions " below ) .

the crisis in bilateral relations has appeared to deepen as turkey has retaliated with its own sanctions , and as each country has raised tariffs on imports from the other .

congressional initiatives .

1 within the tense bilateral context , congress has required the trump administration — in the fy2019 national defense authorization act ( ndaa , p.l .

115-232 ) — to report on the status of u.s. - turkey relations .

also , some members of congress have proposed legislation to limit arms sales and strategic cooperation — particularly regarding the f - 35 joint strike fighter — or to place additional sanctions on turkish officials .

while turkish president recep tayyip erdogan and other turkish leaders have sharply criticized u.s. policies on many issues , questions in u.s. public debate about turkey's status as an ally and its relationship with russia have intensified .

possible s - 400 acquisition from russia .

turkey's planned purchase of an s - 400 air defense system from russia could trigger u.s. sanctions under existing law .

the possible transaction has sparked broader concern over turkey's relationship with russia and implications for nato .

u.s. officials seek to prevent the deal , and reports suggest that they may be offering alternatives to turkey such as patriot air defense systems .

syria and the kurds .

turkey's political stances and military operations in syria have fed u.s. - turkey tensions , particularly regarding kurdish - led militias supported by the united states against the islamic state ( is , also known as isis / isil ) over turkey's strong objections .

turkey's domestic trajectory and financial distress .

president erdogan rules in an increasingly authoritarian manner .

presidential and parliamentary elections held in june 2018 consolidated erdogan's power pursuant to constitutional changes approved in a controversial 2017 referendum .

meanwhile , even before the u.s. sanctions in august , turkey's currency had fallen considerably in value amid concerns about rule of law , regional and domestic political uncertainty , significant corporate debt , and a stronger dollar .

turkey's large , diversified economy , muslim majority population , and geographic position straddling europe and the middle east make it a significant regional power .

important political developments in turkey since 2002 have occurred within the context of significant socioeconomic changes that began in the 1980s .

the military - guided governments that came to power after turkey's 1980 coup helped establish turkey's export - driven economy .

this led to the gradual empowerment of a largely sunni muslim middle class from turkey's anatolian heartland .

these socioeconomic changes helped fuel political transformation led by the islamist - leaning justice and development party ( adalet ve kalkinma partisi , or akp ) and president ( formerly prime minister ) recep tayyip erdogan .

the akp won governing majorities four times — 2002 , 2007 , 2011 , and 2015 — during a period in which turkey's economy generally enjoyed growth and stability .

for decades since its founding in the 1920s , the turkish republic had relied upon its military , judiciary , and other bastions of its kemalist ( a term inspired by turkey's republican founder , mustafa kemal ataturk ) "secular elite" to protect it from political and ideological extremes — sacrificing at least some of its democratic vitality in the process .

erdogan has worked to reduce the political power of the "secular elite" and has clashed with other possible rival power centers , including previous allies in the fethullah gulen movement .

domestic polarization has intensified since 2013: nationwide antigovernment protests that began in istanbul's gezi park took place that year , and corruption allegations later surfaced against a number of erdogan's colleagues in and out of government .

after erdogan became president in august 2014 via turkey's first - ever popular presidential election , he claimed a mandate for increasing his power and pursuing a "presidential system" of governance .

analyses of erdogan sometimes characterize him as one or more of the following: a pragmatic populist , a protector of the vulnerable , a budding authoritarian , an indispensable figure , an islamic ideologue .

erdogan's consolidation of power has continued .

he outlasted the july 2016 coup attempt , and then scored victories in the april 2017 constitutional referendum and the june 2018 presidential and parliamentary elections .

u.s. and european union officials have expressed a number of concerns about rule of law and civil liberties in turkey , including the government's influence on media and turkey's reported status as the country with the most journalists in prison .

while there may be some similarities between turkey under erdogan and countries like russia , iran , or china , some factors distinguish turkey from them .

for example , unlike russia or iran , turkey's economy cannot rely on significant rents from natural resources if foreign sources of revenue or investment dry up .

unlike russia and china , turkey does not have nuclear weapons under its command and control .

additionally , unlike all three others , turkey's economic , political , and national security institutions and traditions have been closely connected with those of the west for decades .

erdogan and various other key turkish figures ( including political party leaders ) are profiled in appendix a .

numerous points of bilateral tension have raised questions within the united states and turkey about the two countries' alliance .

in the context of concerns about turkey's strategic orientation ( see " turkey's strategic orientation and foreign policy " ) , many members of congress are increasingly active in proposing legislation and exercising oversight on u.s. - turkey matters that include arms sales and strategic cooperation , various criminal cases , and economic sanctions .

for its part , turkey may bristle because it feels like it is treated as a junior partner , and may seek greater foreign policy diversification through stronger relationships with more countries .

a number of considerations drive the complicated dynamics behind turkey's international relationships .

turkey's history as both a regional power and an object of great power aggression translates into wide popularity for nationalistic political actions and discourse .

this nationalistic sentiment might make some turks wary of turkey's partial reliance on other key countries ( for example , the united states for security , european union countries for trade , and russia and iran for energy ) .

moreover , turkey's maintenance of cooperative relationships with countries whose respective interests may conflict involves a balancing act .

turkey's vulnerability to threats from syria and iraq increases the pressure on it to manage this balance .

involvement in syria and iraq by the united states , russia , and iran further complicates turkey's situation .

additionally , grievances that turkish president recep tayyip erdogan and his supporters espouse against seemingly marginalized domestic foes ( the military and secular elite who previously dominated turkey , the fethullah gulen movement , kurdish nationalists , and liberal activists ) extend to the united states and europe due to apparent suspicions of western sympathies for these foes .

turkey's middle eastern profile expanded in the 2000s as erdogan ( while serving as prime minister ) sought to build economic and political linkages — often emphasizing shared muslim identity — with turkey's neighbors .

however , efforts to increase turkey's influence and offer it as a "model" for other regional states appear to have been set back by a number of developments since 2011: ( 1 ) conflict and instability that engulfed the region and turkey's own southern border , ( 2 ) turkey's failed effort to help muslim brotherhood - aligned groups gain lasting power in syria and north africa , and ( 3 ) domestic polarization accompanied by government repression .

although turkey shares some interests with traditional sunni arab powers saudi arabia and egypt in countering iran , these countries' leaders regard turkey suspiciously because of its government's islamist sympathies and close relationship with qatar ( see " other international relationships " below ) .

turkey maintains relations with israel , but these have become distant and — at times — contentious during erdogan's rule .

turkey - russia relations appear to have improved significantly since a rapprochement in 2016 .

russia had imposed economic sanctions on turkey and closed syrian airspace to it after the turkish military shot down a russian fighter aircraft near the turkey - syria border in november 2015 .

since the rapprochement , the two countries have cooperated in a number of areas , most notably the possible s - 400 air defense deal ( see " possible s - 400 acquisition from russia " above ) ; some military and political coordination in northern syria ( see " syria " above ) ; and energy dealings ( see " energy " above ) .

viewpoints vary on the significance of closer turkey - russia relations .

some analysts have posited that erdogan may be seeking closer relations with russia , possibly at the expense of turkey's relations with the united states and europe .

some others view the turkey - russia relationship as less of a potential strategic partnership than a "marriage of convenience" as the two nations compartmentalize their relations — alternating between cooperation and competition depending on the specific issue in question .

such a situation , according to one observer , could reflect an effort by turkey to push for its national interest by "balancing between east and west" without cutting security ties to nato or economic ties to the eu .

other observers have explained turkish policy changes largely by reference to the leverage russia used with sanctions and airspace closures after the november 2015 incident .

for example , one analyst has argued that turkish policies favoring russia are probably due more to turkey feeling abandoned by the west and intimidated by russia than to a turkish preference for russia over the west .

turkey has a centuries - long history of geopolitical conflict with russia , and disagreements on various issues persist .

some u.s. officials have suggested that russia may be seeking closer ties with turkey as part of a deliberate strategy to undermine nato and u.s. strategic relationships more broadly .

in written testimony in february 2018 , general joseph votel , commander of u.s. central command , said that russia ( along with iran ) is trying to "fracture the longstanding u.s. - turkey strategic partnership. .

additionally , in july 2018 u.s .

ambassador to nato kay bailey hutchison said , "i do think russia is trying to flip turkey .

they are trying to flip many of our allies. .

while turkey and iran are sometimes rivals for regional influence , they also work together on certain regional issues and to ensure turkish access to iranian oil and gas .

iranian ties with the syrian and iraqi governments and with various iraqi kurdish groups provide it with some possible leverage over turkey .

turkey and iran ( along with russia ) coordinate their efforts in syria as part of the astana process , as mentioned above .

however , turkey "is traditionally wary of tehran's ambitions in its immediate neighborhood. .

erdogan and other turkish officials , who earlier sought the ouster of iran's key arab ally , the asad regime of syria , have periodically criticized iran in stark terms , accusing it of destabilizing the region in pursuit of sectarian interests .

in a july 2018 column that raised concerns about turkey's relationships with the united states and a number of regional actors , a senior advisor to erdogan wrote that iran is "displaying persian expansionist policies throughout the middle east. .

president trump's decision to withdraw from the iranian nuclear agreement in may 2018 may further complicate both turkey - iran and u.s. - turkey relations .

turkish officials have said that turkey will not comply with u.s. secondary sanctions that are scheduled to take effect in november , given its dependence on oil and gas imported from iran .

these sanctions will require third - party countries to stop or significantly reduce those imports .

the administration maintains that the united states is unlikely to offer waivers or exceptions from the sanctions for any country , though a state department official said in july 2018 that "we are prepared to work with countries that are reducing their imports on a case - by - case basis. .

turkey's first priority in iraq appears to be countering threats to turkey from kurds based in northern iraq — primarily the pkk .

another concern — despite generally positive relations between turkey and iraq's kurdistan regional government ( krg ) — is the possibility that iraqi kurdish moves toward independence could spread separatist sentiment among kurds in turkey .

turkey also maintains an uneasy relationship with iraq's central government over concerns that its shia leaders are unduly influenced by iran and that iraq's security forces and shia militias often mistreat sunni arabs and turkmen .

relations with baghdad are also strained by iraqi concerns about the potential impact that turkish dam construction and water management decisions could have on downstream iraqi communities .

turkey's military maintains various posts inside northern iraq and a presence at a base in bashiqa near mosul .

around 2008 , turkey started developing a political and economic partnership with the krg .

as part of this cooperation , in 2013 the krg began transporting oil through pipelines to turkish ports for international export .

however , turkey and most other countries strongly opposed the krg's symbolic 2017 popular referendum on independence .

turkey halted oil exports connected with the krg pipelines after the referendum .

talks are ongoing between turkish , iraqi , and krg officials over restarting the exports .

turkey has conducted airstrikes against pkk safe havens in iraq , with reported intelligence assistance from the united states , since 2007 .

the krg — given its own rivalry with the pkk — generally does not object to these strikes , though it remains sensitive to pan - kurdish sympathies among its population .

in june 2018 , turkish forces began moving into krg territory in preparation for a possible ground operation against the main pkk redoubt in the qandil mountains .

partly because of the constraints a turkish operation would face from the area's harsh terrain and weather conditions , the operation may be more focused on projecting turkish determination and competence to other stakeholders in northern iraq than on decisively defeating the pkk .

ties between turkey and israel , which were close during the 1990s and early 2000s , have deteriorated considerably during erdogan's rule .

this slide has reflected the military's declining role in turkish society relative to erdogan and other leaders whose criticisms of israel resound with domestic public opinion .

despite the countries' differences , trade between the two countries has grown .

during syria's civil war , turkey has used israel's port at haifa as a point of transit for exports to various arab countries after the conflict cut off overland routes .

after years of downgraded diplomatic ties following the 2010 mavi marmara ( or gaza flotilla ) incident , turkey and israel announced the full restoration of diplomatic relations in 2016 , in a deal reportedly facilitated by the united states .

nevertheless , the bilateral relationship remains tense .

israelis routinely decry turkey's ties with hamas and its refusal to characterize hamas as a terrorist organization .

for their part , turks bemoan israel's treatment of palestinians in the west bank and especially the gaza strip .

additionally , erdogan has sought to lead regional opposition to the 2017 u.s. recognition of jerusalem as israel's capital .

israeli authorities have reportedly been monitoring increased turkish financial investment and political activism in east jerusalem , with officials from the palestinian authority and arab states warning israel of erdogan's interest in gaining greater influence over the jerusalem issue .

at various points in 2018 , president erdogan and israeli prime minister binyamin netanyahu have traded public accusations , and in may the two countries temporarily expelled each other's top diplomats in ankara , istanbul , and jerusalem .

some observers have characterized negative statements by erdogan and other prominent turkish voices about israel , zionism , and other historical references as anti - semitic .

erdogan insists that his criticisms of the israeli government and its policies are not directed to the jewish people or to jews in turkey .

in connection with bilateral tensions , israel has raised concerns with u.s. officials over turkey's acquisition of the f - 35 and has contemplated measures to limit turkish influence over holy sites in jerusalem .

israel also has strengthened security and economic ties with traditional turkish rivals greece and cyprus .

turkey has a long history of partnership with the european union ( and its predecessor organizations ) and began negotiations to join the eu in 2005 .

talks stalled shortly thereafter and turkey's membership is now seen as unlikely , at least in the near future .

many analysts argue that resistance to turkish eu accession has been rooted in a fear that turkey's large muslim population would fundamentally change the cultural character of the eu and dilute the power of the eu's founding western european states in particular .

turkey's unwillingness to normalize diplomatic and trade relations with eu member cyprus presents a major obstacle to its accession prospects .

other eu concerns over turkey's qualifications for membership center on the treatment of kurds and religious minorities , media freedoms , women's rights , and the proper and transparent functioning of turkey's democratic and legal systems .

debate regarding the extent to which turkey meets eu standards has intensified in recent years in light of domestic controversies since 2013 and president erdogan's consolidation of power .

erdogan has used anti - european rhetoric to gain support both at home and among the substantial turkish diaspora communities in europe .

turkish domestic expectations of full accession to the eu have apparently been in decline for several years , though support for joining the eu remains according to some polls .

in its turkey 2018 report , the european commission noted a number of membership criteria in which there has been "serious backsliding," including the judiciary and freedom of expression .

despite the lack of significant progress in accession negotiations , the eu provides turkey hundreds of millions of euros in annual pre - accession financial and technical assistance ( separate from the support for refugees addressed below ) .

since 2011 , nearly four million refugees or migrants from syria and other countries have come to turkey , posing significant humanitarian , socioeconomic , and security challenges .

turkey and the european union ( eu ) reached an arrangement in march 2016 providing for the return from greece to turkey of "irregular migrants or asylum seekers whose applications have been declared inadmissible. .

in exchange , the eu agreed to resettle one syrian refugee for every syrian readmitted to turkey and provide turkey with six billion euros to be used to support refugees , among other incentives .

the deterrent effect of the arrangement appears to have contributed to a dramatic reduction in the number of people crossing from turkey to the greek islands , leading one u.n. official to characterize the deal's impact as "huge. .

ongoing turkey - eu disputes and questions about the deal's compatibility with international legal and human rights standards , however , call its long - term viability into question .

from 1915 to 1923 , hundreds of thousands of armenians died as a result of actions of the ottoman empire ( turkey's predecessor state ) .

u.s. and international characterizations of these events influence turkey's domestic and foreign policy , and are in turn influenced by developments in turkey - armenia relations .

turkey and armenia initially agreed in 2009 on a set of joint protocols to normalize relations , but the process stalled shortly thereafter and there has been little or no momentum toward restarting it .

congress has considered how to characterize the events of 1915-1923 on a number of occasions .

in 1975 ( h.j.res .

148 ) and 1984 ( h.j.res .

247 ) , the house passed proposed joint resolutions that referred to "victims of genocide" of armenian ancestry from 1915 and 1915-1923 , respectively .

neither proposed joint resolution came to a vote in the senate .

a number of other proposed resolutions characterizing these world war i - era events as genocide have been reported by various congressional committees ( see appendix c for a list ) .

in the 115 th congress , resolutions have been introduced in both the house ( h.res .

220 ) and senate ( s.res .

136 ) that would characterize the events as genocide .

all u.s. presidents since jimmy carter have made public statements memorializing the events , with president ronald reagan referring to a "genocide of the armenians" during a holocaust remembrance day speech in 1981 .

in an april 2018 statement , the second of his presidency , president trump ( echoing statements made by president obama ) said that the events were "one of the worst atrocities of the 20 th century" and that "one and a half million armenians were deported , massacred or marched to their deaths. .

in addition to past statements or actions by u.s. policymakers , the website of the armenian national institute , a u.s. - based organization , asserts that at least 25 other countries ( not counting the united states or armenia ) have characterized the events as genocide in some way , including 15 of the 28 eu member states .

since cyprus became independent of the united kingdom in 1960 , turkey has viewed itself as the protector of the island's ethnic turkish - cypriot minority from potential mistreatment by the ethnic greek - cypriot majority .

responding to greek and greek - cypriot political developments that raised concerns about a possible greek annexation of cyprus , turkey's military intervened in 1974 and established control over the northern third of the island .

this prompted an almost total ethnic and de facto political division along geographical lines that persists today .

the ethnic greek - cypriot - ruled republic of cyprus is internationally recognized as having jurisdiction over the entire island , while the de facto turkish republic of northern cyprus ( in the northern third ) has only turkish recognition .

the republic of cyprus's accession to the eu in 2004 and turkey's refusal to normalize political and commercial relations with it are seen as major obstacles to turkey's eu membership aspirations .

moreover , eu accession may have reduced incentives for cyprus's greek population to make concessions toward a reunification deal .

turkey and turkish cypriots have opposed efforts by the republic of cyprus to explore and develop offshore energy deposits without a solution to the question of the island's unification .

turkey's relations with greece are also fraught .

the two countries joined nato in 1952 , but intercommunal tensions , the cyprus question , and border disputes "ensured that war between the two allies remained a real risk well into the 1990s. .

despite more regular diplomatic relations in the following two decades , turkish relations with greece have again deteriorated in recent years , with the number of turkish violations of greek territory and airspace spiking in early 2018 .

while the two nations agreed in july 2018 to focus on reducing tensions in the aegean , the area could remain a flashpoint going forward .

turkey seeks to use political and economic influence to strengthen relationships with non - western countries .

through political involvement , increased trade and investment , and humanitarian and development projects , turkey has curried favor with foreign countries not only in the greater middle east , but also in the balkans , the caucasus and central asia , and sub - saharan africa .

gulen movement - affiliated organizations had spearheaded some of these ties with other countries before turkey's government classified the movement as a terrorist organization .

questions persist about how these ties will develop in response to changes in turkey .

over the past year , turkey established a military base in somalia and announced a number of economic initiatives with countries near the horn of africa .

prospects of greater turkish influence in this area , especially considering turkey's close relationship with qatar , have sparked concern from a number of arab countries for whom the horn has important strategic value .

since 2015 , turkey has deployed troops to qatar , and has supported it politically and economically during its tensions with other gulf arab states .

appendix a. profiles of key figures in turkey appendix b .

significant u.s. - origin arms transfers or possible arms transfers to turkey appendix c. congressional committee reports of resolutions using the word "genocide" in relation to events regarding armenians in the ottoman empire from 1915 to 192 .

