for more than 50 years , the small business administration ( sba ) disaster loan program has been a source of economic assistance to people and businesses stricken by disasters .

authorized by the small business act , the program provides direct loans to help businesses , nonprofit organizations , homeowners , and renters repair or replace property damaged or destroyed in a federally declared or certified disaster .

the sba disaster loan program is also designed to help small agricultural cooperatives recover from economic injury resulting from a disaster .

sba disaster loans include ( 1 ) home and personal property disaster loans , ( 2 ) business physical disaster loans , and ( 3 ) economic injury disaster loans ( eidl ) .

most direct disaster loans ( approximately 80% ) are awarded to individuals and households rather than small businesses .

the program generally offers low - interest disaster loans at a fixed rate .

sba disaster loans have loan maturities of up to 30 years .

this report provides an overview of the disaster loan program , discusses how disaster declarations trigger the sba loan process , explains the different types of loans potentially available to disaster victims , and discusses terms and restrictions related to each type of loan .

the report also provides data on the sba disaster loan program , including data related to the gulf coast hurricanes of 2005 and 2008 , and hurricane sandy in 2012 .

this report also examines issues that may be of potential interest to congress , such as sba loan processing times , the implementation of expedited and immediate assistance programs required by small business disaster response and loan improvements act of 2008 , and the use of personal residences as collateral for business disaster loans .

the following section describes the types of disaster loans available to homeowners , renters , and businesses , including the amount that can be borrowed , the program's loan terms , and eligibility requirements .

only victims located in a declared disaster area ( and contiguous counties ) are eligible to apply for disaster loans .

disaster declarations are "official notices recognizing that specific geographic areas have been damaged by floods and other acts of nature , riots , civil disorders , or industrial accidents such as oil spills. .

in general , the incident must be sudden and cause severe physical damage or substantial economic injury ( such as tornadoes , hurricanes , and earthquakes ) .

in contrast , some slow - onset events ( incidents that unfold over time ) such as shoreline erosion or gradual land settling are not viewed by sba as declarable disasters .

droughts and below - average water levels in lakes , reservoirs , and other bodies of water may , however , warrant declarations .

the following section describes the sba disaster loan program's trends and statistics including the number of disaster loan applications and amounts by loan type .

several issues related to the sba disaster loan program may be of interest to congress , including disaster loan processing times , the implementation of expedited and immediate assistance programs mandated by the small business disaster response and loan improvement act of 2008 , the use of personal residences for loan collateral , and the use of grants , as opposed to loans , to help businesses respond and recover from disasters .

supporters of the sba disaster loan program might contend that the sba disaster loan program has made improvements since hurricane katrina made landfall in 2005 .

they may argue that loan processing times have been reduced and interagency coordination has improved as evidenced by the response to hurricanes gustav and ike .

on the other hand , others might argue that the sba response to hurricane sandy indicates loan processing time still needs to be addressed .

some may also be troubled by sba's perceived slow progress in implementing some of the requirements set forth in the small business disaster response and loan improvements act of 2008 such as the implementation of edalp and idap .

they may further contend that the agency's response could have been more successful had these programs been in place before hurricane sandy .

why does sba issue disaster loans instead of fema ? .

in 1978 , president jimmy carter signed executive order 12127 .

the order merged many of the disaster - related responsibilities of separate federal agencies into the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

during fema's formation , it was determined that sba would continue to provide disaster loans through the disaster loan program rather than transfer that function to fema .

at the 1978 hearing before a subcommittee of the committee on government operations , chairman jack brooks questioned the rationale for keeping the loan program outside of fema .

according to james t. mcintyre , director , office of management and budget ( omb ) , the rationale was as follows: [o]ne of the fundamental principles underlying this proposal is that whenever possible emergency responsibilities should be an extension of the regular missions of federal agencies .

i believe the congress also subscribed to this principle in considering disaster legislation in the past .

the disaster relief act of 1974 provides for the direction and coordination , in disaster situations , of agencies which have programs which can be applied to meeting disaster needs .

it does not provide that the coordinating agency should exercise direct operational control.... [i]f the programs ... were incorporated in the new agency we would be required to create duplicate sets of skills and resources.... [s]ince the small business administration administers loan programs other than those just for disaster victims , both the sba and the new agency [fema] would have to maintain separate staffs of loan officers and portfolio managers if the disaster loan function were transferred to the new agency.... [o]ne of our basic purposes for reorganization ... would be thwarted if we were to have to maintain a duplicate staff function in two or more agencies .

mcintyre added , "we believe we have achieved a balance in this new agency [fema] between operational activities and planning and coordination functions. .

he further stated that "we can provide better service to the disaster victims if oversight of disaster response and recovery operations is vested in an agency which can adopt a much broader prospective than would be possible if this agency [fema] had operational responsibilities as well. .

additionally , a clause in the stafford act that prohibits recipients of disaster aid from receiving similar types of aid from other federal sources is often cited as a rationale for keeping the entities distinct .

section 312 of the act states: the president , in consultation with the head of each federal agency administering any program providing financial assistance to persons , business concerns , or other entities suffering losses as a result of a major disaster or emergency , shall assure that no such person , business concern , or other entity will receive such assistance with respect to any part of such loss as to which he has received financial assistance under any other program or from insurance or any other source .

sba disaster loan approvals for applicants in gulf coast states the following figures are provided to help frame discussions concerning sba loan program activity in the gulf coast in response to the 2005 and 2008 hurricane seasons .

