for more than a decade , violent crime perpetrated by warring criminal organizations has threatened citizen security and governance in parts of mexico .

while the illicit drug trade has long been prevalent in mexico , an increasing number of criminal organizations are fighting for control of smuggling routes into the united states and local drug markets .

organized crime - related violence has resulted in more than 109,000 killings since december 2006 and contributed to 30,000 disappearances .

for the first quarter of 2017 , organized crime - related violence in mexico reached levels not seen since the end of the felipe calderón administration ( 2006-2012 ; see figure 1 , below ) .

although daunting challenges remain , u.s. - mexican cooperation to improve security and the rule of law has increased significantly as a result of the mérida initiative , a bilateral partnership developed by the george w. bush administration and the government of felipe calderón .

between fy2008 and fy2017 , congress appropriated more than $2.8 billion for mérida initiative programs ( see table 1 ) , more than $1.6 billion of which has been delivered .

mexico invested some $100 billion of its own resources on security and public safety through 2017 .

mexican president enrique peña nieto took office in december 2012 , vowing to reduce violence in mexico and adjust u.s. - mexican security efforts to focus on violence prevention .

although mexico's public relations approach to security issues has changed , its operational approach has remained basically the same .

that approach , commonly referred to as the kingpin strategy , has focused on taking out the top - and mid - level leadership of mexico's criminal organizations .

critics maintain that this approach has fueled violence by encouraging succession struggles and turf wars .

the government's continued inability to resolve high - profile cases — including extrajudicial killings , torture , and enforced disappearances involving security forces and corruption cases involving former governors — has underscored ongoing problems with impunity .

the peña nieto administration's apparent inability to protect journalists and human rights defenders , as well as allegations that it spied on reporters critical of its policies , has generated international concern .

congress is continuing to fund and oversee the mérida initiative .

the 115 th congress provided $139 million for the mérida initiative in the fy2017 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

115-31 ) .

congress is now considering president trump's fy2018 budget request , which would cut funding for the mérida initiative by $54 million , or 38.8% , compared to the fy2017 estimated funding level ( see table 1 ) .

congress may analyze how progress under the mérida initiative is being measured ; how u.s. funds have been used to advance mexico's police and judicial reform efforts ; and the degree to which u.s. programs in mexico complement other u.s. counterdrug and border security efforts .

congress also may seek to ensure that funds support opium poppy drug eradication and interdiction programs given rising heroin , fentanyl ( a synthetic opioid more powerful than heroin ) , and methamphetamine production in mexico .

this report provides a framework for examining the current status and future prospects for u.s. - mexican security cooperation .

it begins with a brief discussion of security challenges in mexico and mexico's security strategy .

it then provides information on the evolution of congressional funding and oversight of the mérida initiative before delving into its four pillars .

the report concludes by raising policy issues facing congress , as it considers continued funding and as it oversees the mérida initiative and broader u.s. - mexican security cooperation .

the mérida initiative has continued to advance , albeit slowly , despite changes in administrations and partisan control in both countries .

there has been bipartisan support in the u.s. congress for the mérida initiative and , although funding has declined , appropriators provided more assistance than the previous administration requested in fy2015 , fy2016 , and fy2017 .

congress is now considering the trump administration's fy2018 budget request and overseeing previously appropriated funding for the mérida initiative .

most experts agree that mexico continues to require international support to address organized crime - related violence and reform its criminal justice system .

prior to president trump's inauguration , some analysts urged the trump administration to return to the mérida initiative's original focus on law enforcement , whereas others argued for it to maintain a broad , multifaceted approach .

thus far , the trump administration's rhetoric and budget request appear to prioritize combating transnational criminal organizations and addressing shared migration challenges , albeit with much less u.s. support than in years past .

