this report analyzes supreme court nominee elena kagan's co - authored article , written with david barron , on the nondelegation doctrine and the seminal administrative law case , chevron u.s.a. , inc. v. natural resource s defense council , inc .

the article , which was written in 2001 while kagan was a professor at harvard law school , covers a range of concepts in administrative law .

administrative law may be described as the body of law governing agency procedures , structure , and powers , as well as how citizens interact with the government .

administrative law and process encompass the implementation and interpretation of policies and programs enacted by congress , the deference that should be accorded to different types of agency decisions and actions , and who ultimately decides whether agency interpretations of statutory ambiguities are permissible .

the question of whether and when agencies or courts should take the predominant role in resolving statutory ambiguities through their interpretations raises classic separation of powers issues .

while agencies generally fall within the executive branch of government , it is congress that determines , in an act establishing the agency or subsequent statutes , the powers of the agency .

courts both interpret statutes and grant varying levels of deference to agency interpretations when examining questions such as whether an agency's action is in excess of its delegated statutory authority .

according to barron and kagan , judicial deference to agency interpretations of legislative gaps presently depends on the formality of the procedures used by the agency and whether the agency's decision has general or particular applicability .

barron and kagan find that the supreme court's focus on these dichotomies of proceduralism and generality "fail[s] to generate the most appropriate distribution of interpretive power. .

instead , the authors advocate drawing the line between administrative and judicial power to resolve statutory ambiguities on the basis of the position and authority of the agency actor who makes the decision , rather than the agency's use of formal procedures or the agency's issuance of a generally applicable decision .

after providing background on the administrative law concepts discussed in the article , this report discusses the article itself and provides reactions to and considerations of its propositions .

the administrative procedure act ( apa ) applies to all agencies , including independent regulatory agencies such as the federal trade commission .

the apa prescribes procedures for agency actions such as rulemaking and adjudication .

barron and kagan's chevron nondelegation theory would shift the applicable type of judicial deference away from a focus on the agency's use of formal procedures , such as those set forth in the apa , or informal procedures .

the authors' chevron nondelegation doctrine would similarly discount whether the rule or order issued by the agency has general applicability or only applies to the particular parties to the proceeding .

judicial deference is the degree to which a court will uphold and respect the validity of an agency's interpretation of a statutory provision during judicial review of the agency's decisions .

the amount of deference that an agency interpretation of its own statute will receive from a reviewing court "has been understood to vary with the circumstances. .

this section briefly outlines two types of deference that a court may accord to an agency's administration of a statutory provision — chevron ( substantial deference ) and skidmore ( weak deference ) — that barron and kagan discuss in their law review article .

while the law review article focuses primarily on chevron deference , it also discusses skidmore deference in cases where chevron deference would be inapplicable .

the nondelegation doctrine concerns the delegation of legislative power to administrative or executive branch agencies .

the premise of the nondelegation doctrine is that article i of constitution vests legislative power in congress to make the laws that are necessary and proper , and "the legislative power of congress cannot be delegated" to other branches of government .

there are two rationales for the nondelegation doctrine — a separation of powers argument and a checks and balances argument — in addition to several policy justifications .

before the new deal , the nondelegation doctrine consisted of several supreme court rulings that pronounced that congress may not delegate its legislative powers .

in each of these cases , and others as well , the delegations were in fact , if not in name , approved under various theories .

modern delegation doctrine may trace its inception to j.w .

hampton , jr. & co. v. united states , where the court noted that in order to govern effectively congress must seek the assistance of other branches and observed that the extent of the assistance "must be fixed according to common sense and the inherent necessities of the governmental co - ordinaton. .

a congressional delegation of legislative authority would be sustained , the court announced , whenever congress provides an "intelligible principle" that executive branch officials must follow and that their actions may be evaluated against .

stated otherwise , it is "constitutionally sufficient if congress clearly delineates the general policy , the public agency which is to apply it , and the boundaries of this delegated authority .

private rights are protected by access to the courts to test the application of the policy in the light of these legislative declarations. .

the court has struck down two legislative delegations as lacking an "intelligible principle" under the nondelegation doctrine .

in panama refining co. v. ryan , the court found no "intelligible principle" when congress provided the president with the authority to prohibit the interstate transfer of petroleum without providing any standards or limits constraining when such authority was to be exercised .

similarly , in a.l.a .

schechter poultry corp. v. united states , congress was found to have created an unauthorized delegation of legislative authority when it gave the president the authority to enact "codes of fair competition. .

in support of its decision in schechter , the court noted both that "fair competition" was not a term which could easily be defined and that the breadth of the president's authority was markedly different from other cases in which executive officials had been delegated solely the authority to establish prices or issue licenses .

the court has not struck down a congressional delegation to an executive agency since these two new deal cases in 1935 .

after these cases , the court has continued to discuss the nondelegation doctrine , while upholding congressional delegations of legislative power to executive agencies , and has sanctioned many delegations that lacked optimal legislative specificity .

the court also has construed legislation to impose more requirements than is textually required in order to avoid constitutional nondelegation issues .

after the court's 2001 decision in whitman v. american trucking associations , inc. , which did not find a violation of the nondelegation doctrine , the nondelegation doctrine has been declared by several commentators to be , if not "dead," at least "on life support , with the supreme court neither willing to pull the plug nor prepared to revive it. .

the chevron nondelegation doctrine proposed by barron and kagan would apply chevron deference to agency decisions based on internal agency decisionmaking processes .

under their chevron nondelegation doctrine , chevron deference would be accorded to lawful agency decisions that are made by the individual to which the relevant statute has delegated the decisionmaking authority , who would typically be the agency head .

chevron deference would be due if this congressionally - designated agency official met two conditions: ( 1 ) the statutory delegatee ( or her senior advisors ) formally adopted the agency's decision as her own and issued the decision under her name , and ( 2 ) the statutory delegatee ( or her immediate advisors ) conducted a meaningful review of the agency's decision .

if the statutory delegatee subdelegates her decisionmaking authority , or if a decision is made by a lower - level agency official , that agency interpretation would not be eligible for chevron deference , but could instead still potentially receive skidmore deference .

this section explores select discussions and citations of barron and kagan's article .

the article has been cited 80 times according to a search on lexisnexis: twice by courts , 77 times in law reviews and journals , and two times in an amicus brief for cuomo v. clearing house association filed on behalf of several members of the house of representatives .

the article has been referred to as an example of the "voluminous normative literature on how courts should allocate interpretive authority between themselves and administrative agencies. .

the article's focus on the decisionmaker's identity as one trigger for chevron deference has been called "a significant departure from , and extension of," the court's decisions in chevron and mead .

the piece also has been cited along with other literature for the proposition that "presumptions of congressional intent are simply judicially created proxies or fictions. .

two of the most substantive discussions of chevron's nondelegation doctrine evaluate it as one of several proposals that would alter the court's current application of chevron and mead .

a 2003 law review article by university of chicago law professor adrian vermeule called barron and kagan's proposal "notable" and "a potentially important reframing of the mead court's project. .

however , vermeule finds that "the normative case for the [ chevron nondelegation doctrine] is undertheorized. .

he believes that the chevron nondelegation doctrine presents the same "conundrums" as the congressional nondelegation doctrine because it "appeals to the same norm of political accountability. .

specifically , vermeule takes issue with the very notions that the authors assert the chevron nondelegation is designed to promote — political accountability and disciplined policymaking .

with regard to political accountability , he says that "ordinary" ( presumably congressional ) politics is viewed as sufficiently accountable to allow for the use of policy tools other than delegation , and so he does not see the need for a special chevron nondelegation rule in the agency context .

vermeule states that "legislators and agency heads may be held accountable for the very decision to make the delegation," and indeed , barron and kagan discuss an instance where both the secretary of labor and the administrator of the occupational , safety , and health administration ( osha ) , which is located in the department of labor , responded to "a firestorm of protest from individuals , companies , members of congress , and even the white house" that was generated by a legal interpretation in a letter signed by a lower - level osha employee .

vermeule also finds no empirical support for barron and kagan's claim that agency decisions issued by low - level employees are less transparent than "substantive policy decisions" — those presumably issued by high - level agency officials under barron and kagan's theory .

vermeule addresses the chevron nondelegation doctrine's promotion of disciplined agency policymaking in the context of judicial enforceability .

he asserts that agency heads will easily skirt the chevron nondelegation doctrine by delegating decisionmaking authority but continuing to retain legal authority .

he finds that courts will be unable to determine when the agency head has rubberstamped a lower - level official's decision and , as a result , the agency will receive chevron deference for those delegated decisions .

noting that barron and kagan acknowledge this potential for rubberstamping by agency officials , but that they believe agency heads choose "to avoid nominal responsibility" for decisions of lower - level officials rather than receive chevron deference , vermeule finds that barron and kagan "undermin[e] the significance of their own proposal. .

that is , if chevron deference for agency interpretations is not desirable , then why are the authors concerned with providing a substitute for mead ? .

yet if chevron deference for agency interpretations is desirable enough that agency officials would rubberstamp lower - level decisions in contravention of the chevron nondelegation doctrine , then review of those decisions by the courts would be "just as costly and unmanageable a judicial inquiry as the excessively refined mead inquiry it is designed to replace. .

a later 2006 law review article by amy wildermuth commented on both chevron's nondelegation doctrine and vermeule's assessment of it .

wildermuth finds vermeule's "most important critique" of barron and kagan's article to be that the chevron nondelegation doctrine may lead to rubberstamping by the statutory delegatee of decisions made by lower - level agency officials , thus "circumventing the requirement of personal responsibility for the larger benefit afforded by triggering chevron deference. .

wildermuth then discusses barron and kagan's proposed solution to address this "bad behavior," the denial of chevron deference in cases where there has been a "wholesale evasion" of the statutory delegatee's required conduct of a meaningful review of the agency action prior to formally adopting it as her own .

wildermuth finds that their solution "would not require much in terms of a court's resources," as it "sets the bar very high. .

however , she posits that their solution "suffers from its simplicity" in that statutory delegatees could easily "create what appears to be more review in order to avoid a finding of misbehavior," such as a system where the agency head signed a particular number of opinion letters each day instead of adopting a significant number of opinion letters in a short time .

another law review article briefly compares barron and kagan's article with her other 2001 law review article , presidential administration .

the authors of that law review view her chevron 's nondelegation doctrine article as "retracting" the limitation that she had argued for in presidential administration .

in presidential administration , she would apply chevron deference to "issues for which there has been significant white house input. .

in chevron's nondelegation doctrine , the authors view her as asserting "a much broader application for chevron ," as she and barron would apply " chevron to any interpretation adopted by an agency head appointed by the president. .

there does not appear to be much analysis of chevron's nondelegation doctrine on legal blogs .

one posting on the volokh conspiracy , which is generally viewed as a libertarian or conservative blog , called barron and kagan's approach "one that shares some commonalities with justice scalia's approach to chevron deference questions — but also one that is in tension with principles underlying the court's recent ( and , in [the author's view] , generally sensible ) administrative law jurisprudence. .

a subsequent posting by the same author further explained that he viewed barron and kagan's theory as sharing some of the same concerns as justice scalia regarding separation of powers: "the desire to have policy - laden questions of statutory interpretation made by politically accountable officials rather than judges. .

the author views the rest of the present court as "ground[ing] chevron deference in congressional intent , and [as] more process oriented. .

another posting on an environmental law firm's blog discussed the possible effects of barron and kagan's approach , if it were to be adopted by the supreme court: ( 1 ) a "strengthen[ing of] the presumption that a head administrator's decision , based on legitimate exercise of their authority , is sound" ; ( 2 ) a "weaken[ing of] the authority of lower agency officials , holding them to a higher standard" ; ( 3 ) an "increase [in] the administrative workload for higher - level decisionmakers in the agency" ; and ( 4 ) "the beneficial effect of reducing the potential for ad - hoc decisionmaking at lower levels within an agency , when clear interpretations have not been provided from higher officials. .

the change proposed by barron and kagan would be significant , the author argues , since "the vast majority of agency action" that is presently issued by lower - level agency officials would potentially be "second - guess[ed]" by courts under the skidmore deference standard .

it is worth noting that while the chevron nondelegation doctrine addresses the levels of deference that decisions issued by high - and lower - level agency officials may be granted , barron and kagan do not address how their doctrine would respond to a vacancy in the position of the statutory delegatee or the level of deference that a court may grant to an officer who is acting as the head of an agency in a temporary capacity ( for example , pursuant to the vacancies reform act of 1998 ) .

the ability of an agency to receive chevron deference may differ in the case of a vacancy in a position filled by a single statutory delegatee , to which the vacancies act would apply , as opposed to vacancies on multi - member boards or commissions , to which the vacancies act does not apply and which typically require a quorum and simple majority of members to issue binding decisions .

a vacancy in an advice and consent position , such as the head of a single administrator agency , may be filled temporarily by an acting official .

under barron and kagan's chevron nondelegation doctrine , one argument for such an official receiving chevron deference for her decisions would be that the temporary official could presumably perform the same functions as the statutory delegatee ( formally adopting an agency decision after meaningful review ) .

another potential argument for granting chevron deference to such temporary officials under the chevron nondelegation doctrine would be that there are a limited number of individuals that could be appointed pursuant to the vacancies act .

these individuals are "higher level officers," some of whom have gone through the confirmation process for their position , and they are authorized to perform the functions and duties of the office , albeit temporarily .

a potential argument for denying chevron deference under the chevron nondelegation doctrine and potentially granting only skidmore deference is that acting official would only serve in the position of the statutory delegatee for the limited time of the appointment .

vacancies on multi - member boards that result in the lack of a quorum generally would prevent the agency from issuing binding decisions at the board or commission level .

for example , the federal election commission ( fec ) , which has six commissioners , had five vacancies for approximately a six - month period in 2008 , and , as a result , lacked a quorum .

these vacancies prevented the agency from issuing advisory opinions and beginning audits of political committees .

the fec was also unable to move forward on enforcement matters because each stage of an enforcement matter ( reason to believe , investigation , probable cause , and conciliation ) requires the votes of four commissioners .

in another example , the operations of the five member national labor relations board ( nlrb ) were impacted in a 27-month period spanning from 2008 to 2010 due to the vacancies in three of the five seats .

before the board's membership was reduced from four to three members , the board delegated its authority to a three - member group .

the recess appointment of one of the three members then expired , and the board only had two members who , the board argued , constituted a quorum of the three member group ; these two members decided almost 600 cases .

in new process steel , l.p. v nlrb , the supreme court said that while it was neither "insensitive to the board's understandable desire to keep its doors open despite vacancies," nor "unaware of the costs that delay imposes on the litigants," the proper reading of the board's quorum requirements and the delegation clause "requires that a delegee group maintain a membership of three in order to exercise the delegated authority of the board. .

one result of such vacancies may be that all agency decisions issued by lower - level employees at multi - member boards or commissions during this time would be eligible for skidmore deference .

one potential way to avoid such a scenario would be to allow chevron deference for agency decisions issued by other upper level individuals , who would include , according to barron and kagan , senior advisors to the statutory delegatees , such as chiefs of staff or special assistants , as well as officials with supervisory authority , such as the agency general counsel .

yet enabling senior advisors or supervisory officials to issue decisions that could receive chevron deference while the board or commission itself could not issue binding decisions , would seem counterintuitive , as such officials may be less politically accountable .

the chevron nondelegation doctrine would appear to take the focus away from an agency's use of formal procedures that involve the public in the process , such as notice - and - comment rulemaking , in favor of a shift to the political accountability of the statutory delegatee after - the - fact for agency decisions that have already been issued .

in one sense , this shift could arguably make the agency as a whole less responsive to the public and more reliant on its own expertise since the majority of agency decisions would be issued by lower - level officials .

additionally , if the statutory delegatee repeatedly declines to formally adopt agency interpretations as her own , the decisions that the statutory delegatee does adopt may be limited in scope and / or effect , as the statutory delegatee may avoid taking responsibility for controversial decisions .

this shift also could raise the question of the beneficial value of assigning chevron deference to decisions issued following formal procedures ( although this arguably leads to the ossification of the rulemaking process ) as opposed to granting chevron deference based on the decisionmaker's identity under the chevron nondelegation doctrine .

would an agency be more accountable to the public when it has solicited input prior to a binding decision or when the statutory delegatee or her close advisors have conducted their own meaningful review and are called before the white house or congress to justify their decision after the fact ? .

the court is arguably the decisionmaker under skidmore , "independently interpret[ing] the statute[] with the agency's interpretation as one factor among many that will affect [the court's] conclusion. .

barron and kagan's theory applying chevron deference , in which the agency is arguably the decisionmaker , only to agency actions formally adopted after meaningful review by the statutory delegatee would arguably result in a major reformulation of the court's jurisprudence regarding which agency actions receive chevron deference .

however , their theory arguably allows for the agency , rather than the courts , to control when it remains the decisionmaker under chevron if the statutory delegatee meets the tests they set forth .

this would appear to be the case if only courts do not undertake a case - by - case review of when the statutory delegatee has conducted a seemingly standardless meaningful review prior to formally adopting an agency decision .

for example , a court could find that the delegatee has not undertaken an adequate review and instead consider the agency's interpretation under skidmore 's less deferential standard .

one possible implication of the "mass of agency action[s]" issued by lower - level employees only potentially receiving skidmore deference could be that the courts may decide more cases without deferring to the agency's interpretation .

this could theoretically lead to more uncertainty among regulated parties and the agency as to how much deference courts will accord particular decisions .

an increase in the number of court decisions on agency decisions by lower - level officials that could potentially receive skidmore deference could occur at the same time that the courts potentially lessen their scrutiny of high - level agency decisions if , as barron and kagan argue , courts should only act to address rubberstamping if the statutory delegatee has always failed to conduct a meaningful review of the agency's action .

another potential issue of the chevron nondelegation doctrine concerns the timing of the decision .

as the delegatee's decision to adopt an agency interpretation must occur before the agency issues its interpretation in final form , this may raise a question of what level of deference a statutory delegatee's adoption of an "interim final rule," which is issued pursuant to a good cause finding but without notice and comment , would receive .

barron and kagan state that the statutory delegatee cannot ratify the final agency decision after its issuance .

interim final rules have binding effect if validly promulgated , although agencies may modify such rules to take into account post - promulgation comments from the public .

although congress is a more democratic and politically accountable institution than an administrative agency , it may decide to delegate its legislative power to an executive branch agency for a variety of reasons , for example: ( 1 ) efficiency — congress may decide that it would take too long to draft a bill with all of the particulars required for a program or rule or that agencies may be better equipped to resolve issues or address changing needs that arise with implementation of a law ; ( 2 ) expertise — congress may not necessarily have the specialized or technical expertise that the agency would have at its disposal ; ( 3 ) ability to modify the law — congress can overturn agency rulemakings and make other changes to the law if it does not agree with the agency's actions taken pursuant to the delegation ; ( 4 ) transfer of responsibility and potential for blame — congress may decide that politically difficult , unpopular , or untenable decisions are better left to an agency ; and ( 5 ) inability to reach consensus — congress may experience greater difficulty in achieving consensus among its members than would an agency headed by a single administrator or a multi - member board or commission .

congress may decide against delegating interpretive authority to agencies for myriad reasons: ( 1 ) agencies may give greater attention to special interests because these groups may be more organized than the general public , particularly in the notice - and - comment rulemaking process ; ( 2 ) agencies may affect the marketplace or act in ways that may be viewed as attempts to retain or increase their power ; and ( 3 ) required rules and procedures may make agency action slow and inefficient .

if congress decides to delegate its legislative authority to an agency to interpret a statute , congress can control the delegation of such authority by writing broad or narrow statutes , eliminating procedural requirements , and maintaining a supervisory role over the power it has given to the agencies .

if the chevron nondelegation doctrine were adopted , its emphasis on granting chevron deference to high - level agency decisions , which the statutory delegatee has adopted as her own after a meaningful review , could potentially lead congress to become more specific in its delegations , to ensure that the voluminous amount of agency decisionmaking that occurs at the lower levels of an agency also receives chevron deference .

for example , rather than delegate a decision that requires input from the food and drug administration's center for drug evaluation and research ( cder ) to the secretary of health and human services , congress could consider delegating authority to the commissioner of food and drugs , or even the head of cder .

