covered bonds are one method for financial institutions to raise funds from investors .

they are rare in the united states , although variations of covered bonds have been used in europe for centuries .

although covered bonds are not a prohibited form of debt contract in the united states , some observers believe that legislation and agency rulemaking is required to facilitate the growth of a larger domestic covered bond market .

congress has conducted hearings on alternatives to government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) .

policymakers are considering increased reliance on covered bonds as an alternative to securitization .

this report discusses various definitions of covered bonds , analyzes some of the economic advantages and disadvantages of this funding mechanism compared with securitization , and summarizes recent legislative proposals .

conceptually , a covered bond is a way for financial institutions to raise funds by offering collateral to investors .

a bank sells a bond to investors , and the bond is backed both by the bank's promise to repay and by the assets pledged as collateral .

it is important to distinguish between the debt that serves as the collateral and the debt that is the bond itself .

a covered bond is a debt in which a financial institution is the borrower .

the primary collateral backing the covered bond is also debt , often mortgages in which the financial institution was the lender or has a close relationship with the lender .

a covered bond typically uses mortgages ( or other debt ) as collateral for a bond that a financial institution sells to investors .

it is difficult to present a single technical definition of existing covered bonds because variations of this debt contract have been used in many european countries for centuries .

in some countries , variations of covered bonds can be constructed through private contract .

in other countries , covered bonds conforming to statutorily prescribed features may receive enhanced protections .

for such statutorily protected covered bonds , according to the european central bank ( ecb ) , the closest thing to a shared definition is european covered bond council's "essential features of covered bonds," which includes four elements: ( 1 ) the bond is issued by ( or bondholders otherwise have full recourse to ) a credit institution which is subject to public supervision and regulation ; ( 2 ) bondholders have a claim against a cover pool of financial assets in priority to the unsecured creditors of the credit institution ; ( 3 ) the credit institution has the ongoing obligation to maintain sufficient assets in the cover pool to satisfy the claims of covered bondholders at all times ; and ( 4 ) the obligations of the credit institution in respect of the cover pool are supervised by public or other independent bodies .

if that definition is accepted , then no u.s. covered bonds are actually covered bonds because the united states does not as yet have an independent cover pool supervisor .

a comparison to other sources of funds for financial institutions may be helpful in understanding covered bonds .

a distinguishing feature of a covered bond is that it is dual - recourse , which means that the investor has recourse against both the financial institution selling the bond and the pool of assets backing the bond .

in contrast , a bank or other financial institution could offer a bond with no collateral , in which case the bond is a form of unsecured debt .

alternatively , the financial institution could sell the underlying loans to an independent collateral pool that serves as the only backing of the bond , in which case the bond is a typical american private - label asset - backed security ( abs ) .

if backed by mortgages , the abs is a mortgage - backed security ( mbs ) .

table 1 compares the typical covered bond structures to unsecured debt and abs or mbs .

variations on the general structures are presented in the table , for example , fannie mae and freddie mac ( the government - sponsored enterprises , gses ) typically guarantee credit risk for their mbs .

note that table 1 is a general description ; it is possible to design abs and covered bonds in which there is a claim against the issuing financial institution for some kinds of risks but not for others .

american banks are not prohibited from using the covered bond contract to raise funds , although there are few american covered bonds .

in practice , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) may have the ability to limit the market for covered bonds through its regulatory power over insured depositories .

for example , the fdic can limit the type of collateral that may be used or the percent of the depository's balance sheet that is funded with covered bonds .

the fdic defined covered bonds in fil 73-2008 on august 4 , 2008 .

the policy statement defines a covered bond as: a non - deposit , recourse debt obligation of an idi [insured depository institution] with a term greater than one year and no more than thirty years , that is secured directly or indirectly by perfected security interests under applicable state and federal law on assets held and owned by the idi consisting of eligible mortgages , or aaa - rated mortgage - backed securities secured by eligible mortgages if for no more than ten percent of the collateral for any covered bond issuance or series .

because securitization is more common than covered bonds in the united states , it may be helpful to compare typical features of private securitization to typical features of covered bonds .

as discussed above , covered bonds are supported by both the pledged mortgages ( or other assets ) and the issuing bank , but there are other elements of interest to some policymakers ( discussed in more detail below ) .

for example , covered bonds typically remain on the balance sheet of sponsoring institutions while securitized assets typically do not .

therefore , covered bonds typically tie up more capital than typical securitizations .

on the other hand , issuers of covered bonds typically have more long - term stake in the performance of the assets in the cover pool than typical securitization .

table 2 compares selected features of covered bonds to typical private securitization of u.s. mortgages .

the steep drop in the volume of securitization and the gse intervention of 2008 have encouraged some policymakers to consider alternative funding sources for mortgage finance .

covered bonds might be less subject to investor loss of confidence than securitization because covered bond issuers maintain a long - term interest in the underlying loans and because the exposure of banks to covered bonds remains recorded on their balance sheets .

these potential advantages would have to be weighed against less advantageous capital requirements for issuing institutions and potential costs to the fdic's deposit insurance fund .

some potential economic benefits and costs of covered bonds are presented below .

in response to mortgage market turmoil in 2007 and 2008 , the treasury department and the fdic considered rulemaking to encourage the use of covered bonds as an alternative to mortgage securitization .

they believed that covered bonds might be a more stable source of funding than securitization because the volume of american private - label mortgage securitizations collapsed as mortgage market turmoil progressed .

in contrast to the united states , the european union ( eu ) covered bond market has been a traditional feature of europe's capital markets .

as of the end of 2008 , there was approximately 2.38 trillion euros in outstanding eu covered bonds .

there are various kinds of covered bonds in the eu market , but they can be categorized into two main types: regulated and structured .

regulated covered bonds are governed by specific legislation , including european directives , national legislation , and secondary legislation .

structured covered bonds operate outside any dedicated laws .

this distinction between regulated and structured european covered bonds is important because regulated covered bonds are subject to privileged financial market regulation , whereas their structured counterparts are not .

within the eu regulatory framework , two primary laws outlining the minimum requirements for a regulated covered bond are article 22 ( 4 ) of the 1988 directive on undertakings for collective investments in transferable securities ( ucits ) , and the capital requirements directive ( crd ) .

because of global financial market instability , covered bonds have received significant attention from the european central bank ( ecb ) .

in particular , the ecb's banking supervision committee ( bsc ) released a study in december 2008 , covered bonds in the eu financial system , which examined the impact of covered bonds on the stability of the eu financial system .

the bsc concluded in its report that eu covered bonds appeared relatively resilient to the recent global financial market turmoil , although covered bonds were adversely affected following the intensification of financial turbulence in september 2008 .

in an effort to assist european capital markets , the ecb in july 2009 began a one - year purchase program of approximately eur 60 billion in covered bonds in both primary and secondary markets .

the overall covered bond market in europe has fared better than the american private label - mortgage securitization market .

for example , the average spread between the average covered bond yield and euro interest rate swap rate remained relatively stable ( between 90 and 100 basis points ) after the finalization of the december 2009 fsr to end - april 2010 .

the debt crisis in some european countries is having a negative effect , however , as evidenced by spreads of covered bonds widened considerably in some euro area countries after may 2010 .

furthermore , recently created funding facilities in europe to deal with the sovereign debt crisis have given banks alternative sources to raise funds .

the result was that european covered bond issuance was 40% lower in 2012 than in 2011 "as several banks took advantage of the ecb's three - year ltros to fund future liabilities. .

representative garrett introduced h.r .

940 on march 8 , 2011 .

a related hearing was held on march 11 , 2011 , in the subcommittee for capital markets and government sponsored enterprises , of the house committee on financial services .

h.r .

940 would have established a statutory framework for covered bonds in the united states to replace the purely contractual system now in place .

under h.r .

940 , the department of treasury would establish an oversight program for covered bonds .

the federal banking regulators or the treasury would have been the covered bond regulators ( depending on the covered bond issuer ) , and the treatment of covered bonds in the case of bank failures would have been clarified .

key sections of h.r .

940 are presented below .

eligible assets backing covered bonds ( section 2 ( 7 ) ) .

one question is whether covered bonds should be limited to residential mortgages , or whether other types of loans should be eligible assets for statutory designation ( as opposed to a contractual covered bond ) .

under h.r .

940 as introduced , the covered bond statutory framework would be available for non - mortgage asset classes .

h.r .

940 specifically included the potential to use covered bonds for certain residential mortgages , home equity loans , commercial mortgages , public sector securities , auto loans , student loans , credit card loans , and small business loans .

eligibility of asset classes would be dependent upon any rule or supervisory guidance from relevant federal agencies .

in addition to these enumerated assets , the secretary of treasury would be allowed to designate additional types of eligible assets by rule , after consultation appropriate regulators .

eligible issuers of covered bonds ( section 2 ( 9 ) ) .

under h.r .

940 as introduced , there would have been four categories of covered bond issuers .

these included ( 1 ) insured depositories and their subsidiaries ; ( 2 ) bank holding companies , savings and loan holding companies , and their subsidiaries ; ( 3 ) nonbank financial companies and their subsidiaries that are approved by the covered bond regulator ; and ( 4 ) any issuers that are sponsored by an eligible issuer for the sole purpose of issuing covered bonds on a pooled basis .

federal regulators of covered bond programs ( section 2 ( 6 ) ) .

although the secretary of treasury would have been directed to establish the covered bond regulatory oversight program , the federal banking regulators would have been the covered bond regulators for insured depositories and banks and savings and loan holding companies , and their affiliates , in general .

the secretary of treasury would have been the covered bond regulator for entities without an existing federal banking regulator , such as some issuers that are sponsored by an eligible firm for the sole purpose of issuing covered bonds on a pooled basis .

statutory definition of a covered bond ( section 2 ( 4 ) ) .

recall that contractual covered bonds are already legal in the united states h.r .

940 would have created a statutory framework for covered bonds in the united states similar to programs in europe that distinguish contractual from statutory covered bonds .

h.r .

940 would have created a statutory definition for covered bonds .

under h.r .

940 , the term covered bond would have meant any recourse debt obligation of an eligible issuer that ( 1 ) has an original term to maturity of not less than one year ; ( 2 ) is secured by a perfected security interest in or other lien on a cover pool that is owned directly or indirectly by the issuer of the obligation ; ( 3 ) is issued under a covered bond program that has been approved by the applicable covered bond regulator ; ( 4 ) is identified in a register of covered bonds that is maintained by the secretary ; and ( 5 ) is not a deposit ( as defined in section 3 ( l ) of the federal deposit insurance act ( 12 u.s.c .

1813 ( l ) ) ) .

approval of covered bond programs ( section 3 ) .

the secretary of treasury , in consultation with the federal banking regulators , would have had 180 days to issue rules to establish a covered bond oversight program .

eligible issuers would have had to get approval from their federal banking regulator ( or other appropriate covered bond regulator if the eligible issuer is not a bank ) for each covered bond program that they establish .

approval or denial was to be based upon standards issued by the secretary of treasury .

eligible issuers may have had more than one covered bond program .

for example , eligible issuers may have one program for mortgages and another for student loans .

registry of covered bond programs ( section 3 ( a ) ( 3 ) ) .

h.r .

940 would have created a national registry for covered bonds .

the treasury was to maintain a website with information on covered bond programs .

the registry would have included information to identify covered bond issuers , their programs , the applicable regulator , holders of the covered bonds , independent asset monitors , and applicable indenture trustees .

costs and fees of regulation ( section 3 ( a ) ( 4 ) ) .

the covered bond issuers would have been assessed fees to cover the costs of regulation .

each covered bond regulator would have established the fees to cover the aggregate costs of the covered bonds programs that they supervised .

the fees would not have been construed to be government funds or appropriated monies and shall not be subject to apportionment .

overcollateralization ( section 3 ( b ) ) .

a covered bond is backed by the issuer and by specific assets .

overcollateralization refers to a requirement that the value of the assets in the cover pool backing the bond be greater than the expected liability of the bond .

h.r .

940 would have established a number of standards for overcollateralization .

these standards included rules to be issued by the secretary of treasury in consultation with the covered bond regulators and an asset - coverage test .

issuers of covered bonds would have been required to report information on overcollateralization to the secretary of treasury , covered bond regulator , holders of the covered bonds , the independent asset monitor , and the indenture trustee .

the bill would have established minimum standards for eligible cover assets , such as a requirement that loans not be more than 60 days delinquent nor may the same loans be pledged as collateral for multiple cover pools .

the bill also established notice and procedures should the assets in the cover pool subsequently fail to meet the asset - coverage test .

treatment of covered bonds for defaulting or failing issuers ( section 4 ) .

h.r .

940 would have established procedures should ( 1 ) an issuer of a covered bond default on the covered bonds prior to that issuers failure and ( 2 ) the issuer of a covered bond go bankrupt or be placed under receivership or conservatorship .

h.r .

940 would have created a separate estate for the asset pool backing the covered bond .

a separate estate would have been established for each covered bond program established by the firm .

the estate would have been liable for the applicable covered bonds when the estate is created .

each estate would not have been liable on any other obligation of the issuer .

the holders of covered bonds would have retained their claims against the issuer if the assets in the separate estate do not fully cover the bond .

transfer of covered bonds under receivership and conservatorship ( section 4 ( c ) ) .

there may be instances in which an issuer of covered bonds is placed in receivership or conservatorship before the issuer defaults on any covered bond payments .

if so , the fdic would have been required to transfer the covered bond obligations and related asset - cover pools to another eligible covered bond issuer within 180 days .

