vebas historically belonged to a single firm .

more recently , however , some vebas are structured as a trust independent of the firm .

these trusts are sometimes termed independent vebas , new vebas or stand - alone vebas .

an independent veba must be controlled by its membership , by independent trustees , or by other fiduciaries designated by the membership .

trustees chosen by a collective bargaining agreement are considered designated by the membership .

in all cases , the trust acts in the interest of the workers .

the detroit 3 veba is an independent veba .

the automobile companies have had no say in its operation since it became the active source of retiree health funding for the three firms on january 1 , 2010 .

like many independent vebas , the specific details of the detroit 3 veba were negotiated between the firms and the union .

beginning with gm , uaw and management representatives bargained over the amount of funding needed to pay for health insurance for all ( eligible ) present and future retirees , their spouses , and their dependents for the remainder of their lifetimes .

the parties also bargained over the sources of the funding .

although unionized employees and retirees may experience reduced retirement health benefits during a chapter 11 reorganization , benefits do not automatically end when a company files for bankruptcy .

the court may approve modifications to existing retiree health benefits , but may only do so after it has determined that the company has met the requirements for negotiating with an authorized representative of the affected retirees ; the authorized representative has , without good cause , rejected the proposal made by the company ; and the proposed modifications are necessary for successful reorganization ; the treatment of all affected parties , including creditors and the company , is fair and equitable ; and the balance of equities clearly favors the modification .

thus , modification of retiree health benefits under chapter 11 is possible but is neither automatic nor easy .

a strong protection for retiree health benefits , even in a financially troubled firm , is therefore a funded veba .

although funds pledged for contribution by the firm to the veba can be reduced in bankruptcy , funds that are already in the veba are beyond the reach of the firm's creditors .

forming and funding a veba can benefit both the firm and its workers .

the firm improves its financial statements by reducing an unfunded liability .

the worker receives a guarantee that he or she will get ( at least some percentage of ) promised benefits , even if the firm enters bankruptcy .

it is not often that a financial instrument may improve the position of both the firm and its workers at the same time .

any such improvement , however , is inherently risky in that the level of funding available in each year in the vebas cannot be predicted with certainty .

for example , if technological innovations in the product being produced increase the stock price of the producing firms , the value of the veba will increase with the stock price .

on the other hand , if consumer demand for the product dries up , the value of the veba will decrease with the stock price ( assuming some of the veba's assets are in company stock ) .

even if the revenue and expenditure forecasts are perfect , the collective bargaining process ultimately determines the veba's funding level .

the current and future retirees can never be sure that the veba will have enough money to fund their expected benefits over the lifetime of the veba .

it is also important to remember that the firms must have the money to contribute to the veba .

the various collective bargaining agreements dictate what contributions are required and how much flexibility the firms have in the payment schedule .

at the same time , the firms cannot contribute money they do not have .

another source of uncertainty concerns tradeoffs for retirees between the next few years and the distant future .

for example , the automotive veba was intended to last 80 years .

the money currently in the veba will likely be able to pay for retiree health benefits in the near future .

at some point before 80 years , however , the funds will probably dry up , given that the veba is not fully funded .

this situation sets the stage for conflicts between current retirees , who will receive benefits , and future retirees , who are contractually obligated to receive benefits , but for whom there may be no funding .

the veba trustees must then decide how to raise additional funding and , if desired or necessary , how to reduce the cost of the benefit package .

as part of their financial restructuring , gm and chrysler together received more than $80 billion in assistance from the troubled asset relief program .

the department of the treasury now owns nearly 61% of the new gm and nearly 10% of the new chrysler .

the federal government therefore has joint roles as a monitor of tarp funding in gm and chrysler and as part owner of gm and chrysler .

some observers consider these joint roles to be an inherent conflict of interest .

the following legislation regarding vebas has been introduced to the 111 th congress .

representative tim ryan introduced h.r .

3455 on july 31 , 2009 , and senator sherrod brown introduced s. 1663 on september 11 , 2009 .

these identical bills would provide up to $3 billion from the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) to fund a veba for former employees of the delphi corporation .

representative john boehner introduced h.res .

591 on june 26 , 2009 .

among other provisions , this resolution would request that president obama transmit to the house of representatives details of the role of the presidential task force on the auto industry in any aspect relating to the levels of and reductions in the benefits of gm's employees and retirees .

in theory , establishing a veba to fund retiree health insurance gives workers more control over both health insurance funding and plan design .

the success or failure of the veba , however , can only be measured years after its implementation .

many factors influence whether the workers in fact end up better off .

the financial health of the firm influences whether it makes the agreed upon deposits into the fund .

the ability of the veba trustees to invest the funds for maximum interest affects the available monies .

the trustees also must select cost - effective health insurance plans for the retirees .

