congressional interest has grown in carbon capture and sequestration ( or carbon capture and storage , ccs ) as part of legislative strategies to mitigate global climate change .

the promise of ccs lies in the potential for technology to capture co 2 emitted from large , industrial sources , thus significantly decreasing co 2 emissions without drastically changing u.s. dependence on fossil fuels , particularly coal , for electricity generation .

the future use of coal — a significant component of the u.s. energy portfolio — in the united states would likely depend on whether and how ccs is deployed if legislative or regulatory actions curtail future co 2 emissions .

unlike the other two components of ccs , transportation and geologic storage , the first component of ccs — co 2 capture — is almost entirely technology - dependent .

for ccs to succeed at reducing co 2 emissions from a significant fraction of large sources in the united states , co 2 capture technology would need to deployed widely .

widespread commercial deployment would likely depend on the cost of capturing co 2 .

this report examines the factors underlying the cost of currently available co 2 capture technologies and advanced capture systems .

this report also examines efforts to commercialize other advanced technologies , namely sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) and nitrogen oxide ( nox ) capture technologies to reduce air pollution , to glean insights that could be useful for assessing the prospects for improved , lower - cost co 2 capture systems .

the transportation and storage components of ccs are not nearly as technology - dependent as the capture component .

nonetheless , transportation and sequestration costs , while generally much smaller than capture costs , could be very high in some cases .

they would depend , in part , on how long it would take to reach an agreement on a regulatory framework to guide long - term co 2 injection and storage , and on what those regulations would require .

ccs deployment would also depend on the degree of public acceptance of a large - scale ccs enterprise .

this report provides a "snapshot" of current technological development , but is both prospective and retrospective in that it also examines emerging or advanced technologies that may affect future ccs deployment , and looks at lessons from past experience with large - scale technological development and deployment as guidelines that could be used to shape energy policy .

this technology assessment and report was undertaken by carnegie mellon university , department of engineering and public policy , under the leadership of edward s. rubin , together with aaron marks , hari mantripragada , peter versteeg , and john kitchin .

the work was performed under contract to crs , and is part of a multiyear crs project to examine different aspects of u.s. energy policy .

[author name scrubbed] , crs specialist in energy and natural resources policy , served as the crs project coordinator .

the bulk of the report consists of 10 chapters , together with figures and tables .

each chapter can be read independently ; however , " chapter 1: executive summary ," " chapter 2: background and scope of report ," and " chapter 3: overview of co 2 capture technologies " provide the reader with background and context for a more complete understanding of some of the more technologically focused discussions in other chapters .

the material in this report is current as of july 19 , 2010 .

the report will not be updated .

this report has sought to provide a realistic assessment of prospects for improved , lower - cost co 2 capture systems for use at power plants and other industrial facilities in order to mitigate emissions of greenhouse gases linked to global climate change .

toward that end , the report first described each of the three current approaches to co 2 capture , namely , post - combustion capture from power plant flue gases using amine - based solvents such as monoethanolamine ( mea ) ; pre - combustion capture ( also via chemical solvents ) from the synthesis gas produced in an integrated coal gasification combined cycle power plant ; and oxy - combustion capture , in which high - purity oxygen is used for combustion to produce a flue gas with high co 2 concentration amenable to capture without a post - combustion chemical process .

currently , post - combustion and pre - combustion capture technologies are commercial and widely used for gas stream purification in a variety of industrial processes , including several small - scale installations on power plant flue gases that produce commodity co 2 for sale .

oxy - combustion capture is still under development and is not currently commercial .

the advantages and limitations of each of these three methods are discussed in this report , along with plans for their continued development and demonstration in large - scale power plant applications .

while all three approaches are capable of high co 2 capture efficiencies ( typically about 90% ) , major drawbacks of current processes are their high cost and large energy requirements for operation ( which contribute significantly to the high cost ) .

this is especially true for the combustion - based capture processes , which have the highest incremental cost relative to a similar plant without co 2 capture .

also discussed in this report are the substantial r&d activities underway in the united states and elsewhere to develop and commercialize improved solvents that can lower the cost of current post - combustion capture processes , as well as research on a variety of potential "breakthrough technologies" such as novel solvents , sorbents , membranes , and oxyfuel systems that hold promise for lower - cost capture systems .

most of these processes , however , are still in the early stages of research and development ( i.e. , conceptual designs and laboratory - or bench - scale processes ) , so that credible estimates of their performance and ( especially ) cost are lacking at this time .

even with an aggressive development schedule , the commercial availability of these technologies , should they prove successful , is at least a decade away based on past experience .

processes at the more advanced pilot plant scale are , for the most part , new or improved solvent formulations ( such as ammonia and advanced amines ) that are undergoing testing and evaluation .

these advanced solvents could be available for commercial use within several years if subsequent full - scale testing confirms their overall benefit .

pilot - scale oxy - combustion processes also are currently being tested and evaluated for planned scale - up , while in europe two igcc plants are installing pilot plants to evaluate pre - combustion capture options .

at the moment , however , there are still no full - scale applications of co 2 capture at a coal - based power plant , although a number of demonstration projects are planned or underway in the united states and other countries .

capture projects for other types of industrial facilities also are planned .

in general , the focus of most current r&d activities is on cost reduction rather than additional gains in the efficiency of co 2 capture ( which can often result in higher overall cost ) .

while a number of programs emphasize the need for lower - cost retrofit technologies suitable for existing power plants , as a practical matter these same technologies are being pursued to reduce capture costs for new plant applications as well .

indeed , as the fleet of existing coal - fired power plants continues to age , the size of the potential u.s retrofit market for co 2 capture will continue to shrink , as older plants may not be economic to retrofit ( although the situation in other countries , especially china , may be quite different ) .

whether for new power plants or existing ones , the key questions are , when will advanced co 2 capture systems be available for commercial rollout , and how much cheaper will they be compared to current technology ? .

all of the technology roadmaps reviewed in this report anticipate that co 2 capture will be available for commercial deployment at power plants by 2020 .

for current commercial technologies like post - combustion amine systems , this is a conservative estimate , since the key requirement is for scale - up and demonstration at a full - size power plant — achievable well before 2020 .

a number of roadmaps also project that novel , lower - cost technologies like solid sorbent systems for post - combustion capture also will be commercial in the 2020 time frame .

such projections acknowledge , however , that this will require aggressive and sustained efforts to advance promising concepts to commercial reality .

that caveat is strongly supported by our review of recent experience from r&d programs to develop lower - cost technologies for post - combustion so 2 and no x capture at coal - fired power plants .

those efforts typically took two decades or more to bring a new concept ( like combined so 2 and no x capture systems ) to commercial availability .

by then , the cost advantage initially foreseen had largely evaporated: advanced technologies tended to get more expensive as the development process progressed ( consistent with "textbook" descriptions of the innovation process ) , while the cost of formerly "high - cost" commercial options gradually declined over time .

in a number of cases , the absence of a market for the advanced technology ( as is currently the case for co 2 capture systems ) put it at a further disadvantage .

the good news based on past experience is that the costs of environmental technologies that succeed in the marketplace tend to fall over time .

for example , after an initial rise during the early commercialization period , the cost of post - combustion so 2 and no x capture systems declined by 50% or more after about two decades of deployment at coal - fired power plants .

this trend is consistent with the "learning curve" behavior seen for many other classes of technology .

it thus appears reasonable to expect a similar trend for future co 2 capture costs once these technologies become widely deployed .

this report also notes that the cost of co 2 capture also depends strongly on other aspects of power plant design , financing , and operation — not solely on the cost of the co 2 capture unit .

future improvements in net power plant efficiency , for example , will tend to lower the unit cost of co 2 capture .

some estimates of future electricity generation costs for advanced power plant designs with co 2 capture and storage offer even more optimistic forecasts of potential cost reductions from advanced technologies .

in general , however , the further away a technology is from commercial reality , the lower its estimated cost .

thus , there is considerable uncertainty in the projected cost of technologies that are not yet commercial , especially those that exist only as conceptual designs .

more reliable estimates of future technology costs typically are linked to projections of their expected level of commercial deployment in a given time frame ( i.e. , a measure of their market size ) .

for power plant technologies like co 2 capture systems , this is commonly expressed as total installed capacity .

however , as with other technologies whose sole purpose is to control environmental emissions , there is no significant market for power plant co 2 capture systems absent government actions or policies that effectively create such markets — either through regulations that limit co 2 emissions or through voluntary incentives for its use .

the historical evidence and technical literature examined in this report strongly link future cost reductions to the level of commercial deployment of a technology .

in empirical "experience curve" models , the latter measure serves as a surrogate for the many factors that influence future costs , including expenditures for r&d and the knowledge gained through learning - by - doing ( related to manufacturing ) and learning - by - using ( related to technology use ) .

based on such models , published estimates project the future cost of electricity from power plants with co 2 capture to fall by up to 30% below current values after roughly 100,000 mw of capture plant capacity has been installed and operated worldwide .

that would represent a significant decrease from current costs — one that would bring the cost and efficiency of future power plants with co 2 capture close to that of current plants without capture .

for reference , it took approximately 20 years following passage of the 1970 clean air act amendments to achieve a comparable level of technology deployment for so 2 capture systems at coal - fired power plants .

uncertainty estimates for these projections , however , indicate that future cost reductions for co 2 capture also could be much smaller than indicated above .

thus , whether future cost reductions will meet , exceed , or fall short of current estimates will only be known with hindsight .

in the context of this report , the key insight governing prospects for improved carbon capture technology is that achieving significant cost reductions will require not only a vigorous and sustained level of r&d , but also a substantial level of commercial deployment .

that will require a significant market for co 2 capture technologies , which can only be established by government actions .

at present such a market does not yet exist .

while various types of incentive programs can accelerate the development and deployment of co 2 capture technology , actions that significantly limit emissions of co 2 to the atmosphere ultimately are needed to realize substantial and sustained reductions in the future cost of co 2 capture .

