the united states imposes sanctions on burma by a variety of means , including certain laws and presidential executive orders ( e.o.s ) specifically targeting burma , as well as laws that impose sanctions on countries for unacceptable behavior related to functional issues of importance to the u.s. government , such as nuclear proliferation or human trafficking .

the burma - specific laws and e.o.s were issued between 1990 and 2012 , often in response to actions on the part of burma's ruling military junta , the state peace and development council ( spdc ) , that were considered sufficiently egregious to warrant the imposition of sanctions .

the result is a web of overlapping sanctions subject to differing restrictions , waiver provisions , expiration conditions , and reporting requirements .

u.s. sanctions targeted solely at burma are specified in six federal laws , a series of presidential executive orders , and certain presidential determinations .

the six laws are: section 138 of the customs and trade act of 1990 ( section 138 ) ( p.l .

101-382 ) — requires the president to impose "such economic sanctions upon burma as the president determines to be appropriate," unless the president certifies certain conditions pertaining to human rights and counternarcotics have been met ; section 307 of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( section 307 ) ( p.l .

87 – 195 ) , as amended by the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 1994 and 1995 ( p.l .

103-236 ) — withholds u.s. contributions to selected international organizations with programs in burma ; section 570 of the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , 1997 ( section 570 ) ( p.l .

104-208 ) — imposes various specific sanctions on burma , unless the president certifies that certain human rights and democracy standards have been met ; the burmese freedom and democracy act of 2003 ( 2003 bfda ) ( p.l .

108-61 ) — requires the president to impose a ban on the import of products of burma ; freeze assets of certain burmese officials ; block u.s. support for loans from international financial institutions ( ifis ) ; and ban visas for certain burmese officials ; the tom lantos block burmese jade ( junta's anti - democratic efforts ) act of 2008 ( tom lantos block burmese jade act ) ( p.l .

110-286 ) — bans the direct and indirect import of products containing burmese jadeite and rubies ; expands the list of burmese officials subjected to visa bans and financial sanctions ; and allows for the placement of restrictions on use of correspondent accounts to provide services to burmese officials ; and p.l .

112-192 — provides the president with the authority to waive u.s. opposition to assistance to burma from ifis , subject to certain conditions .

five presidential executive orders ( e.o. ) .

currently in force impose sanctions on burma .

the five e.o.s are: e.o .

13047 — issued on may 20 , 1997 , by president bill clinton , it bans all new investments in burma , as required by section 570 ; e.o .

13310 — issued on july 28 , 2003 , by president george w. bush , it brings the sanction regime into compliance with certain provisions of the bfda , including the freezing of assets of certain burmese officials and the prohibition of the provision of financial services to burma ; e.o .

13448 — issued on october 18 , 2007 , by president bush , it added to the list of burmese officials and entities subject to the freezing of assets ; e.o .

13464 — issued on april 30 , 2008 , by president bush , it added to the list of burmese officials and entities subject to the freezing of assets ; and e.o .

13619 – issued on july 11 , 2012 , by president obama , it expanded the list of burmese nationals subject to visa bans , the freezing of assets , and other targeted sanctions .

on october 3 , 1996 , president clinton issued presidential proclamation 6925 denying entry into the united states of "persons who formulate , implement , or benefit from policies that impede burma's transition to democracy , and the immediate family members of such persons. .

president bush issued presidential determination no .

2009 – 11 on january 15 , 2009 , providing a limited waiver of some of the sanctions in the tom lantos block burmese jade act , stating that doing so was "in the national interest of the united states. .

the e.o.s sanctioning burma rely on the authority vested in the president by the constitution , the five burma sanctions laws , and the following laws: the international emergency economic powers act of 1997 , or ieepa ( p.l .

95-223 ; 50 u.s.c .

1701 et seq .

 ) — authorizes the president to impose certain types of international trade or financial sanctions to deal with a threat to national security , foreign policy , or economy of the united states ; and the national emergencies act , or nea ( p.l .

94-412 ; 50 u.s.c .

1601 et seq .

 ) — authorizes the president ( under certain conditions ) to declare a national emergency .

to carry out and execute the authority conveyed by the ieepa , the president must declare a national emergency by invoking the nea .

invocations of the ieepa are subject to annual renewal requirements .

section 301 of u.s.c .

title 3 , chapter 35 allows the president to delegate authority ( under certain conditions ) to other government officials to carry out responsibilities on behalf of the president .

in most cases , this has been either the secretary of state or the treasury secretary .

president obama gave official notice to congress on may 17 , 2012 , that he was continuing for another year ( may 21 , 2012-may 20 , 2013 ) the international emergency with respect to burma , and renewing the provisions of e.o .

13047 , e.o .

13310 , e.o .

13448 , and e.o .

13464 , which are still in force .

the implementation of the burma - specific sanctions instituted by the preceding laws and e.o.s , and that have been delegated to the treasury secretary , is governed by part 537 of title 31 of the code of federal regulations ( cfr ) .

these burmese sanction regulations cover the import ban , the prohibition of the provision of financial services , and the prohibition of new investments in burma .

other portions of the cfr cover some portions of burmese - specific sanctions .

current u.s. policy towards burma can be characterized as the balancing of bilateral engagement and an assortment of political and economic sanctions — an approach sometimes referred to as "pragmatic engagement. .

the stated intent of u.s. policy is to persuade and / or pressure burma's year - old , quasi - civilian union government to release all political prisoners from detention and advance the nation's transition to a representative , democratically elected civilian government that will respect the human rights of the people of burma , including its ethnic minorities .

since burma's former ruling military junta formally transferred power to a quasi - civilian government in april 2011 , burma's union government and union parliament have implemented a number of political reforms that the obama administration sees as progress towards the fulfillment of u.s. objectives in burma .

frequently described as being in an "action for action" mode , recent u.s. policy discussions have generally focused on establishing criteria for amending , waiving , and / or removing existing u.s. sanctions .

in an april 4 , 2012 , press briefing , two unnamed senior administration officials gave some indication of the current principles underlying current burma policy .

the first principle is "to send a clear signal of support for the reform process and reformers. .

the second principle is to remove the "bluntness" of the existing sanctions and refocus them onto "the regressive elements , the corrupt elements , the elements that are not looking forward and consistent with reform going forward. .

over the last 12 months , the obama administration has taken several steps designed to foster further reforms in burma and support individuals identified as being generally supportive of political and economic reforms .

the first steps were taken following the second of the four prisoner releases and were announced by secretary clinton during her historic trip to burma .

another series of steps was announced following the april 2012 parliamentary by - elections .

the latest changes were announced to coincide with the visits of president thein sein and aung san suu kyi to the united states in september 2012 .

a major element of the obama's administration's efforts to foster reforms in burma has been the utilization of presidential authority to waive or ease some of the existing political and economic sanctions on burma .

although the presidential waivers effectively lift the sanctions , they do not revoke or remove the sanctions , which can be reimposed at any time .

table 1 summarizes the sanction waivers authorized to date , as well as which sanctions remain in effect .

in addition , the obama administration has indicated it intends to partially or totally waive the general import ban at some future date , and use recently created authority to support assistance to burma by international financial institutions .

u.s. sanctions on burma are the end result of a general , but uneven decline in u.s. relations with burma and its military , the tatmadaw , since world war ii .

for the most part , the decline is due to what the u.s. government sees as a general disregard by the burmese military for the human rights and civil liberties of the people of burma .

however , part of the tensions between the tatmadaw and the united states can be attributed to a failure to address burma's internal security concerns in the early years after its independence .

during world war ii , the united states utilized burma as a base of operations against japanese forces in china and southeast asia , engendering generally cordial relations with burma's civilian and military leadership .

following the war , the former british colony of burma became an independent nation , led by a civilian government .

the new nation became a member of the united nations in 1948 , was a founding member of the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) , and joined the international monetary fund ( imf ) in 1952 — with the full support of the united states .

the united states and burma also established full diplomatic relations .

relations between the two nations began to sour following world war ii for various reasons .

first , burma was increasingly frustrated by u.s. reluctance to resolve the status of displaced kuomintang ( kmt ) soldiers operating out of northeastern burma against the newly established people's republic of china ( prc ) .

in 1953 , u.s. economic assistance to burma temporarily ceased in part because of the friction over the kmt soldiers in burma .

second , burma's civilian government proved to be unstable , due in part to various ethnic - based militia groups operating in the country , and in part due to a 1962 coup d'état staged by the military under the name of the burmese socialist programme party ( bspp ) .

the new military government chose to foster closer ties to the prc , a decision that the united states did not like .

third , the military government also demonstrated a general lack of respect for the human rights of its citizens , clamping down on opposition groups calling for a return to civilian rule .

despite the cooling of relations , u.s. policy towards burma remained relatively normal .

the united states also accepted burma as one of the original beneficiaries of its generalized system of preference ( gsp ) program in 1976 .

it also granted burma most favored nation ( mfn , now referred to as normal trade relations , or ntr ) status , and supported the provision of developmental assistance by international financial institutions .

there were also close military to military relations ( including a major international military education and training [imet] program ) until 1988 .

the implementing of sanctions on burma did not begin until after the tatmadaw brutally suppressed a peaceful , popular protest that has become known as the 8888 uprising .

starting in the fall of 1987 , popular protests against the military government sprang up throughout burma , reaching a peak in august 1988 .

on august 8 , 1988 , the military quashed the protest , killing and injuring an unknown number of protesters .

in the aftermath of the event , the military regrouped and the state law and order restoration council ( slorc ) assumed power .

three days following the crackdown , the senate passed s.res .

464 , condemning the killings and mass arrests , supporting a return to democracy in burma , and calling on the reagan administration to raise the issue of human rights and reconciliation with burmese officials .

on september 7 , 1988 , the house of representatives passed h.res .

529 condemning the killing of unarmed protesters , paying tribute to the people of burma and their struggle for democracy , and calling on the executive branch to review assistance programs in burma .

the reagan administration responded on september 23 , 1988 , by suspending all u.s. aid to burma , including counternarcotics programs , and stopping all arms sales — starting the gradual progress of sanctions on burma .

on april 13 , 1989 , president george h. w. bush issued presidential proclamation 5955 , amending the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program and suspending preferential treatment .

after assuming power , slorc announced that it intended to expedite the return to civilian rule by holding parliamentary elections to form a pyithu hluttaw ( union assembly ) on may 27 , 1990 .

on september 27 , 1988 , slorc released a new law governing the registration of political parties , and on may 31 , 1989 , it issued a new law governing the upcoming parliamentary election .

although 235 political parties registered for the election , only 4 parties won more than 10 of the 485 contested seats .

in a surprise to many , the national league for democracy ( nld ) , led by aung san suu kyi , received 59.9% of the valid votes and won 382 seats , while slorc's political party , the national unity party , received 21.2% of the vote , but only 10 seats .

slorc and burma's military were shocked by the election results , and refused to allow the union assembly to meet .

instead , the burmese military arrested and detained many of the opposition leaders , including aung san suu kyi .

protests , led by buddhist monks and university students , were brutally suppressed .

slorc declared martial law .

congress responded to the post - election crackdown by including burmese sanction language in the customs and trade act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-382 ) , which it passed on august 20 , 1990 .

section 138 of the law granted the president the authority to impose "such economic sanctions upon burma as the president determines to be appropriate , including any sanctions appropriate under the narcotics control trade act of 1986. .

a version of the act which passed the senate by a vote of 92-0 would have prohibited all imports from burma .

prior to the passage of customs and trade act of 1990 , the bush administration had suspended burma's eligibility for the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program on april 13 , 1989 .

president bush also designated burma as a drug - producing and / or drug - trafficking country under the foreign assistance act of 1961 on february 28 , 1990 , which required the united states to oppose loans to burma by international financial institutions .

after the passage of customs and trade act of 1990 , the bush administration invoked the law's authority on august 5 , 1991 , and refused to renew the bilateral textile agreement with burma , which had lapsed on december 31 , 1990 .

during the 1990s , congress considered a number of bills and resolutions calling for additional sanctions on burma .

most of those measures failed to emerge from committee , with a few notable exceptions .

on april 30 , 1994 , congress passed the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 1994 and 1995 ( p.l .

103-236 ) which amended the foreign assistance act of 1961 and withheld a portion of u.s. contributions to international organizations with programs for burma , including the united nations development program ( undp ) , but excluding iaea and unicef .

language restricting u.s. funding for undp if it conducted programs in burma was included in legislation up to fy2008 , but not since then .

in july 1995 , the free burma act of 1995 ( s. 1092 ) was introduced , which would have placed a broad range of sanctions on burma , including a ban on u.s. investment and assistance , the suspension of gsp privileges and normal trade relations , the prohibition of all imports of burmese goods , travel restrictions to and from burma , and u.s. opposition to all multilateral assistance .

according to some scholars , the severity of the sanctions in this bill was sufficient to persuade slorc to release aung san suu kyi from house arrest on july 10 , 1995 .

even after the release of aung san suu kyi , congress approved new sanctions on burma in section 570 of the omnibus consolidated appropriations act , 1997 ( p.l .

104-208 ) , including a cessation of all non - humanitarian assistance , a ban on the issuance of entry visas for burmese government officials , and instructions for u.s. representatives for international financial institutions to vote against loans or funding to burma .

on october 3 , 1996 , president clinton issued presidential proclamation 6925 , suspending visas for "persons who formulate , implement , or benefit from policies that impede burma's transition to democracy , and the immediate family members of such persons. .

in addition , the law required the president to prohibit new investments in burma by u.s. persons .

on may 20 , 1997 , president clinton released e.o .

13047 banning all new investments in burma .

since 2000 , additional bills and resolutions have been introduced in congress seeking to apply more sanctions on burma .

in october 2000 , identical bills were introduced in the house and the senate ( h.r .

5603 and s. 3246 ; 106 th congress ) that would have banned all textile and apparel imports from burma .

in the spring of 2001 , similar bills ( h.r .

2211 and s. 926 ; 107 th congress ) were introduced that would have "prohibited the importation of any article that is produced , manufactured , or grown in burma. .

however , congress did not pass any new sanction legislation until after the spring 2003 crackdown on opposition parties ( which included the detention of aung san suu kyi and other opposition leaders ) , when it approved the burmese freedom and democracy act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-61 ) .

similarly , congress did not pass the tom lantos block burmese jade act until the spdc crushed a nationwide protest initiated by buddhist monks in the autumn of 2007 — the so - called "saffron revolution. .

after the protests had been quashed , the spdc arrested and imprisoned many of the leaders , and defrocked and relocated a number of the buddhist monks involved in the protests .

the george w. bush administration did not take significant action on burma until after the attacks on the burmese opposition in the spring of 2003 and the passage of the burmese freedom and democracy act of 2003 ( bfda ) .

using authority granted by the bfda and other laws ( see " summary of burma - specific sanctions " ) , president george w. bush issued e.o .

13310 , e.o .

13448 , and e.o .

13464 on july 28 , 2003 , october 18 , 2007 , and april 30 , 2008 , respectively .

since assuming office , president barack obama's actions regarding burmese sanctions have included renewing the international emergency with respect to burma ( thereby extending the sanctions under e.o .

13047 , e.o .

13310 , e.o .

13448 , and e.o .

13464 ) , and issuing a presidential determination and a memorandum waiving some of the sanctions related to the victims of trafficking and violence protection act of 2000 .

there are some distinct patterns in the history of u.s. relations with burma .

first , despite the general decline in relations following world war ii , the imposition of sanctions did not begin until after the suppression of the 8888 uprising in 1988 .

second , subsequent u.s. sanctions have generally been imposed after burma's military has severely violated the human rights and civil liberties of its political opponents and / or the burmese people .

third , congress has been more proactive in pushing for the imposition of sanctions on burma than the white house .

fourth , it is unclear if the imposition of sanctions has had a demonstrable effect on the spdc or its predecessors .

fifth , it is equally unclear if the absence of u.s. sanctions on burma would have led to an improvement in the political situation in burma .

the existing u.s. sanctions specifically targeted at burma can be generally divided into several broad categories .

first , there are bans on issuing visas to certain burmese government officials ( particularly the leadership of the state peace and development council [sdpc] and the union solidarity development association [usda] ) , members of their families , and their business associates .

second , there are restrictions on the provision of financial services to certain burmese government officials , members of their families , and their business associates .

third , certain assets of selected individuals held by u.s. entities have been "frozen. .

fourth , there is a general prohibition on the import of goods of burmese origin .

fifth , there is a prohibition on the import of certain types of goods and goods from certain companies .

sixth , there is a ban on new u.s. investments in burma , including investments in third country companies .

seventh , there are restrictions on the provision of bilateral and multilateral assistance to burma .

some of the types of sanctions are included in more than one of the laws or e.o.s listed above , with at times apparently overlapping provisions .

in addition , depending on the specific provisions of the laws or e.o.s , the sanctions may be subject to differing presidential waiver provisions , renewal or extension conditions , or reporting requirements .

a summary of the various provisions in the laws or e.o.s for each type of sanction follows in tabular form .

in cases where the obama administration has indicated its intent to relax or modify the existing type of sanction , a brief description of what steps may be necessary to implement the proposed change is provided , and the relevant waiver or removal conditions are highlighted in the table .

in addition to the targeted sanctions , burma is currently subject to certain sanctions specified in u.s. laws based on various functional issues .

in many cases , the type of assistance or relations restricted or prohibited by these provisions is also addressed under burma - specific sanction laws .

the functional issues include: child soldiers: burma is prohibited from receiving certain types of foreign assistance under the provisions of the child soldiers preventions act of 2008 ( title iv of p.l .

110-457 ) because of its designation as a foreign government that hosts governmental armed forces or supports armed groups that recruit and use child soldiers .

as a result , burma is ineligible to receive aid under international military education and training ( imet ) , the foreign military financing ( fmf ) , and section 1206 assistance , as well as excess defense articles and the issuance of licenses for direct commercial sales of military equipment .

human trafficking: burma is prohibited from receiving non - humanitarian and non - trade - related foreign assistance because of its designation by the president as a "tier 3" country in the 2011 trafficking in persons ( tip ) report .

tier 3 countries are statutorily defined in the victims of trafficking and violence protection act of 2000 ( tvpa , p.l .

106-386 , as amended ) as noncompliant with the minimum standards for the elimination of tip and not making significant efforts to bring themselves into compliance with such standards .

on september 30 , 2011 , president obama issued presidential determination 2001-28 , granting burma a partial waiver of the aid sanctions of the tvpa , to provide assistance for controlling infectious diseases .

on february 3 , 2012 , he issued a presidential memorandum waiving section 110 ( d ) ( 1 ) ( b ) of the tvpa with respect to burma .

the memorandum specifically waives the requirement for u.s. executive directors to vote against "and use the executive director's best efforts to deny" non - trade , non - humanitarian loans or other utilization of funds to burma through multilateral development banks and the international monetary fund ( imf ) .

despite the presidential waiver , the requirement that the executive director of each multilateral development bank oppose and vote against loans and other forms of assistance to burma remains in force because of section 5 of the burmese freedom and democracy act ( see " bilateral and multilateral assistance ban " above ) .

money laundering and organized crime: burma's mayflower bank and asia wealth bank , and the jurisdiction of burma as a whole , including its state - run banks , are designated as "primary money laundering jurisdictions of concern" under section 311 of the usa patriot act ( p.l .

107-56 , as amended ) for the country's absence of money laundering regulations , weak oversight of the banking sector , and private bank connections to account holders involved in organized crime , particularly drug trafficking .

under this provision , the treasury department imposed a "special measure" to prohibit certain u.s. financial institutions from establishing , maintaining , administering , or managing correspondent or payable - through accounts for , or on behalf of , myanmar mayflower bank , asia wealth bank , and any other burmese banking institution .

this prohibition extends to correspondent or payable - through accounts maintained for other foreign banks when such accounts are used to provide banking services to burmese banks indirectly .

religious freedom: the international religious freedom act ( irfa , p.l .

105-292 , as amended ) requires that the president conduct an annual review of the status of religious freedom in other nations , and authorizes the imposition of various types of sanctions on nations that seriously violate religious freedom .

burma has been designated a "country of particular concern for religious freedom" pursuant to this act since 1999 .

burma was most recently re - designated in 2009 .

as the sanctioning action imposed on burma pursuant to irfa and currently in effect , the secretary of state has elected to continue the existing arms embargo against burma .

workers rights: the trade reform act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-618 , as amended ) grants the president the authority to withdraw preferential trade treatment under the u.s. generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program if a country "has not taken or is not taking steps to afford internationally recognized worker rights to workers in the country. .

on april 13 , 1989 , president george h. w. bush issued presidential proclamation 5955 suspending burma's preferential treatment under the gsp program , invoking his authority under the trade reform act of 1974 .

world peace and the security and foreign policy of the united states : the president has the authority under the arms export control act of 1976 ( p.l .

94-329 ) to prohibit all arms exports to a country "in furtherance of world peace and the security and foreign policy of the united states. .

on september 23 , 1988 , president reagan invoked his powers under this law to impose an arms embargo on burma .

in addition , on june 9 , 1993 , the state department issued a public notice implementing an immediate ban on export of defense articles and services to burma .

the u.s. arms embargo on burma remains in effect .

burma had been prohibited from receiving certain types of foreign assistance , as well as other types of foreign policy provisions , because of its designation by the president as a major illicit drug producing and / or drug - transit country under section 490 of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( faa , 87-195 , as amended ) and section 706 of foreign relations authorization act , fiscal year 2003 ( p.l .

107-228 , as amended ) .

however , presidential determination 2012-15 , issued on september 14 , 2012 , granted burma ( as well as bolivia and venezuela ) a national interest waiver of the stipulated prohibitions despite its continued designation as a major drug transit and / or major illicit drug producing nation , as well as burma's designation as a nation that had failed demonstrably during the previous 12 months to adhere to its international counternarcotics agreements and take measures set forth in section 489 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the faa .

since 1989 , some members of congress have proposed , and congress has at times considered , additional sanctions on burma .

some of those proposed sanctions would go beyond the current sanctions regime .

others would fall under broader sanctions already enacted .

the notion of a complete ban on the importation of products of burmese origin first appeared in legislation in the senate version of the customs and trade act of 1990 ( see above ) .

it reappeared in proposed legislation in 1995 , when s. 1092 was introduced during the 104 th congress .

s. 1092 would have prohibited the importation of any article "produced , manufactured , grown , or extracted in burma. .

as early as june 1989 , legislation was introduced in congress to prohibit the import of selected burmese products .

initially , these proposed import bans were directed at products of burmese origin .

for example , in the 101 st congress , h.r .

2578 would have blocked the importation of teak and fish products from burma .

in the 106 th congress , h.r .

5603 and s. 3246 were introduced , proposing a ban on the importation of all textile and apparel products from burma .

later on , the proposed import bans would have prohibited the importation of goods containing materials , parts , or components originating in burma , regardless of the country of origin of the imported good .

for example , s. 2172 and s. 2257 of the 110 th congress would have banned the importation of goods containing "any gemstones or rough unfinished geological materials" and "any teak or other hardwood timber" from burma , regardless of the country of origin of the imported good .

various bills and resolutions have also been proposed calling for a broader arms embargo on burma .

in some cases , such as s.res .

195 of the 102 nd congress , the president and the u.s .

permanent representative to the united nations were to "take the strongest possible action" in support of a global arms embargo on the country .

in other cases , such as h.con.res .

308 , h.res .

473 , and s.con.res .

107 of the 102 nd congress , the legislation would have required the president and / or the secretary of state to press china to end its military assistance to burma .

in the 104 th congress , s. 1092 would have required the united states to vote against any loan or assistance to china by a multilateral financial institution "until the president determines and certifies to the appropriate congressional committee that the people's republic of china has terminated arms sales and other arms transfers to burma. .

china is not the only nation specifically identified in congressional legislation to be pressed to support sanctions on burma .

the members of the european union ( eu ) and the nine other members of the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) have been mentioned in several bills as countries that should be pushed to tighten their sanction regimes against burma .

in the 110 th congress , h.con.res .

200 called upon asean to suspend burma's membership in the organization .

in addition , s. 1092 of the 104 th congress would have denied certain trade benefits to countries designed as "beneficiary developing countries" under title v of the trade act of 1974 ( 19 u.s.c .

2461 et seq .

 ) , as a "beneficiary country" of the caribbean basin economic recovery act ( 19 u.s.c .

2701 et seq .

 ) , or as a "beneficiary country" of the andean trade preference act ( 19 u.s.c .

3201 et seq. ) .

unless those nations entered into an agreement with the united states to cease trade and investment in burma .

there has also been congressional consideration of broader financial sanctions on burma .

the house version of the tom lantos block burmese jade act initially included provisions that would have prohibited "united states persons" from entering into economic - financial transactions , paying taxes , or performing "any contract" with burmese government institutions or individuals .

the prohibition of the payment of taxes specifically included the payments of taxes to the burmese government by the yadana natural gas project , in which the u.s. corporation chevron is a major partner .

these stricken provisions were replaced in the final bill by a "sense of congress" statement that chevron and the other foreign investors should consider voluntary disinvestment from the project .

another area targeted by congressional legislation for additional sanctions has been investment in burma .

s. 1092 of the 104 th congress would have banned all existing and new investments by u.s. nationals in burma .

similarly , s. 2172 of the 110 th congress would have banned investments in burma by u.s. persons , including those made prior to may 20 , 1997 , as well as payments to the spdc related to the divestment of assets in burma .

various recent developments in burma sparked a general reexamination of u.s. policy towards burma , and a discussion of whether u.s. sanctions continue to be an effective means of achieving policy goals or effecting change in burma .

after senior general than shwe formally dissolved the spdc on march 30 , 2011 , and officially transferred power to the new union government , an era of political reforms and improved communications with the united states has ensued .

since taking office , president thein sein has issued prisoner amnesties on six occasions , resulting in the release of 28,838 prisoners , including 745 political prisoners .

the union parliament has enacted laws that allowed the nld and other opposition parties to participate in parliamentary by - elections in april 2012 , and permit the formation of labor unions .

in addition , the union government has begun ceasefire talks with several of the nation's ethnic - based militias , concluding preliminary agreements in some cases .

however , serious human rights violations continue to occur in burma .

according to assistance association for political prisoners ( burma ) , 280 political prisoners remain in detention .

the government - backed union election commission refuses to register several ethnic - based political parties .

some labor unions have been unable to register and union organizers have been subjected to harassment and arbitrary dismissal , despite the passage of the new law .

although president thein sein issued instructions to stop all attacks on ethnic - based militias , the tatmadaw continues its assaults and commits severe human rights abuses against civilians in conflict areas .

during its first session , the 112 th congress generally acted to retain the existing sanctions .

it passed h.r .

2017 ( p.l .

112-33 ) on september 30 , 2011 , extending the general imports restriction in the 2003 bdfa through july 2012 .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) , passed on december 15 , 2011 , reaffirmed other existing sanctions by barring the use of funds for international military education and training , foreign military financing , excess defense articles , or section 1206 assistance ; restricting the use of the state department's economic support fund to humanitarian assistance in burma ; and restating the requirement that the u.s. executive directors to ifis vote against "any loan , agreement , or other financial support to burma. .

in 2012 , congress passed p.l .

112-163 renewing the general import ban , and p.l .

112-192 , described previously in the report .

in general , the 112 th congress has allowed the obama administration to take the lead on deciding when to selectively ease or waive some of the existing sanctions ( see " recent u.s. sanctions policy " ) .

the relative dearth of legislative action does not imply that the 112 th congress has not demonstrated an interest in u.s. policy in burma .

the house committee on foreign affairs subcommittee on asia and the pacific and the senate committee on foreign relations held oversight hearings during the second session on u.s. policy in burma .

several congressional delegations from both the house of representatives and the senate have traveled to burma to assess the extent of the political reforms and discuss u.s. policy with various political leaders .

the obama administration frequently consults with key members of congress regarding possible policy options , as well as to inform congress of the administration's interpretation of the situation in burma .

several members of congress have also released statements on burma , ranging from support for the removal of all sanctions to disapproval of "pragmatic engagement" and the endorsement of the maintenance of all sanctions .

although presidential waivers permit the temporary suspension of sanctions , the actual removal of existing sanctions may be a more complex proposition because of the overlapping provisions of the laws governing the current sanction regime .

in addition , because burma is subject to sanctions based on assessments related to certain functional issues ( eg , human trafficking , religious freedoms ) , the repeal of burma - specific sanction laws or e.o.s may not eliminate certain types of restrictions on burma .

for example , removing prohibitions on certain types of assistance may be more difficult than eliminating bans on the importation of selected goods with materials , parts , or components from burma .

in addition , congress would likely give consideration to matching the importance or weight of the sanction to the intended message it would be trying to convey to the burmese government and the people of burma .

such a balance would also heavily depend on the course of events in burma in the months ahead .

