implementation of the affordable care act ( aca ) is having a substantial impact on federal mandatory spending .

most of the mandatory spending under the law is for expanding health insurance coverage .

this includes premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies for individuals and families who purchase private insurance coverage through the aca health insurance exchanges , as well as federal matching funds for states that choose to expand their medicaid programs .

in addition , the aca authorized new medicare spending and appropriated billions of dollars in mandatory funds to support numerous other activities and programs .

for example , it provided a permanent appropriation — available for 10-year periods — for a center for medicare & medicaid innovation to test and implement innovative health care payment and service delivery models .

furthermore , the aca established four special funds — and appropriated amounts to each one — to support primary care , public health , and comparative effectiveness research , and help pay for the administrative costs of the law's implementation .

the aca is having a more modest impact on federal discretionary spending , which is subject to the annual appropriations process .

discretionary spending under the aca falls into two broad categories .

first , there are the amounts provided in appropriations acts for specific grant and other programs pursuant to explicit authorizations of appropriations in the aca .

second , there are the costs incurred by federal agencies to administer and enforce the health insurance reforms and other core requirements of the law .

the two agencies primarily responsible for the aca's implementation are the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the internal revenue service ( irs ) , within the department of the treasury .

both agencies have requested additional administrative funding in recent years to help cover the costs of implementing the law .

this report examines the aca's effects on discretionary spending .

first , it discusses all the aca authorizations ( and reauthorizations ) of appropriations for grant and other programs .

this information , along with the appropriation amounts ( if any ) for each program since fy2010 , is summarized in a series of tables .

the report then briefly discusses the aca administrative costs borne by cms and the irs .

appendix a provides background information on the enforceable discretionary spending limits ( caps ) and the annual spending reductions under the budget control act of 2011 .

this report is periodically revised and updated to reflect important legislative and administrative developments .

the next update will occur after congress completes its work on the fy2017 appropriations acts and the president releases the fy2018 budget .

a companion crs report summarizes all the aca's mandatory appropriations and the obligation of these funds .

the aca authorized numerous new discretionary grant programs and provided for each an authorization of appropriations , typically through fy2014 or fy2015 .

many of these provisions authorize annual appropriations of specified amounts for one or more fiscal years to carry out the program .

other provisions authorize the appropriation of specified amounts for fy2010 or fy2011 , and unspecified amounts — such sums as may be necessary , or ssan — for later years .

a few provisions authorize multi - year appropriations , available for obligation for a period in excess of one fiscal year ( eg , for the period fy2011 through fy2014 ) .

numerous other provisions simply authorize the appropriation of ssan , in a few cases without specifying any fiscal years .

the aca also was a convenient legislative vehicle to reauthorize funding — in most instances through fy2014 or fy2015 — for many existing discretionary grant programs , primarily ones authorized under the public health service act ( phsa ) .

they include most , but not all , of the health workforce education and training programs administered by the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) .

the authorizations of appropriations for many of these established programs had expired prior to the aca , though most of them were continuing to receive annual funding .

importantly , the aca permanently reauthorized appropriations for the federal health centers program , the national health service corp ( nhsc ) , and many programs and services provided by the indian health service ( ihs ) .

all the aca's discretionary spending provisions that include authorizations of appropriations are summarized in a series of tables below .

the provisions are organized by general topic under the following headings: health centers and clinics ( table 2 ) ; health care workforce ( table 3 ) ; prevention and wellness ( table 4 ) ; maternal and child health ( table 5 ) ; health care quality ( table 6 ) ; nursing homes ( table 7 ) ; health disparities data collection ( table 8 ) ; emergency care ( table 9 ) ; elder justice ( table 10 ) ; biomedical research ( table 11 ) ; biologics ( table 12 ) ; 340b drug pricing ( table 13 ) ; medical malpractice ( table 14 ) ; pain care management ( table 15 ) ; medicaid ( table 16 ) ; medicare ( table 17 ) ; and private health insurance ( table 18 ) .

each table row provides information on a specific aca provision , organized across four columns .

the first column shows the aca section or subsection number .

the second column indicates whether the provision is freestanding ( i.e. , new statutory authority that is not amending an existing statute ) or amendatory ( i.e. , amends an existing statute such as the phsa ) .

amendatory provisions either add a new program to the statute or modify an existing one .

the name of the administering agency or office within hhs is also included , if known .

the third column provides a brief description of the program , including the types of entities and / or individuals eligible for funding , and gives details of the authorization of appropriations .

finally , the fourth column shows the program's actual funding levels for fy2010 through fy2016 if it received any discretionary appropriations ( or other funding ) during that period .

many of the programs have seen their discretionary funding remain flat or decrease since fy2010 .

funding from sources other than annual discretionary appropriations ( eg , aca mandatory funds ) is shown in parentheses .

unless otherwise noted , the funding figures represent final amounts reflecting sequestration and other adjustments .

the fy2017 funding request , if applicable , is also provided .

all the discretionary funding listed in the tables in this report is provided by the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( l - hhs - ed ) annual appropriations act .

if crs was unable to identify specific appropriations for a program , then that is indicated by the phrase "no appropriations identified. .

in some instances a program may be supported with funds from another budget account .

in each of the larger tables with multiple entries ( i.e. , tables 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 and 9 ) , the aca provisions are grouped based on whether they reauthorize funding for existing programs or authorize funding for new programs .

where available , the table entry includes the catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) number for the grant program .

unless otherwise stated , all references in the tables to the secretary refer to the hhs secretary .

cms and the irs are incurring significant administrative costs to implement the aca .

both agencies have requested an increase in their annual appropriations in each of the past five years ( i.e. , fy2013-fy2017 ) to help cover those costs .

but congress has repeatedly denied their requests for additional discretionary funding for aca implementation .

cms has instead relied on funding from a variety of sources to support the development and operation of the federally facilitated exchange ( ffe ) .

table 1 shows total funding for ffe operations since fy2010 .

prior to fy2013 , cms used discretionary funding from its program management account — supplemented by a small amount of discretionary funding from the hhs departmental management account — for ffe development .

the agency also used mandatory funds from the health insurance reform implementation fund ( hirif ) , which is administered by the hhs secretary .

the aca established the hirif and appropriated $1 billion to it to help pay for administration of the law .

in the fy2013 budget , cms requested an increase of $1.001 billion for its program management account for ffe operations and other activities .

congress did not provide cms with any additional discretionary funding that year , so the hhs secretary tapped funds from other sources .

they included ( 1 ) discretionary funds transferred from other hhs accounts under the secretary's transfer authority ; ( 2 ) expired discretionary funds from the nonrecurring expenses fund ( nef ) ; ( 3 ) mandatory funds from the hirif ; and ( 4 ) mandatory funds from the pphf .

in the fy2014 budget , cms requested an increase of $1.397 billion for its program management account for ffe operations and other activities .

once again , congress did not give cms any additional funding .

the agency relied on transferred departmental funds as well as nef and hirif funding to help support the ffe .

however , congress prevented — and continues to prevent — the use of pphf funds by cms .

fy2014 was the first year in which cms collected ffe user fees ; a total of $252 million ( see table 1 ) .

under the aca , exchanges are permitted to charge participating insurance companies an assessment or user fee to support their operations .

in the fy2015 budget , cms requested an increase of $227 million for its program management account to fund ffe operations and other activities .

as in the previous two years , congress denied the agency's request for additional funding .

cms collected $888 million in ffe user fees in fy2015 ( see table 1 ) to help support ffe operations .

but with most of the hirif funds already obligated , and pphf funds off limits , cms appears to have relied largely on discretionary sources for the rest of the funding it needed for ffe operations .

in the fy2016 budget , cms requested an increase of $270 million for its program management account for ffe operations and other activities , none of which was provided by congress .

the agency collected an estimated $1.225 billion in ffe user fees , accounting for 61% of the agency's total funding for ffe operations ( see table 1 ) .

cms requested an increase of $135 million for its program management account in fy2017 for ffe operations and other activities .

the agency anticipates collecting approximately $1.604 billion in ffe user fees in fy2017 , which will cover about cover about three - quarters of the estimated funding for ffe operations ( see table 1 ) .

there are fewer details about the irs's funding for aca implementation .

the irs is responsible for administering the law's tax provisions , including the premium tax credit and other subsidies .

however , the agency has not provided — or been instructed by congress to provide — a breakdown of its spending on aca implementation .

like cms , the irs requested additional funding for aca implementation in each of the past five years: $360 million for fy2013 , $440 million for fy2014 , $436 million for fy2015 , $474 million for fy2016 , and $195 million for fy2017 .

but , as with cms , congress has not given the irs any additional funding .

according to the hhs budget office , the department transferred to the irs a total of $543 million in hirif funds over the fy2010-fy2016 period to help support aca implementation .

appendix a .

discretionary spending and the budget control act of 2011 congress has taken a number of steps in recent years to limit federal discretionary spending .

in april 2011 , lawmakers agreed to cuts in discretionary spending for a broad range of agencies and programs as part of negotiations to complete the fy2011 appropriations process and avert a government shutdown .

four months later , as part of negotiations to raise the debt ceiling , congress and the president enacted the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ) .

the bca established enforceable discretionary spending limits , or caps , for defense and nondefense spending for each of fy2012 through fy2021 , and provided for further annual spending reductions equally divided between the categories of defense and nondefense spending beginning in fy2013 .

within each spending category , those further reductions are allocated proportionately to discretionary spending and mandatory spending , subject to certain exemptions and special rules .

all the spending summarized in this report falls within the nondefense category .

under the bca , spending reductions are achieved through two different methods: ( 1 ) sequestration ( i.e. , an across - the - board cancellation of budgetary resources ) and ( 2 ) lowering the bca - imposed discretionary spending caps .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) is responsible for calculating the percentages and amounts by which mandatory and discretionary spending are required to be reduced each year , and for applying the relevant exemptions and special rules .

the bca requires mandatory spending reductions to be executed each year through a sequestration of all nonexempt accounts .

discretionary spending also was reduced through sequestration in fy2013 .

however , for each of the remaining fiscal years ( i.e. , fy2014 through fy2021 ) , the annual reductions in discretionary spending required under the bca are to be achieved by lowering the discretionary spending caps by the total dollar amount of the required reduction .

this means that the cuts within the lowered spending cap may be apportioned through the annual appropriations decisionmaking , rather than via an across - the - board reduction through sequestration .

fy2013 sequestration nonexempt nondefense discretionary spending in fy2013 generally was subject to a 5.0% sequestration .

fy2014-fy2017 nondefense discretionary spending caps table a - 1 shows the original nondefense discretionary ( ndd ) spending caps for fy2014-fy2017 established by the bca .

for each of those four fiscal years , the bca required the caps to be lowered by approximately $37 billion to achieve the necessary reduction in ndd spending .

however , the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( bba13 ) amended the bca by establishing new levels for the fy2014 and fy2015 ndd spending caps , and eliminating the requirement for those caps to be reduced .

while the bba13 caps were set at a level that was lower than the original bca caps ( see table a - 1 ) , they were higher than the bca - lowered caps that they replaced .

the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( bba15 ) further amended the bca by establishing new levels for the fy2016 and fy2017 ndd spending caps , and eliminating the requirement for those caps to be lowered .

once again , the bba15 caps were set at a level below the original bca caps for those two fiscal years ( see table a - 1 ) , but above the bca - lowered caps that they replace .

the revised ndd caps allowed an additional $26 billion for nondefense programs in fy2016 compared to the previous fiscal year .

however , there is a slight increase in ndd appropriations allowed by the fy2017 revised cap level .

as shown in table 19 , the revised cap for fy2017 is $40 million above the revised cap for fy2016 .

appendix b .

expired authorizations of appropriation .

