proposals to limit senate debate are as old as the senate itself .

over the 224-year history of the body , numerous procedures have been proposed to allow the senate to end discussion and act .

the most important debate - limiting procedure enacted was the adoption in 1917 of the "cloture rule," codified in paragraph 2 of senate rule xxii .

under the current version of this rule , a process for ending debate on a pending measure or matter may be set in motion by a supermajority vote of the senate .

since the senate's adoption of the cloture rule in 1917 , proposals have been advanced to repeal or amend it in almost every session of congress .

at times , senators of both political parties have debated the merits of the senate's tradition of free and unlimited debate .

these debates have occurred at different times and under different sets of circumstances as senators attempted , for example , to prevent filibusters of civil rights measures , pass consumer protection legislation , or secure the confirmation of judicial or executive branch nominations .

debates on the cloture rule have frequently focused on whether the senate must consider amendments to it under the body's existing rules , including rule xxii itself .

this argument rests on the principle that the senate is a "continuing body," and relatedly , that its rules stay in force from one congress to the next .

a contrary argument contends that this principle has the effect of "entrenching" the existing rules against change , a situation which amounts to an unconstitutional limit on the power of the body to set the terms of its own operation .

to overcome these difficulties , senators attempting to change rule xxii have employed various procedural tactics , including seeking to invoke cloture by majority vote , seeking opinions by the vice president acting as presiding officer that the cloture rule itself is unconstitutional , and arguing that the senate's standing rules do not apply on the first day of a congress .

although many attempts have been made to amend paragraph 2 of rule xxii , only six amendments have been adopted since the cloture rule was enacted in 1917: those undertaken in 1949 , 1959 , 1975 , 1976 , 1979 , and 1986 .

each of these changes was made within the framework of the existing or "entrenched" rules of the senate , including rule xxii .

in 1949 , the cloture rule was amended to apply to all "matters," as well as measures , a change that expanded its reach to nominations , most motions to proceed to consider measures , and other motions .

a decade later , in 1959 , its reach was further expanded to include debate on motions to proceed to consider changes in the senate rules themselves .

the threshold for invoking cloture was lowered in 1975 from two - thirds present and voting to three - fifths of the full senate except on proposals to amend senate rules .

in a change made in 1976 , amendments filed by senators after cloture was invoked were no longer required to be read aloud in the chamber if they were available at least 24 hours in advance .

in 1979 , senators added an overall "consideration cap" to rule xxii to prevent so - called post - cloture filibusters , which occurred when senators continued dilatory parliamentary tactics even after cloture had been invoked .

in 1986 , this "consideration cap" was reduced from 100 hours to 30 hours .

in its current form , which was adopted in 1986 , rule xxii provides that a cloture motion must be signed by 16 senators and presented on the senate floor .

one hour after the senate meets on the second calendar day of session after a cloture motion has been filed ( and after a quorum has been ascertained ) , the presiding officer puts the question , "is it the sense of the senate that the debate shall be brought to a close ? .

the cloture motion is then subject to a mandatory yea - and - nay vote .

if three - fifths of senators — 60 if there is no more than one vacancy in the body — vote for the cloture motion , the senate must take final action on the matter on which it has invoked cloture by the end of 30 total hours of additional consideration .

invoking cloture on a proposal to amend the senate's standing rules requires a higher threshold: approval by two - thirds of the senators present and voting or 67 senators if there are no vacancies and all senators vote .

once cloture has been invoked , the clotured matter remains the pending business of the senate until it is disposed of , and no senator may speak for more than one hour .

senators may yield all or part of their allotted hour to a floor manager or floor leader , who may then yield time to other senators .

each floor manager and leader , however , can have no more than two hours in total yielded to him or her .

as with most senate procedures , any of these requirements may be waived or their operations altered by unanimous consent .

the mandatory quorum call , for example , is almost always waived by unanimous consent .

after cloture has been invoked , no dilatory amendments or motions are permitted , and all debate and amendments must be germane .

only amendments filed before the cloture vote ( or still pending , if germane ) may be considered , and a senator may not call up more than two amendments until every other senator has had an opportunity to do likewise .

printed amendments that have been available for at least 24 hours are not read when called up .

time for votes , quorum calls , and other actions is charged against the 30-hour limit on consideration .

this time limit may be extended by joint leadership motion if three - fifths of all senators vote for a non - debatable motion to do so .

senators who have not used or yielded 10 minutes of their hour are guaranteed up to 10 minutes to speak .

when all time expires , the senate immediately votes on any pending amendments and then on the underlying matter .

as noted above , the senate has considered — and in some cases , adopted — changes to the cloture rule and associated procedures at various times in the past .

in recent congresses — and perhaps especially in the 112 th ( 2011-2012 ) and 111 th ( 2009-2010 ) congresses — some senators have expressed renewed concern over the effect of extended debate on the senate's capacity to act efficiently .

rather than list all ( sometimes overlapping ) proposals introduced in recent congresses , the discussion below groups proposals into categories based on the procedural mechanism by which the change would be effected or the overall goal of the change .

the first category addressed below includes proposals that provide a non - rule - based mechanism by which the senate could change its rules or precedents , or both , without needing to surmount the supermajority hurdle present in existing rules ; specifically , these proposals hinge on a novel ruling by the senate's presiding officer in relation to senate rules on debate or the constitutionality thereof .

the second category discussed focuses on changes to the rules that would alter the vote threshold by which cloture is invoked .

a third group of proposals focuses on the time the senate must expend in using the cloture process to end debate on a question .

fourth , the report discusses proposals to limit debate on only certain questions ( eg , on the motion to proceed , motions related to establishing a conference committee ) .

the fifth and final category addressed includes proposals that would increase the procedural burden on those opposing an end to debate on a particular matter .

this section of the report then concludes by addressing other proposals that have been discussed in the context of changing the cloture process .

each proposal to change the operation of cloture discussed above does not necessarily require a change in senate standing rules .

for example , some rely only on changes in senate practices , and some propose a series of steps on the senate floor that could establish new precedents .

many proposals do , however , require a rules change .

a change to senate standing rules could be accomplished via adoption of a simple resolution making specified rules changes , though standing rules changes can also be accomplished through provisions of a statutory measure ( eg , pursuant to an amendment to legislation adopted on the floor ) .

once a simple resolution is on the calendar of business ( typically after having been reported by committee ) , it could be brought before the senate by unanimous consent or by a debatable motion to proceed .

once a rules change is under consideration on the senate floor , it could be subject to extended debate ; a cloture process may be necessary to end debate and allow for a final vote on adoption .

as noted earlier , pursuant to changes made in 1975 to rule xxii , cloture on a proposal to change the standing rules requires a two - thirds threshold of those present and voting .

this provision makes it difficult to make changes in the standing rules of the senate and contributes to the so - called entrenchment of senate rules , as discussed earlier .

it is again worth noting that senate procedure is governed not only by the standing rules and the precedents interpreting them , but also by the constitution , standing orders , the rule - making provisions of certain statutes that provide for procedures outside of the provisions of the standing rules ( eg , the congressional budget act ) , and practice .

changes to senate procedures accomplished through these other mechanisms — for example , through adoption of a new standing order or enactment of statutory provisions that do not amend the standing rules — do not fall under the rule xxii requirement that cloture on a rules change obtain a two - thirds affirmative vote .

these options , however , would still be subject to the lower ( but still supermajority ) threshold of three - fifths to end debate .

changes accomplished via a new statutory provision , of course , would also require house — and potentially presidential — approval for enactment .

