on may 23 , 2005 , during the first year of president george w. bush's second term , omb issued a memorandum to the heads of departments and agencies .

 ( see appendix a for a facsimile of the memorandum. ) .

joshua b. bolten , director of omb at that time , wrote that "effective immediately," omb would involve itself systematically in some aspects of how agencies execute laws related to mandatory spending .

for the most part , mandatory spending programs are provided for in substantive laws under the jurisdiction of house and senate authorizing committees .

congress typically vests authority to implement these laws in agencies .

mandatory spending accounts for more than half of the federal government's annual outlays .

 ( see appendix b for tabular displays of fy2009 mandatory outlays broken out by authorizing committee and programmatic area. ) .

discretionary spending , by contrast , is provided in annual appropriations acts under the jurisdiction of the house and senate appropriations committees .

in issuing the omb memorandum , the bush administration's stated goal was to restrain federal spending growth for mandatory spending programs .

if an agency wished to use discretion under current law in a way that would "increase mandatory spending," the memorandum required the agency to propose the action to omb .

for purposes of omb's process , an increase was defined as spending more than the amount that the administration assumed in its most recent projection of what is required under current law to fund the mandatory spending program .

to offset such a difference in spending , the memorandum also required the agency to propose actions that would "comparably reduce" mandatory spending .

the memorandum did not address , however , whether agencies' administrative actions and corresponding spending changes would be consistent with congressional intent or expectations , or whether agencies' proposals and omb's decisions would be transparent to congress and the public .

the administration elsewhere characterized the process as "augmenting its ... controls" on agency decisions , and , in addition , referred to the process as "administrative paygo. .

in using the term "paygo," the administration juxtaposed this omb involvement in agency decision making with a different , statutory mechanism that congress has used when carrying out its power of the purse and legislative function ( see box 1 ) .

in 2009 , the barack obama administration said it would continue the omb memorandum's process .

after several years of implementation , however , very little is publicly known about the scope and effect of omb's process or the rationales for omb determinations .

in one case , some details about omb's process were disclosed publicly in june 2010 , which prompted congressional concerns about agency policy implementation and the role of omb .

using available information , this crs report focuses first on the omb may 2005 memorandum and the process it outlines .

the report then discusses one case where the process appears to have been implemented .

it then discusses other potential implications , if the omb process were widely utilized in practice .

next , the report discusses potential options for congress .

finally , appendix c of the report discusses how congress in other contexts has responded legislatively to the prospect of ( 1 ) agencies operating under broad grants of discretion to implement laws , and ( 2 ) the president's involvement in agency decision making through omb .

this report's analysis draws on these precedents , which may inform congressional consideration of options related to the omb memorandum and its use on behalf of the president .

as of the time of this report's writing , little more is publicly known about how widely the omb memorandum has been used , whether it has been used consistently across agencies and policy areas , and what its effects have been .

in addition , the bush and obama administrations generally have not addressed whether agencies' and omb's actions would be consonant with congressional intent or expectations .

even with a lack of transparency , it is nevertheless possible to analyze some of the memorandum's potential effects and implications , if the memorandum's process were used .

such analyses , may , in turn , highlight potential issues for congress .

in one case , an agency official broached the subject in a congressional hearing , as discussed below .

omb's effort to exercise more systematic control over agency mandatory spending is fairly recent , but many related issues have arisen in the past .

the framers of the constitution intended for congress , the president , and the courts to share power over the national government , subject to checks and balances from each other .

consequently , as congress and the president pursue their policy preferences , they may cooperate or compete for control of agencies and the policies they implement .

in addition , with the advent of the "administrative state" — that is , expansion in the size and scope of federal government at the turn of the 20 th century — congress granted increasing discretion in many policy areas to administrative agencies .

in response , congress has shown ongoing interest in monitoring , regulating , and publicizing how agencies use discretion .

the institutional presidency also expanded in the 20 th century in several respects , especially with the establishment of omb and its growing role in helping the president to pursue his or her policy preferences .

consequently , congress also has shown considerable interest in the possibility of presidential influence on , and interventions in , agency decision making through omb .

in appendix c , this report reviews selected instances when these issues arose and ways in which congress responded .

these include the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , which congress passed in 1946 in order to bring transparency and public participation to agencies' use of discretion through rulemaking .

the apa facilitated congressional oversight by defining certain kinds of discretionary actions as "rules," requiring agencies to formally articulate proposed rulemakings in advance of implementation , and allowing interested stakeholders to act as extensions of congress for purposes of "fire - alarm" oversight .

this transparency also facilitated congress's ability to influence rulemaking through the use of appropriations restrictions .

it should be noted , however , that rules may encompass only a small portion of the discretion that agencies exercise .

a prominent administrative law scholar argued that most agency decision making is informal activity — that is , use of discretion not covered by the apa and largely unregulated .

furthermore , omb sometimes has been involved in agency decision making , as discussed in appendix c .

in some instances , congress gave omb a role in agency decision making through statutory requirements , when doing so served congress's legislative purposes .

at other times , various presidents initiated omb's involvement in order to pursue their policy preferences .

in both cases , congress responded to the prospect or reality of omb's involvement with statutory directions , constraints , and transparency requirements .

in other cases , omb itself has provided for some level of transparency .

if congress wishes to consider options related to the omb may 2005 memorandum , the following four examples of omb involvement in agency decision making , along with related congressional responses , may suggest approaches .

agency submissions of budget information and requests .

the budget and accounting act of 1921 required agencies to submit budget requests to the president for potential modification , before the requests are submitted to congress .

omb administers this process on the president's behalf .

in multiple cases , congress has legislated statutory exceptions to this law and thereby allowed direct submissions of budget information to congress , in order to provide agencies with some independence from the policy preferences of the president or to improve congressional access to agency information .

omb clearance of agency testimony and draft legislation .

executive order ( e.o. ) .

8248 established a process for omb to "clear" and "coordinate" numerous types of agency communications with congress , including testimony and correspondence , before agencies submit them to congress .

in this area , as well , congress has acted to provide some agencies with statutory authority to directly submit such materials to congress , in order to provide them with some independence from the policy preferences of the president or to improve congressional access to agency information .

omb and the paperwork reduction act .

congress passed the paperwork reduction act to provide central leadership and oversight of government - wide efforts to reduce paperwork burden on non - federal persons .

the law established the office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) within omb .

oira is authorized by law to approve or disapprove agency information collection requests , but this approval process is subject to certain requirements for transparency and public participation .

omb review of agency rules and guidance documents .

the rulemaking process that the apa established also facilitated the eventual start of "presidential review" of agency rulemaking , which has been undertaken in one form or another since 1971 .

the current process was established through e.o .

12866 .

the e.o .

requires departments and agencies ( but not independent regulatory agencies ) to submit all "significant" proposed and final regulatory actions to oira for review before they are published in the federal register and take effect .

oira may return some draft proposed and final rules to agencies for "reconsideration," as discussed in box 2 .

the e.o .

requires some transparency for "formal" oira reviews of draft proposed and final rules , but not for "informal" reviews .

congress has used statutory provisions added to omb's appropriation to limit the scope of certain omb reviews .

discussion in appendix c of the apa and four examples of omb involvement in agency decision making ( and associated congressional responses ) may inform congressional consideration of potential options that relate to the process outlined in omb's may 2005 memorandum .

the process outlined by omb's may 2005 memorandum may raise issues for congress relating to congressional intent for mandatory spending , agency use of discretion , and the possibility of omb involvement in agency decision making on behalf of the president .

in approaching the subject of omb controls on agency mandatory spending , congress might consider at least five general options .

first , if congress sees no current need to engage in lawmaking or oversight of the process , it might continue with the status quo .

second , if congress wished to learn more about the process , as practiced currently or in the past , congress could conduct related oversight through hearings and inquiry .

in posing certain questions , scrutiny associated with this kind of oversight may indirectly affect how omb implements its process .

in addition , congress might wish to have more information before considering legislative options , if it were concerned about potential unintended consequences from legislating .

if congress wished to address the topic prospectively through lawmaking , congress might consider three additional options: increasing transparency of omb's process , legislating in greater detail , or modifying how omb's process operates .

the latter three options also might be considered in combination .

each of the five general options is discussed below along with potential implications .

congress might consider proceeding with the status quo .

under this option , the process outlined in the omb may 2005 memorandum presumably would continue in some form with very limited transparency outside the executive branch .

to the extent agency administrative actions already were subject to requirements for transparency and public participation ( eg , "rules" under the apa ) , these practices would continue .

if the omb process were utilized , the administration would twice per year establish a baseline spending projection to which agency mandatory spending levels would be held , unless the administration made exceptions or agencies could persuade omb that cost - increasing administrative actions were required by law .

advocates of this option might argue that the president and omb would use this process to prevent increases in mandatory spending that are not required by law , and that directing agencies in this way should be considered pre - decisional and therefore viewable only within parts of the executive branch until agencies act or otherwise are required to disclose actions .

the bush administration justified use of the process by saying "[a] significant amount of federal policy is made via administrative action , which can increase federal spending , often on the order of tens of billions of dollars in entitlement programs such as medicare or medicaid," and that agencies "frequently initiate unplanned for and costly proposals. .

critics of the status quo option might argue that the process outlined in omb's may 2005 memorandum could be used by the president in an effort to displace statutory authority vested in agencies , and that agencies have a higher likelihood of following congressional expectations and intent than omb , which acts on behalf of the president's policy preferences .

critics also might enlist arguments like those below , in support of alternative options to conduct investigatory oversight , increase transparency , legislate in detail , or modify omb's process .

a separate group of critics might view the status quo as providing inadequate leverage for the president , because omb does not have explicit statutory authority to disapprove agency administrative actions .

as a second general option , congress might conduct oversight through the use of hearings or other forms of investigative inquiry of how agencies and omb have operated in the past , or currently operate , under omb's process .

in addition , if congress wished to consider options that involve lawmaking , the use of oversight tools to gain more information about omb's process might help prevent unintended consequences from legislating .

if congress wished to learn more about the process , how it has been used , and what its effects have been , a number of topics might be investigated or studied .

for example , little is publicly known about the scope and effect of omb's controls on mandatory spending programs .

potential avenues of inquiry related to this topic might include the following: establishing which agencies and programs have been subject to omb's process ; determining what its effects on program outputs , outcomes , and spending have been ; discovering what the process's impact has been on the activities , capacity , and workload of agency budget , legal , policy analysis , and program offices ; and ascertaining how the process has worked in practice ( eg , the extent to which omb has judged agency - submitted offsets to be "inappropriate," returned submissions for reconsideration , or granted exceptions to the process's offset requirement "in light of extraordinary need or other compelling circumstances" ) .

in addition , it is not clear whether agencies' administrative actions and corresponding mandatory spending changes have been consistent with congressional intent or expectations .

related questions might include whether agencies have consulted with congressional authorizing committees before submitting administrative actions to omb or taking action .

another potential line of inquiry might involve how the administration's baseline has been used .

because the omb memorandum's definition of an "increase in mandatory spending" is relative to a baseline that is easily revised by omb , it is conceivable that a president or omb could use the baseline proactively as a policy lever in an attempt to direct agency uses of discretion in mandatory spending programs .

for example , it is conceivable that an administration might assume that a longstanding agency practice , which nevertheless is not required by law , does not continue .

if discontinuance of the practice would save funds , an agency's plan to continue with the practice technically might be interpreted by omb as an "increase in mandatory spending," which under the omb memorandum would require the agency to propose offsets .

hence it is conceivable that omb could proactively cause certain agency practices to become "proposals" for purposes of the omb memorandum .

congress also might consider legislating on this subject to increase transparency prospectively .

especially in this area , prior congressional approaches to agency use of discretion and omb involvement in agency decision making may inform congressional options ( see appendix c ) .

as a threshold matter , additional transparency could be pursued on an agency - specific or government - wide basis .

in either case , congress might seek increased transparency at one or more stages of agency and omb activity , including ( 1 ) at the time of initial agency submission of a "proposal" to omb ; ( 2 ) after an omb determination , but in advance of agency implementation ; ( 3 ) at the beginning of agency implementation ; and ( 4 ) after implementation has begun .

at stage ( 1 ) , for example , congress might consider as a model the exceptions it has legislated for submission of budget information or agency testimony directly to congress before modification by omb .

alternatively , congress might consider establishing an apa - like or pra - like process for agency submissions to omb , the president , or an entity in the executive office of the president , albeit without allowing omb to conduct "informal" reviews of the submissions before they are published for public comment .

analogous to the apa or pra , such a process might provide for advance publication , public participation , and congressional insight into the trade - offs that omb and agencies consider .

because this option would provide some advance notice to congress , congress might have an opportunity to conduct oversight or legislate on the topic .

at stage ( 2 ) , congress might consider establishing an apa - like or pra - like process for agency administrative actions reviewed and approved by omb but not yet implemented .

such a process might provide for advance publication and public participation , while still allowing omb to conduct a prior review .

at stages ( 3 ) or ( 4 ) , congress might consider reporting requirements for agency administrative actions pursued after omb review , including cost - increasing and cost - reducing actions .

this option would not provide advance notice to congress .

advocates of increased transparency might argue that omb's current process makes it difficult or impossible to know whether omb and agencies were acting consistently with congressional expectations or intent .

in addition , advocates might argue that administrative actions with substantial implications for spending are legislative in nature , even if they do not fall under the apa's definition of "rule," and therefore should be subject to transparency and public participation .

critics of increased transparency might argue that the transparency would weaken the president's influence over agencies , or that the president should have substantial leverage over agency mandatory spending activities .

in addition , critics might argue that transparency would impede open communications within the executive branch on how to best implement current law .

if congress were dissatisfied with the omb process , congress might consider legislating in greater detail to reduce the discretion that agencies might exercise when implementing mandatory programs .

by reducing agency discretion , congress might lessen the ability of omb to involve itself in agency decision making and thereby potentially prevent deviations from congressional intent .

legislating in greater detail would be done at the agency or program - specific level by individual authorizing committees , if the committee process were used to move legislation .

legislating in greater detail may put more responsibility on congress to anticipate a range of implementation issues that otherwise could be left to agencies .

if agencies are prevented from exercising authority to adjust the implementation of mandatory programs or pursue emerging policy priorities , the outcome of a program may rest more squarely with congress .

in addition , if detailed program parameters or requirements that are set in statute are not optimized initially and need to be adjusted ( eg , to fix a faulty assumption ) , legislative action may take relatively longer than administrative action .

this could put program costs or participation in jeopardy compared to congressional intent .

depending on the direction of the change , revising legislative details could have adverse statutory paygo implications for authorizing committees that otherwise might not occur had implementation been left to an agency .

thus , there could be some substitution of budget challenges between omb's process and legislating in detail .

in some circumstances , congress may be reluctant to "reopen" authorizing language before it expires because of unrelated program requests that could complicate the legislative process .

congress might consider statutorily modifying the process outlined in omb's may 2005 memorandum , either on an agency - specific or government - wide basis .

for example , congress might enact into law omb's process while giving omb explicit authority to approve agency actions , perhaps modeled on the pra ( see appendix c ) .

alternatively , congress might prohibit omb from implementing the memorandum , perhaps modeled on how congress has restricted omb reviews of agricultural marketing regulations ( see appendix c 's discussion under " omb review of agency rules and guidance documents " ) .

congress also could consider requiring reviews to be conducted by congressional authorizing committees or the senate and house budget committees instead of omb , perhaps by using cbo's baseline spending projection instead of the administration's baseline , provided that the authorizing committees did not engage in executive functions .

because many variations on this option could be considered , advocates and critics of these variations might bring to bear a variety of arguments in support or opposition .

in many cases , procedural arrangements may have significant implications for power relationships among congress , the president , and agencies .

for example , it could be argued that giving statutory authority to omb to approve or disapprove agency use of discretion for mandatory spending would give the president considerable legal leverage over the activities of agencies and enhanced bargaining power with congress .

conversely , it could be argued that prohibiting omb from conducting such reviews would strengthen congress's influence over agencies' mandatory spending programs by limiting presidential influence .

in any case , due to the lack of transparency of omb's process outside the executive branch , congress might wish to gain more information about past and current omb and agency practices to inform future decision making and avoid unintended consequences .

appendix a. facsimile of omb memorandum m - 05-13 appendix b. tabular displays of fy2009 mandatory outlays the tables below provide several perspectives on how mandatory spending may be categorized , including by house authorizing committee ( table b - 1 ) , senate authorizing committee ( table b - 2 ) , and programmatic area ( figure b - 1 and figure b - 2 ) .

appendix c. prior congressional approaches to agency discretion and omb involvement grants of administrative discretion and the administrative procedure act congress historically has expressed strong interest that agencies execute laws in a manner that is consistent with congressional intent and expectations .

as a result , congress often legislates in detail when it directs agencies , or sometimes the president , to undertake certain tasks .

at other times , however , when laws are formulated in ways that allow a measure of discretion in their implementation , congress may use a variety of constitutional , statutory , and political tools to direct and constrain agencies ( or the president ) and hold them to account .

when granting discretion to agencies , congress's approach arguably reached a turning point with enactment in 1946 of the administrative procedure act ( apa ) .

by that time , a variety of factors — including industrialization , urbanization , the progressive movement , efforts to combat the great depression , and two world wars — had led to an expansion in the scope of the federal government's activities .

to deal with the complexity , "congress had become a delegator , vesting much of its legislative authority in administrative agencies , and a great deal of the initiative for policy making and budgeting had passed to the executive branch. .

in response , congress passed measures to enhance its lawmaking and oversight capacities .

these laws included the apa , which among other things was enacted to subject agency use of discretion through rulemaking to transparency and public participation .

as codified in title 5 of the united states code , the apa defines the term "rule," in part , as "the whole or part of an agency statement of general or particular applicability and future effect designed to implement , interpret , or prescribe law or policy. .

the law also establishes procedural requirements for how agencies may make , amend , and repeal rules , which together generally are called "rulemaking. .

the law requires , among other things , that an agency publish a notice of proposed rulemaking in the federal register , afford interested persons an opportunity to participate in the proceeding through the submission of written comments , and when consideration of the matter is completed , incorporate in any adopted rules "a concise general statement of their basis and purpose. .

according to one scholar , because agencies were exercising delegated legislative authority , congress's intention was that agencies' "processes should embrace the legislative values of representation , participation , and open information. .

congressional authorizations of , and responses to , omb involvement in agency decision making congress was not alone in noticing how agencies may exercise discretion .

presidents oftentimes pursue their policy preferences by attempting to influence or control agency decision making through organizational and procedural means .

consequently , various presidents have initiated omb's involvement in some agency decision making processes .

in other instances , however , omb's role began at the requirement of congress through statute , when congress wished for agencies to be subject to additional oversight or direction .

as noted earlier , in many cases , congress responded to the prospect or reality of omb's involvement with legislation .

agency submissions of budget information and requests the budget and accounting act of 1921 established in law the duty of the president to submit each year a single , consolidated budget proposal for congressional consideration .

it meant that the president was responsible for making budget requests , so that each executive department and agency would no longer act independently of presidential direction .

support for the law grew out of progressive era views that placed little trust in legislative institutions and sought to shift more authority to executive institutions , and also emerged out of budgetary stresses from world war i .

as amended and recodified , one of the act's key provisions restricts agency officers and employees from submitting "to congress or a committee of congress an appropriations estimate or request , a request for an increase in that estimate or request , or a recommendation on meeting the financial needs of the government" unless "requested by either house of congress" ( 31 u.s.c .

§ 1108 ( e ) ) .

currently , omb issues annual directions to agencies on how to put together budget requests for potential modification by the president , before the requests are submitted to congress .

omb then manages the process of assembling the president's budget proposal .

over time , however , congress has established multiple statutory exceptions to the law .

these provisions allow or require certain agencies to provide budgetary information or annual budget requests directly to congress without first submitting them to omb or the president , or to provide them concurrently to congress and the president , before potential modification by the president .

omb appears to acknowledge and abide by statutory authorities for agencies to directly submit budget and other information to congress .

omb clearance of agency testimony and draft legislation reorganization plan no .

1 of 1939 transferred the predecessor of omb to its location in the newly created executive office of the president .

executive order ( e.o. ) .

8248 followed soon thereafter to "effectuate the purposes" of the reorganization and provide "adequate machinery for the administrative management of the executive branch of the government" to the president .

as amended , the e.o .

's section ii.2 .

 ( e ) assigns to omb the duty to "assist the president by clearing and coordinating departmental advice on proposed legislation. .

the e.o .

effectively directs omb to review and modify many documents that agencies produce for congressional recipients ( eg , testimony and correspondence ) , in order to ensure compliance with the president's policy agenda and coordination across agencies .

congress sometimes has responded by providing agencies with statutory authority to submit such materials directly to congress , bypassing omb .

omb has said it recognizes such exceptions .

omb and the paperwork reduction act the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) of 1980 established oira within omb to provide central leadership and oversight of government - wide efforts to reduce unnecessary paperwork burden and improve management of information resources .

the law was amended in 1995 ( pra of 1995 ) .

if a covered agency ( departments , independent agencies , and independent regulatory agencies ) wants to collect information from 10 or more non - federal persons , or to require 10 or more persons to provide information to a third party or to the public , that information collection or disclosure requirement probably is covered by the pra .

the law provides for transparency and public participation in several ways .

after an agency submits its proposed information collection request to oira , the pra requires oira to provide at least 30 days for public comment prior to deciding whether to approve the request .

this comment period is in addition to the 60 days of public comment that are required prior to submission of the proposed collection to oira .

oira maintains a daily - updated database showing each approved collection by agency , collection requests that are under review , collections that have been reviewed in the previous 30 days , and collections that have recently expired .

the pra also requires oira to keep congress and congressional committees "fully and currently informed of the major activities" under the act .

specifically , the act requires oira to submit an annual report to the president of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives describing , among other things , the extent to which agencies have reduced information collection burdens on the public .

to satisfy the requirement , oira develops an annual information collection budget ( icb ) by gathering data from agencies .

omb review of agency rules and guidance documents the current process of presidential review of rulemaking was established by president william clinton in october 1993 through e.o .

12866 , which revoked previous orders .

the e.o .

requires departments and agencies ( but not independent regulatory agencies ) to submit all "significant" proposed and final regulatory actions to oira for review before they are published in the federal register .

the order defines a "significant" regulatory action as one that may , among other things , have a $100 million impact on the economy , create a serious inconsistency with actions by another agency , or raise "novel legal or policy issues arising out of ... the president's priorities. .

oira conducts formal reviews under the e.o .

that are subject to some transparency , but it also conducts informal reviews that are substantially not transparent .

with regard to formal reviews , e.o .

12866 generally requires that oira complete them within 90 calendar days , and requires both the agencies and oira to disclose certain information about how the reviews were conducted .

specifically , the order says that agencies should identify for the public ( 1 ) the substantive changes made to rules between the draft submitted to oira for review and the action subsequently announced , and ( 2 ) changes made at the suggestion or recommendation of oira .

oira also is required to provide agencies with a copy of all written communications with parties outside of the executive branch , and to maintain a public log of all regulatory actions under review .

for some rules , there is an additional phase of "informal review" before a rule is officially submitted to oira .

oira has indicated that it can have its greatest impact on agencies' rules during these informal reviews .

former oira administrator john graham indicated that agencies' "receptivity" to informal reviews may be enhanced by the possibility of a returned rule .

in january 2007 , president bush issued e.o .

13422 , which changed the regulatory review process in several ways .

among other things , the order required that every agency head designate a presidential appointee within the agency as a "regulatory policy officer" who could control upcoming rulemaking in the agency , and expanded oira review to include significant guidance documents .

omb characterized the executive order as a "good government" measure , but the changes were highly controversial and were viewed by some as a "power grab" by the bush administration .

many observers have viewed e.o .

13422 as part of a broader statement of presidential authority presented throughout the bush administration — from declining to provide access to certain information to presidential signing statements that indicated certain statutory provisions would be interpreted consistent with the president's view of the "unitary executive. .

on january 30 , 2009 , president obama issued e.o .

13497 , which revoked e.o.13422 and returned e.o .

12866 to its original form .

notably , however , on march 4 , 2009 , omb director orszag issued a memorandum to federal agencies stating that agency actions and documents , including , "significant policy and guidance documents," would "remain subject to oira's review under executive order 12866. .

in contrast to omb's formal review of rules , there is no requirement to disclose changes made to guidance as a result of oira reviews .

congress has used provisions added to omb's appropriation to limit the scope of certain reviews .

for example , since 1983 , language has been included in omb's appropriation stating that none of the funds provided to omb could be used for the purpose of reviewing any agricultural marketing orders issued by the department of agriculture "or any activities or regulations under the provisions of the agricultural marketing agreement act of 1937 ( 7 u.s.c .

601 et seq. ) . .

members of congress have inserted this restriction in each appropriation bill , asserting that the department of agriculture , not omb , has statutory authority in this area .

