child nutrition programs ( like school meal programs , after - school meal / snack programs , and those serving children in child care settings ) and the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( the wic program ) were scheduled for a comprehensive review ( "reauthorization" ) in 2009 .

however , because of concerns over the cost of any renewal of expiring child nutrition and wic program authorities and of new proposals that went beyond current law ( and how to pay for these new initiatives ) , congress delayed action on a comprehensive bill and enacted a one - year extension ( through september 30 , 2010 ) of expiring authorities as part of the fy2010 appropriations law for the agriculture department .

the administration proposed spending $10 billion over the next 10 years in an effort to "end childhood hunger by 2015," but did not advance specific program changes or ways to offset any new costs .

after more than a year of debate , congress responded with the healthy , hunger - free kids act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-296 ; enacted december 13 , 2010 ) .

while p.l .

111-296 includes the most extensive changes in child nutrition / wic programs since the 1970s , it requires much less new spending than the administration called for and includes a relatively controversial provision reducing supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly the food stamp program ) benefits as one of its offsetting savings .

p.l .

111-296 effectively adopts the reauthorization bill passed by the senate ( s. 3307 ) , not the more expansive ( and expensive ) version put forward in the house .

a section - by - section summary of the law can be found in " summary of 's provisions," below .

prior to p.l .

111-296 , child nutrition and wic programs were last amended in a substantial way by the child nutrition and wic reauthorization act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-265 ) ; these revisions are covered in crs report rl33299 , child nutrition and wic legislation in the 108 th and 109 th congresses , by [author name scrubbed] .

how child nutrition and wic programs work is addressed in two crs reports: crs report r43783 , school meals programs and other usda child nutrition programs: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r44115 , a primer on wic: the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children , by [author name scrubbed] .

the new child nutrition - wic reauthorization law — the healthy , hunger - free kids act of 2010 — represents the most far - reaching ( and costly ) changes to child nutrition and wic programs since the early 1970s and is expected to add significant new funding ( above inflation - indexed payments for meals and snacks ) .

the most recent legislation increases funding for school lunches and links this new money to schools meeting updated nutrition standards ; provides for gradually increasing prices for school lunches served to paying ( non - poor ) students ; increases access to free school meals by ( 1 ) expanding automatic ( direct ) certification of those receiving public assistance benefits , and ( 2 ) giving schools new options to offer free meals to all students ; requires updated school meal nutrition standards and professional standards for school meal providers ; broadens coverage of and support for local school "wellness policies" ; establishes nutrition standards for foods sold in competition with school meals ( eg , a la carte foods and those sold from vending machines ) ; encourages "farm - to - school" and other initiatives to combat childhood obesity ; expands support for food service through summer programs and after - school and outside - of - school programs ; adds to food safety requirements for foods served on school campuses and foods provided by the agriculture department ; improves food procurement practices used by schools ; increases wic program support for breastfeeding ; establishes a time frame for introducing electronic benefit transfer systems to the wic program ; improves schools' accountability for proper program operations ; introduces new rules for nutrition standards and heightened physical activity in child care settings ; and supports and finances state and local initiatives to end childhood hunger .

with a few exceptions ( noted below ) , there was little controversy over the substance of the senate and house policy provisions carrying out the themes listed above .

the single , overwhelming issue in the child nutrition / wic reauthorization debate was the costs associated with the proposed revisions ( and how to offset them ) .

the bill reported by the senate agriculture , nutrition , and forestry committee ( with costs of just under $5 billion over 10 years ) included four offsets .

there was no opposition to the two smallest offsets — changes in how to count "bonus" commodities in meeting minimum requirements for commodity aid to schools and additional independent review of eligibility for free and reduced - price school meals .

together , they accounted for about one - fifth of the new spending in the senate's measure .

however , the two larger offsets were controversial .

one would have substantially reduced payments for the agriculture department's environmental quality incentive program ( eqip ) and the other would have , over the long term , effectively cut spending for the nutrition education component of the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly the food stamp program ) .

critics argued that these two efforts deserve the support they get ; supporters saw few other offsets to use under house / senate "pay - go" rules .

largely in response to criticism of the eqip offset from the agricultural community and others , the child nutrition / wic reauthorization bill passed by the senate on august 5 , 2010 , and the final version of the new child nutrition reauthorization law replaces it with a provision that reduces future snap / food stamp benefits by terminating an across - the - board benefit increase legislated in the 2009 american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) for november 2013 .

this offset , in turn , was controversial among advocates for food assistance programs , who saw it as simply transferring snap / food stamp funding meant for low - income households to pay for other nutrition programs primarily affecting the same households — not new spending on food assistance .

the house education and labor committee's version of child nutrition / wic reauthorization ( h.r .

5504 ) had significantly higher costs than the senate's bill ( and very small offsets ) .

as a result , progress on reauthorization legislation was stalled until agreement could be reached on how to finance any initiative and , in the end , the house accepted the senate's approach .

in addition to cost / offset issues , the 111 th congress also debated and the law in part addressed three major policy questions: to what degree should the federal government step in with rules governing the types of "competitive foods" served outside the school meal programs ( eg , a la carte items and foods sold from vending machines ) ? .

while both the senate and house bills ( and p.l .

111-296 ) require the establishment of federal rules for these foods , there are those who argue that the decision is better left to states and schools .

should there be federal rules effectively requiring minimum prices for school lunches served to non - poor children ? .

both the senate and house bills ( and p.l .

111-296 ) envision a gradual increase in these prices .

this is based on agriculture department studies indicating that federal school meal payments may , to an extent , "cross - subsidize" the price of food served to non - poor children and items offered outside the school meal programs ( for example , "paid" meals served to non - poor children often are priced below the full federal subsidy for a free meal ) .

in effect , supporters were concerned that federal dollars intended for services to poor children are being "diverted" to aid in paying for meals for those who could afford to pay more .

on the other hand , opponents contended that the current system brings higher participation among non - poor children ( and bigger revenues for school food service authorities ) that allows authorities to serve better meals ; they are concerned that higher prices would be charged to "non - poor" children whose family income is just above the cutoff for free and reduced price meals ( i.e. , the near poor ) , and they oppose placing federal rules on local schools' meal pricing decisions .

should there be rules governing when the wic program will pay for foods ( like infant formula ) where new ingredients have been added that purport to increase their nutritional value ? .

the bill reported by the senate agriculture , nutrition and forestry committee would have given the agriculture department authority to bar foods where increased costs outweighed any increased nutritional value ; the house bill would have taken a somewhat different approach and called for a review of the benefits of any new or emerging ingredients .

wic program advocates argued that , at a minimum , the house provisions should be adopted .

others contended that giving the department either the senate or house versions of authority over the ingredient content of wic foods would have granted it too much power over innovation in and upgrading of wic foods ( eg , wic purchases make up a very large portion of the infant formula market ) and might produce a "two - tier" system whereby wic parents would not be provided the same types of foods that non - wic parents can purchase with their own money .

in the end , p.l .

111-296 contains no authority for review or disapproval of wic food items .

on december 13 , 2010 , s. 3307 , the healthy , hunger - free kids act of 2010 , was enacted as p.l .

111-296 .

this followed senate approval on august 5 , 2010 , and house passage on december 2 , 2010 .

the bill adopted by congress and enacted was identical to the senate's bill ( s. 3307 , as amended ) ; the house made no changes although its education and labor committee had ordered its own different version reported ( h.r .

5504 , as extensively revised in the committee ) .

as such , congressional budget office ( cbo ) cost / saving estimates for the enacted law track those for the senate - passed bill , as discussed below .

in large part , the bill approved by the 111 th congress's house education and labor committee ( the improving nutrition for america's children act ; h.r .

5504 ) was similar or identical to the senate's provisions ( that were ultimately included in law , p.l .

111-296 ) .

however , in addition to differences over costs and offsetting savings ( noted earlier ) , the bill approved by the house education and labor committee ( the improving nutrition for america's children act ; h.r .

5504 ) included a number of provisions that went beyond or substantially differed from those in the senate's bill .

this version of the house bill was never voted on by the house ; the bill was ordered reported but was never reported .

these policies , ways in which the house committee's and senate's bills differ , are therefore not included in p.l .

111-296 but are outlined below .

the differences that account for the largest part of the higher dollar cost of the house bill are its additional outside - of - school and summer initiatives , its more expansive provisions for direct eligibility certification of children in medicaid households , and funding for a nutrition wellness and promotion program ( see , especially , sections 103 , 105 , 113 , and 207 below ) .

differing from p.l .

111-296 ( although with similar intent ) , section 409 of the house bill would have required that participating schools gradually increase their revenues from non - federal sources ( including prices charged to paying students ) so as to ensure that the average per - lunch revenue from federal and non - federal sources matches at least the federal subsidy for a free lunch .

while similar to p.l .

111-296 , section 103 would have covered many more states ( and children ) under provisions allowing the direct certification of children in medicaid households as eligible for free school meals .

section 107 would have permitted local educational agencies ( leas ) to automatically certify as eligible for free school meals any child in a military household receiving a defense department "supplemental subsistence allowance for low - income families. .

section 146 would have required the agriculture department ( in consultation with the defense department ) to examine the access children in military households have to free and reduced - price school meals and recommend strategies that could better meet their needs .

section 207 would have established and funded a new nutrition and wellness promotion program to support nutrition education and other promotion and compliance activities .

each state would have received an annual amount equal to a ½ cent for each lunch subsidized under the school lunch program ( totaling approximately $25 million – $30 million ) .

section 244 would have authorized the agriculture department ( in consultation with the education and health and human services departments ) to conduct a study on the extent and types of marketing of foods and beverages in schools ( including , for example , assessment of the nutritional quality of the items marketed ) .

section 247 would have authorized the department to award competitive matching "partnership for wellness" grants for projects that leverage community resources and support student access to physical activity , nutrition education , and nutritious foods during the regular school year .

section 249 would have required the department to ensure that schools and other child nutrition providers have information as to the levels of mercury in the food they serve and called for guidance and technical materials to help ensure that foods and meals are safe with respect to mercury levels .

section 250 would have authorized a pilot program ( the "healthier us challenge initiative" ) to encourage the consumption of milk outside of school meal programs .

section 252 would have established a pilot project under which the department would deliver plant - based alternate protein products to schools for the meal programs — in addition to other commodities provided to schools .

section 363 would have authorized the establishment of a nutrition corps under the corporation for national and community service .

it would have supported programs to increase access to and participation in nutrition programs , improve the quality of these programs , and support local agriculture and farm - to - school initiatives .

section 105 would have established a five - state grant project to provide year - round meals and snacks ( "out - of - school meal service" ) to children participating in outside - of - school educational or other programs .

 ( also see section 113 in the discussion of summer food service provisions below. ) .

section 144 would have required a study of after - school meal service programs , including "best practices" for soliciting sponsors for the programs and any requirements that may be a barrier to sponsor participation .

section 145 would have established and funded a pilot program under which the department would give food commodities to entities like schools , food banks , and emergency feeding organizations to be used to provide food to at - risk school children on weekends and during extended school holidays .

section 242 would have required the agriculture department to develop model product specifications and procurement practices for procurement of food used in child nutrition programs .

section 254 would have required the department to purchase low - fat cheeses for use in school meal programs , in addition to other commodities the department supplies .

section 306 would have mandated that the department develop new guidelines to determine the circumstances under which it is appropriate to place a "hold" on suspect foods supplied by the department and establish rules for improving department hold and recall procedures .

section 307 would have required the department to make available to states and schools information on vendors supplying commodity foods to the department .

section 312 would have allowed the department to retain title to commodities provided by the department and delivered to a processor on behalf of a state recipient agency until the finished , processed commodity is delivered to the state agency .

it also would have required the department to issue regulations to ensure accountability for commodities provided to processors , especially in the event of a food safety issue .

section 441 would have allowed dried fruit and frozen fruit to be included in offerings under the fresh fruit and vegetable program in schools .

section 122 would have provided for federal subsidies for additional meal / snacks served to children in child care for more than eight hours a day — in no more than five states .

section 335 would have increased administrative cost payments to sponsors of participating day care homes beyond the levels included in p.l .

111-296 .

section 113 would have authorized and funded a grant program to provide up to 10 states with federal subsidies for meals and snacks served by non - public entities wishing to implement "year - round" food service programs that effectively operate like summer food service programs: for example , they operate at sites during the regular school year that serve meals / snacks outside of school hours , on weekends , or during school holidays / vacations ; are located in low - income areas ; and receive federal subsidies based on summer program rather than school meal program rules .

 ( also see section 105 under the discussion of " after - school and outside - of - school initiatives " above. ) .

section 115 would have lowered the threshold for qualifying as a low - income area in the summer program for rural areas — potentially making more rural sponsors of summer programs eligible .

section 441 would have loosened "low - income area eligibility" rules , potentially making more sponsoring organizations eligible to operate summer programs .

section 106 would have provided mandatory funding ( $10 million ) for a grant program for schools to help them expand the school breakfast program .

section 425 would have mandated that the department contract for an independent review of the benefits of any new or emerging ingredients of potential public health significance that are added or may be added to wic foods .

section 143 would have required schools to notify parents about policies with respect to providing school meals to children without sufficient funds to buy their meals or who have outstanding debts owed for meals .

it also would have required that unpaid meal fees not affect children's access to regular school meals and establishes rules for dealing with households in arrears on their meal payments .

section 147 would have provided specific authority for schools to donate unused foods to food banks and other charitable organizations .

section 245 would have authorized grants to schools for the purchase of food service equipment .

in addition , section 248 called for a study of the adequacy of cafeteria equipment commonly used in school meal programs .

section 246 would have authorized the agriculture department ( in consultation with the environmental protection agency ) to establish a "green cafeterias" pilot program of competitive grants to schools making environmentally suitable changes in their meal programs ( eg , recycling activities and changes to their procurement practices ) .

section 313 would have authorized an examination of states' policies and practices with respect to participation of charter schools in school meal programs .

