climate change has received considerable policy attention in the past several years both internationally and within the united states .

a major report released by the intergovernmental panel on climate change in 2013 found widespread evidence of climate warming , and many are concerned that climate change may be severe and rapid with potentially catastrophic consequences for humans and the functioning of ecosystems .

the national academies maintains that the climate change challenge is unlikely to be solved with any single strategy or by the people of any single country .

policy efforts to address climate change use a variety of methods , frequently including mitigation and adaptation .

mitigation activities aim to reduce greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) from the earth's atmosphere .

carbon dioxide is the dominant greenhouse gas emitted naturally through the carbon cycle and through human activities like the burning of fossil fuels .

other commonly discussed ghgs include methane , nitrous oxide , hydroflourocarbons , perflourocarbons , and sulfur hexaflouride .

adaptation activities seek to improve an individual's or institution's ability to cope with or avoid harmful impacts of climate change , and to take advantage of potential beneficial ones .

some observers are concerned that current mitigation and adaptation strategies may not prevent change quickly enough to avoid extreme climate disruptions .

geoengineering has been suggested by some as a timely additional method to mitigation and adaptation that could be included in climate change policy efforts .

geoengineering technologies , applied to climate , aim to achieve large - scale and deliberate modifications of the earth's energy balance in order to reduce temperatures and counteract anthropogenic ( i.e. , human - made ) climate change ; these climate modifications would not be limited by country boundaries .

as an unproven concept , geoengineering raises substantial environmental and ethical concerns for some observers .

others respond that the uncertainties of geoengineering may only be resolved through further scientific and technical examination .

proposed geoengineering technologies vary greatly in terms of their technological characteristics and possible consequences .

they are generally classified in two main groups: solar radiation management ( srm ) method: technologies that would increase the reflectivity , or albedo , of the earth's atmosphere or surface , and carbon dioxide removal ( cdr ) method: technologies or practices that would remove co 2 and other ghgs from the atmosphere .

much of the geoengineering technology discussion centers on srm methods ( eg , enhanced albedo , aerosol injection ) .

srm methods could be deployed relatively quickly if necessary , and their impact on the climate would be more immediate than that of cdr methods .

because srm methods do not reduce ghg from the atmosphere , global warming could resume at a rapid pace if a deployed srm method fails or is terminated at any time .

at least one relatively simple srm method is already being deployed with government assistance .

other proposed srm methods are at the conceptualization stage .

cdr methods include afforestation , ocean fertilization , and the use of biomass to capture and store carbon .

prior to 2013 , neither the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) nor the intergovernmental panel on climate change ( ipcc ) had made any official mention of geoengineering science or technology in their negotiation texts or their reports .

however , in the ipcc's scientific - technical assessment for its fifth assessment report ( ar5 ) , released on september 26 , 2013 , the panel addressed for the first time the current status of geoengineering research and its potential impacts as follows: methods that aim to deliberately alter the climate system to counter climate change , termed geoengineering , have been proposed .

limited evidence precludes a comprehensive quantitative assessment of both solar radiation management ( srm ) and carbon dioxide removal ( cdr ) and their impact on the climate system .

cdr methods have biogeochemical and technological limitations to their potential on a global scale .

there is insufficient knowledge to quantify how much co 2 emissions could be partially offset by cdr on a century timescale .

modeling indicates that srm methods , if realizable , have the potential to substantially offset a global temperature rise , but they would also modify the global water cycle , and would not reduce ocean acidification .

[additionally , scaling srm to substantial levels would carry the risk that if] srm were terminated for any reason , there is high confidence that global surface temperatures would rise very rapidly to values consistent with the greenhouse gas forcing .

cdr and srm methods carry side effects and long - term consequences on a global scale .

neither the 112 th nor the 113 th congress , thus far , has taken any legislative action on geoengineering .

in 2009 , the house science and technology committee of the 111 th congress held hearings on geoengineering that examined the "potential environmental risks and benefits of various proposals , associated domestic and international governance issues , evaluation mechanisms and criteria , research and development ( r&d ) needs , and economic rationales supporting the deployment of geoengineering activities. .

some foreign governments , including the united kingdom's , as well as scientists from germany and india , have considered engaging in the research or deployment of geoengineering technologies because of concern over the slow progress of emissions reductions , the uncertainties of climate sensitivity , the possible existence of climate thresholds ( or "tipping points" ) , and the political , social , and economic impact of pursuing aggressive ghg mitigation strategies .

congressional interest in geoengineering has focused primarily on whether geoengineering is a realistic , effective , and appropriate tool for the united states to use to address climate change .

however , if geoengineering technologies are deployed by the united states , another government , or a private entity , several new concerns are likely to arise related to government support for , and oversight of , geoengineering as well as the transboundary and long - term effects of geoengineering .

such was the case in the summer of 2012 , when an american citizen conducted a geoengineering experiment ( ocean fertilization ) off the west coast of canada that some say violated two international conventions .

this report is intended as a primer on the policy issues , science , and governance of geoengineering technologies .

the report will first set the policy parameters under which geoengineering technologies may be considered .

it will then describe selected technologies in detail and discuss their status .

the third section provides a discussion of possible approaches to governmental involvement in , and oversight of , geoengineering , including a summary of domestic and international instruments and institutions that may affect geoengineering projects .

geoengineering technologies aim to modify the earth's energy balance in order to reduce temperatures and counteract anthropogenic climate change through large - scale and deliberate modifications .

implementation of some of the technologies may be controlled locally , while other technologies may require global input on implementation .

additionally , whether a technology can be controlled or not once implemented differs by technology type .

little research has been done on most geoengineering methods , and no major directed research programs are in place .

peer reviewed literature is scant , and deployment of the technology — either through controlled field tests or commercial enterprise — has been minimal .

most interested observers agree that more research would be required to test the feasibility , effectiveness , cost , social and environmental impacts , and the possible unintended consequences of geoengineering before deployment ; others reject exploration of the options as too risky .

the uncertainties have led some policymakers to consider the need and the role for governmental oversight to guide research in the short term and to oversee potential deployment in the long term .

such governance structures , both domestic and international , could either support or constrain geoengineering activities , depending on the decisions of policymakers .

as both technological development and policy considerations for geoengineering are in their early stages , several questions of governance remain in play: what risk factors and policy considerations enter into the debate over geoengineering activities and government oversight ? .

at what point , if ever , should there be government oversight of geoengineering activities ? .

if there is government oversight , what form should it take ? .

if there is government oversight , who should be responsible for it ? .

if there is publicly funded research and development , what should it cover and which disciplines should be engaged in it ? .

a wide range of geoengineering technologies have been proposed to address climate change .

geoengineering technologies attempt to mitigate continued warming of the earth's climate .

the technologies vary in complexity from planting trees for carbon sequestration to launching mirrors into space for sunlight reflection .

most of the technologies are not yet proven and are at the theoretical or research phase .

several of the proposed technologies were recently conceived ; if they prove feasible and effective , they would require large amounts of funding for full - scale deployment ; and currently they generally lack political , scientific , and public support .

the two main categories of geoengineering technologies are carbon dioxide removal ( cdr ) and solar radiation management ( srm ) ( see figure 1 ) .

cdr methods remove co 2 from the atmosphere .

srm methods increase the reflectivity of the earth's atmosphere or surface , thus reducing incoming solar radiation .

geoengineering is an emerging policy area .

the decision of policymakers to either pursue or constrain geoengineering research and / or deployment activities may be based on a wide assortment of factors , including social , legal , and political factors as well as scientific and technical ones — not the least of which may be progress on other climate - related policies .

the debate over the point at which governments may choose to oversee geoengineering activities as well as the form which potential oversight may take is presented in the following section .

at present , only a few of the possible geoengineering activities appear to be under the jurisdiction of domestic laws or international treaties , and it is largely unclear how those legal instruments would encourage or constrain these activities in practice .

while some continue to debate the merits of government oversight of geoengineering activities , others have suggested that new legal frameworks should be enacted to support coordinated and collaborative research , develop normative standards for enforcement , and / or prevent or minimize the risks in development and deployment .

moreover , whether frameworks are best implemented at a local , national , or international level ( perhaps different for different technologies ) is uncertain , and debate remains over what agencies or organizations should be tasked with oversight .

the following section summarizes three different approaches to government oversight of geoengineering activities: methods of sub - national oversight , methods of national oversight , and methods of international oversight .

in doing so , it also summarizes existing laws and treaties that may affect geoengineering research and deployment activities .

geoengineering is an emerging field that , like other areas of scientific innovation , requires careful deliberation by policymakers , and possibly , the development or amendment of international agreements , federal laws , or federal regulations .

currently , many geoengineering technologies are at the conceptual and research stages , and their effectiveness at reducing global temperatures has yet to be proven .

very few studies have been published documenting the cost , environmental effects , socio - political impacts , and legal implications of geoengineering .

nevertheless , if geoengineering technologies are deployed , they are expected to have the potential to cause significant transboundary effects .

some foreign governments and private entities have expressed an interest in pursuing geoengineering projects , largely out of concern over the slow progress of greenhouse gas reductions under the international climate change agreements , the possible existence of climate "tipping points," and the apparent political or economic obstacles to pursuing aggressive domestic greenhouse gas mitigation strategies .

however , in the united states , there is limited federal involvement in , or oversight of , geoengineering .

consequently , to the extent that some federal agencies and u.s. states have begun addressing geoengineering projects , they are doing so in a largely piecemeal fashion .

if the u.s. government opts to address geoengineering at the federal level , there are several approaches that are immediately apparent .

first , it may continue to leave geoengineering policy development in the hands of federal agencies and states .

second , it might impose a temporary or permanent moratorium on geoengineering , or on particular geoengineering technologies , out of concern that its risks outweigh its benefits .

third , it might develop a national policy on geoengineering by authoring or amending laws .

fourth , it could work with the international community to craft an international approach to geoengineering by writing or amending international agreements .

that the government can play a substantial role in the development of new technologies has been manifested in such areas as nanotechnology , nuclear science , and genetic engineering .

