implementation of the patient protection and affordable care act ( affordable care act , or aca ) is having a significan t impact on federal mandatory — also known as direct — spending .

most of the projected spending under the law is for expanding health insurance coverage .

this includes premium tax credits and cost - sharing reduction payments for individuals and families who purchase private insurance coverage through the health insurance exchanges established under the aca , as well as federal matching funds for states that choose to expand their medicaid programs .

the internal revenue service ( irs ) reports that spending on the premium tax credits and cost - sharing reductions totaled $79.2 billion for first three fiscal years ( i.e. , fy2014-fy2016 ) in which the aca exchanges were operational .

an analysis of preliminary data from the medicaid budget and expenditure system ( mbes ) released by the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) provides some insight into the initial impact of the medicaid expansion on spending .

for calendar year 2014 , the 27 states that implemented the expansion reported spending a total of $36.7 billion on newly eligible adults , which under the aca was paid for entirely with federal funds ( i.e. , 100% federal match ) .

the same states spent an additional $10.5 billion on adults that were previously eligible at traditional federal match rates or subject to technical adjustments .

expenditures for these individuals were subject to a higher rate than the traditional match rate , but not 100% .

in its march 2016 baseline budget projections , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that gross spending on insurance coverage expansion under the aca will total $1.938 trillion over the 10-year period fy2017 through fy2026 .

that total includes $866 billion on exchanges subsidies — premium tax credits and cost - sharing reductions — and related spending , and $1.063 trillion on medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) .

cbo projects that these costs will be offset by revenues from the aca's taxes and fees , and by savings from the law's changes to the medicare program that are designed to slow the rate of growth of medicare payments to certain health care providers .

the aca also included numerous appropriations that are providing billions of dollars in mandatory funds to support new and existing grant programs and other activities .

several other provisions in the law require the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) to transfer amounts from the medicare part a and part b trust funds for specified purposes .

this report summarizes all the mandatory appropriations and medicare trust fund transfers in the aca and provides details , where publicly available , on the status of obligation of these funds .

the information is presented in two tables .

the report also includes a brief discussion of the impact that sequestration is having on aca mandatory spending .

this report is periodically revised and updated to reflect important legislative and other developments .

a companion crs report discusses the aca's impact on discretionary spending , which is controlled by the annual appropriations process .

discretionary spending under the aca falls into two broad categories .

first , there are the amounts provided in appropriations acts for specific grant and other programs pursuant to explicit authorizations of appropriations in the aca .

second , there are the costs incurred by the federal agencies that are responsible for administering and enforcing the aca's core provisions to expand insurance coverage .

 table 2 summarizes all the aca provisions that include an appropriation of funds or a transfer of amounts from the medicare trust funds .

the provisions are grouped under the following headings: ( 1 ) private health insurance ; ( 2 ) medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) ; ( 3 ) medicare ; ( 4 ) fraud and abuse ; ( 5 ) health centers ; ( 6 ) health workforce and the national health service corps ; ( 7 ) community - based prevention and wellness ; ( 8 ) maternal and child health ; ( 9 ) long - term care ; ( 10 ) comparative effectiveness research ; ( 11 ) biomedical research ; and ( 12 ) aca implementation: administrative expenses .

each table row provides information on a specific aca provision , organized across four columns .

the first column shows the aca section or subsection number .

the second column indicates whether the provision is freestanding ( i.e. , statutory authority that is not amending an existing statute ) or amendatory ( i.e. , amends an existing statute , typically the social security act ) .

amendatory provisions either add a new program to the statute or modify an existing one .

the third column gives a brief description of the program or activity , including details of the appropriation or fund transfer .

the entry also includes the name of the administering agency within hhs and , if applicable , the catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) number for the grant program .

the fourth column shows how much funding has been obligated to date .

an agency incurs an obligation , for example , by placing an order , signing a contract , awarding a grant , purchasing a service , or taking other actions that require the government to make payments .

the obligation amounts are based on information in the hhs tracking accountability in government grants system ( taggs ) unless specified otherwise .

the taggs database is a central repository for grants awarded by all the hhs operating divisions ( agencies ) and several offices within the office of the secretary .

it is updated daily with new data provided by these entities .

overall , the aca provided more than $100 billion in mandatory appropriations and medicare fund transfers over the 10-year period fy2010-fy2019 .

as enacted , the law included the following amounts: $40 billion for chip ( fy2014 and fy2015 ) ; $15 billion for the pphf through fy2019 ( and $2 billion for each year thereafter ) ; $11 billion for the chcf ; $10 billion for cmmi through fy2019 ( and $10 billion for each 10-year period thereafter ) ; $6 billion for the co - op program ; $5 billion for pcip ; $5 billion for the early retiree reinsurance program $4 billion ( projected ) for the pcortf ; $2.25 billion for the medicaid money follows the person ( mfp ) demonstration ; and $1.5 billion for the maternal , infant , and early childhood visitation program .

only four of the aca appropriations are permanent ( i.e. , cmmi , ipab , pphf , and environmental health screening ) .

all the other appropriations were temporary .

in a series of legislative actions ( described in more detail in table 2 and table 3 ) , congress extended funding for several programs whose aca appropriations were about to expire .

the following programs are now funded through fy2017: health centers ( chcf funding ) ; national health service corps ( chcf funding ) ; graduate medical education ( gme ) payments for teaching health centers ; maternal , infant , and early childhood home visiting program ; personal responsibility education program ( prep ) ; health workforce demonstration programs ; abstinence education grants ; family - to - family health information centers ; and outreach and assistance for low - income programs .

congress has also provided two more years of funding ( fy2016-fy2017 ) for chip .

finally , congress has partially reduced or rescinded aca funding for ipab , pphf , and the co - op program .

appendix a .

acronyms used in the report the following laws , agencies , programs , and funds are referred to in this report by their acronym .

appendix b .

annual spending reductions under the budget control act the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ) amended the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca ) by establishing two budget enforcement mechanisms to reduce federal spending by at least $2.1 trillion over the 10-year period fy2012 through fy2021 .

first , the bca established enforceable discretionary spending limits , or caps , for defense and nondefense spending for each of those years .

second , the bca created a joint committee on deficit reduction to develop legislation to further limit federal spending .

the failure of the joint committee to agree on deficit - reduction legislation triggered automatic annual spending reductions for each of fy2013 through fy2021 .

the bca specified that a total of $109 billion must be cut each year from nonexempt budget accounts .

that amount is equally divided between the categories of defense and nondefense spending .

within each category , the spending cuts are allocated proportionately to discretionary spending and nonexempt mandatory ( i.e. , direct ) spending .

under the bca , the spending reductions are achieved through two methods: ( 1 ) sequestration ( i.e. , an across - the - board cancellation of budgetary resources ) ; and ( 2 ) lowering the bca - imposed discretionary spending caps .

the bca requires that the mandatory spending reductions in each category — defense and nondefense — must be executed in each of fy2013 through fy2021 by a sequestration of all nonexempt accounts , subject to the bbedca sequestration rules .

discretionary spending in each category is also subject to sequestration , but only in fy2013 .

for each of the remaining fiscal years ( i.e. , fy2014 through fy2021 ) , discretionary spending reductions are to be achieved by lowering the discretionary spending caps for defense and nondefense spending by the total dollar amount of the required reduction .

thus , congressional appropriators get to decide how to apportion the cuts within the lowered spending caps rather than having the cuts applied across - the - board to all nonexempt discretionary spending accounts through sequestration .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) is responsible for calculating the percentages and amounts by which mandatory and discretionary spending are required to be reduced each year , and for applying the bbedca's sequestration exemptions and rules .

congress has amended the bca several times since its enactment in 2011 .

the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ) revised the discretionary spending caps for fy2013 and fy2014 and reduced the overall dollar amount that needed to be sequestered from fy2013 mandatory defense and nondefense spending .

the bipartisan budget act of 2013 established new discretionary spending caps for fy2014 and fy2015 and eliminated the requirement for these caps to be lowered .

it also extended the sequestration of mandatory spending in the defense and nondefense categories for two additional years — fy2022 and fy2023 — and specified that the percentage reduction calculated for fy2021 be applied to both those years .

a provision in a 2014 law on military retirement pay extended the sequestration of mandatory spending to include fy2024 and , again , specified that the percentage reduction calculated for fy2021 be applied to that additional year .

the bipartisan budget act of 2015 established new discretionary spending caps for fy2016 and fy2017 and eliminated the requirement for these caps to be lowered .

it further extended the sequestration of mandatory spending to include fy2025 , once again using the percentage reduction calculated for fy2021 .

