roughly every five years , congress debates and revises omnibus legislation — referred to as the "farm bill" — governing federal farm and food policy .

congress is currently reviewing u.s. farm policy before commodity provisions in the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-246 ; the 2008 farm bill ) expire in 2012 .

a major topic is the so - called "farm safety net. .

the u.s. department of agriculture and the broader farming community often refer to the price and income support programs of the farm bill's title i and the crop insurance and disaster assistance programs of title xii as encompassing the farm safety net .

while many critics of farm subsidies take issue with what does and does not constitute a safety net and whether current farm programs actually perform as such , this report uses the term safety net as a catchall descriptor rather than an assessment of the safety net merits of the various programs .

several farm programs contain elements of a safety net , which is intended to protect farmers against risks or ensure a minimum level of economic well - being .

for example , crop farmers and landowners receive counter - cyclical payments ( ccp ) when crop revenue declines below a certain level .

in contrast , one of the largest farm budget outlays — "direct payments" — delivers nearly $5 billion every year to the same set of owners of agricultural base acres irrespective of the level of commodity prices or whether the land is farmed .

this report provides a brief description of the current farm safety net programs as a background for the congressional debate that is expected to precede the next round of omnibus farm legislation in 2012 .

the report also examines budget and policy issues and discusses implications for u.s. farm policy in the context of the world trade organization ( wto ) .

the federal government supports farm prices and income for major field crops such as corn , soybeans , cotton , and rice and helps farmers manage risks associated with variability in crop yields and prices through a collection of commodity programs .

many policymakers and farmers consider federal support of farm businesses necessary for their financial survival , given the unpredictable nature of agricultural production and markets .

in contrast , many environmental groups argue that these subsidies encourage overproduction on environmentally fragile land using excessive pesticides and fertilizers .

others , including budget hawks , have long argued that farm subsidies are an unfair market - distorting use of taxpayer dollars .

in addition , farm subsidies are routinely the subject of harsh criticism from the editorial pages of many major u.s. newspapers .

as provided under the 2008 farm bill and other legislation , farm safety net programs can be divided into three main categories ( as shown in figure 1 and table 1 ) : c ommodity programs provide income support and attempt to address farm price or revenue risk for selected field crops ; risk management provides protection from declines in yield or revenue for a much broader set of commodities , including many field and specialty crops and some livestock ; and supplemental disaster assistance is available for most commodities ( crops and livestock ) when weather - related losses are not covered by other programs .

historically , federal programs have primarily benefitted farmers ( and landowners ) of the major field crops , such as wheat , corn , soybeans , rice , cotton , and sugar .

milk is also included .

most of these commodities have a long history of government support dating back to the 1930s .

in recent years , other crops such as dry peas and lentils have become eligible commodities .

in contrast , producers of specialty crops ( eg , fruits , vegetables , horticulture crops ) and livestock have generally received little or no direct government support through commodity programs , and instead they must manage their own risk and / or rely on crop insurance and disaster assistance .

payment limits control the overall level of payments made to individuals to some extent .

however , farm operators or landowners have avoided payment limits in the past by subdividing individual farms into multiple operators by use of certificate exchanges for marketing loan benefits and by other means .

importantly , farm support has evolved over many decades by modifying or adding programs .

as a result , programs sometimes overlap or work at cross purposes , generating criticism that they are not well integrated , cost too much , or do not provide adequate risk protection .

each of the three major program categories is described in the sections below .

additional program details are available in the crs reports referenced in each section .

recent and growing federal budget deficits have increased calls within both congress and the administration for fiscal restraint and government - wide spending reductions .

the congressional budget office has said that the fy2009 deficit "was the largest as a share of gdp since the end of world war ii , and the deficit expected for 2010 would be the second largest… .

under current law , the federal fiscal outlook beyond this year is daunting… .

those accumulating deficits will push federal debt held by the public to significantly higher levels. .

with that background , president obama created the bipartisan national commission on fiscal responsibility and reform to propose long - term solutions for a sustainable federal budget , noting that all programs were under consideration .

for agriculture , the commission recommended reducing mandatory agricultural spending by $15 billion from fy2012-fy2020 , including direct payments , crop insurance premium subsidies and insurance company reimbursements , conservation , and the market access program .

similarly , the bipartisan debt reduction task force proposal would reduce agricultural spending , but by twice that amount , $30 billion through fy2020 .

it would tighten payment limits , reduce crop insurance premium subsidies and insurance company reimbursements , and consolidate and cap conservation programs .

at best , this budget situation is likely to prevent any increase in overall new spending on a 2012 farm bill .

thus , the level of funding in the cbo baseline for agricultural programs will be of paramount importance as the development of a 2012 farm bill progresses .

each year , cbo issues a baseline budget projection for all federal spending under current law over a multi - year period .

projected spending in the baseline represents cbo's estimate at a particular point in time of what federal spending and revenues likely would be under current law if no policy changes were made over the projected period .

the baseline serves as a benchmark or starting point for future budget analyses .

whenever new legislation ( such as a farm bill ) is introduced that affects federal mandatory spending , its impact is measured as a difference from the baseline .

any increase in costs above the baseline level may be subject to certain budget constraints ( such as pay - go ) .

the process of scorekeeping and estimating baselines is done in congress by cbo , acting under the supervision of the house and senate budget committees .

the current , tight federal budget situation is unlike that faced by congress when it wrote the 2002 farm bill .

at that time , a brief federal budget surplus allowed congress to spend $73 billion more than its 10-year baseline .

it was relatively easy to keep existing programs and add new programs across the spectrum of the omnibus farm bill .

more recently , the 2008 farm bill was held to be budget neutral , although it received additional funding from outside the agriculture committees' jurisdiction .

this outside funding from changes in tax policies provided offsets for higher spending on nutrition and other non - commodity programs , and allowed the overall bill to be budget neutral while increasing total farm bill spending .

however , procedural difficulties related to negotiating these offsets with other committees , such as the house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee , prolonged the development of the 2008 farm bill and added constituencies that were not always in line with agriculture committee priorities .

given these difficulties , most policy observers expect the next farm bill will be budget - neutral at best , and written within the confines of the agriculture committees .

in this scenario , the level of funding in the cbo baseline would set a maximum amount of funding available for a new farm bill .

offsets to pay for any new programs — such as a new farm safety net — would need to come from within the agriculture committees' jurisdiction .

to increase one program , another program would need to be decreased .

offsets could occur within titles or functions of the farm bill ( eg , from within the commodity subsidy program ) , or could come from transfers between titles or functions within the farm bill ( eg , between commodity subsidies and conservation programs ) .

moreover , 37 programs in the 2008 farm bill received mandatory funding but do not have any assumed baseline funding beyond fy2012 .

to continue these programs , offsets of up to $10 billion over five years may be needed .

thus , the political stakes could be increasingly high among the various interest groups and constituencies needed to pass the farm bill .

moreover , some fear that budget reconciliation could be required before the 2008 farm bill expires .

budget reconciliation would require cuts in existing farm bill programs to save money before a new farm bill is written , and these cuts could make even fewer funds available in the baseline for the 2012 farm bill .

for the title i farm commodity programs in particular , additional infusions of mandatory funding are unlikely given the improbability of offsets from outside the agriculture committees .

other titles in the farm bill such as nutrition , bioenergy , and conservation have had more success in recent farm bills competing for additional funds .

thus , the pool of money for any proposed revisions to the farm safety net may likely come from the existing baseline for the farm commodity programs and the crop insurance program .

existing programs such as direct payments , the various counter - cyclical payments , or crop insurance might be replaced , revised , or reduced to pay for new farm safety net programs .

figure 3 shows the actual outlays and projected cbo baseline for the farm commodity payments , crop insurance , non - insured assistance , and supplemental and ad hoc disaster payments from fy2003 to fy2020 .

combined outlays for these broadly defined safety net and / or farm income support programs have ranged from $12.2 billion in 2008 to $20.5 billion in 2006 .

the average for the actual outlays from fy2003 to fy2010 is $15.7 billion per year .

the projected annual average for fy2011-fy2020 in the august 2010 cbo baseline is 5.6% smaller at $14.8 billion .

of particular note in this analysis when comparing the baseline projection to the recent past is that crop insurance outlays have increased while counter - cyclical support has decreased .

in fact , crop insurance outlays have increased more than threefold over the period , rising to an estimated $7.3 billion in fy2010 as higher policy premiums from rising crop prices drove up premium subsidies and expense reimbursements to private insurance companies .

these costs are projected to stay high , rising to $8.7 billion in fy2020 .

conversely , title i farm commodity program costs have had a nearly corresponding decrease since fy2003 .

this is because the counter - cyclical payment component has decreased as market prices for farm commodities generally have risen from levels a decade ago .

the status of supplemental disaster assistance remains uncertain and unpredictable .

by definition , ad hoc disaster payments are subject to congressional action and are not included in baseline projections .

the so - called "permanent" agricultural disaster provisions ( eg , sure ) in the 2008 farm bill are authorized only temporarily and have baseline only through the end of the 2008 farm bill .

figure 4 shows the components in the baseline projection for the title i farm commodity programs , crop insurance , nap , and the permanent disaster program .

crop insurance is the largest component of projected payments , comprising $81 billion of the $148 billion 10-year total .

direct payments are the next largest , at $49 billion over fy2011-fy2020 .

counter - cyclical and acre payments are the third - largest component , with nearly $9 billion over 10 years .

cotton accounts for about 55% of the combined counter - cyclical and acre payment projection , with acre payments for corn rising near the end of the period and accounting for 17% of the projection .

whether or not direct payments are considered part of the farm safety net ( because they are fixed and not tied to changes in prices or revenue ) , their magnitude in comparison to counter - cyclical payments makes it likely that some proposals for a new safety net could include funding offsets from direct payments .

figure 5 shows how the title i farm commodity payments are allocated by commodity ( including direct payments , counter - cyclical payments , acre , and the marketing loan programs ; that is , the green bars of figure 3 ) .

corn is the commodity receiving the most support , both in the fy2003-fy2010 period and in the fy2011-fy2020 projected period .

cotton is the next - highest supported commodity in total terms , but is planted on comparatively fewer acres .

wheat , soybeans , and rice round out the top five supported commodities , which together account for 93% of the title i baseline .

while commodity allocations are not directly associated with the design of a safety net , these shares nonetheless reflect some of the support and influence in the commodity title ( for example , that corn growers were the primary advocates for the development of the acre provisions in the 2008 farm bill ) .

besides budget issues , several policy questions are being raised to assess the current farm safety net programs and consider potential changes .

how well does the multitude of programs support farmers and / or help them manage overall business risks ? .

what are the holes in the farm safety net with respect to commodities , regional coverage , or farm size ? .

is it money well spent , or is there a better combination of programs that would meet the objectives of policymakers ? .

for supporters of farm programs , continued calls for wide - scale emergency disaster relief are an indication that the farm safety net is not functioning as well as producers and policymakers would like .

two programs with the most genuine safety net features , the sure and acre programs , have been criticized as being too complex , which reportedly has limited participation , while providing too few benefits for farmers who face economic hardship .

also , some farmers have complained , both recently and prior to the 2008 farm bill , that mal benefits and counter - cyclical payments do not provide enough assistance because trigger levels are mostly below current and expected price levels .

production costs relative to current levels of support are also a concern for many farmers , including dairy producers .

critics of farm programs have long questioned the need for farm subsidies , contending that resources for agriculture could be better spent advancing environmental goals or improving agricultural productivity .

others cite an economic argument against the farm commodity programs: like any subsidy , farm programs distort production , capitalize benefits to the owners of the resources , encourage concentration of production , and comparatively harm smaller domestic producers and farmers in lower - income foreign nations .

several issues might shape any potential changes to farm safety net programs in the next farm bill debate .

managing farm risk — crop insurance has very high participation rates , a result driven in part by the high subsidization levels but also because the program in fact reduces both yield and revenue risks .

some members of congress and policy observers have wondered if crop insurance might be the only element of the farm safety net that remains in the distant future if farm programs are rationalized and funding is reduced .

farm policy observers have identified significant overlap between farm programs .

for example , the acre program and crop insurance both address revenue variability .

also , the current farm program mix has several variations of "counter - cyclical - style" payments , including marketing loan benefits , traditional ( price ) counter - cyclical payments , acre ( revenue ) payments , revenue - type crop insurance , and whole - farm insurance .

in the view of some , a different array of programs might reduce farm risk in a more cost - effective way .

commodity coverage — the extent of the current commodity coverage is primarily a result of the historical and evolving nature of farm policy .

producers of major commodities such as wheat , corn , soybeans , rice , cotton , and milk have benefited the most from farm programs because farmers and policymakers representing those commodities shaped the programs from their inception .

since then , most other commodity advocates have not had the interest or sufficient political power to add their commodities to the mix .

commodity coverage could be increased by changing the commodity mix for current programs or by developing a whole - farm program or insurance policy that could be more comprehensive than usda's current insurance policy and eliminate potential overlap of coverage across the various existing programs .

biofuels subsidies — the federal government has enacted an increasing number of programs that support the use of agriculture - based biofuels , foremost of which is corn - based ethanol .

in the past decade , corn use for ethanol has expanded corn demand by nearly 30% , driving corn prices higher .

in 2009 , biofuels subsidies totaled nearly $6 billion , and corn has not been the only beneficiary .

the increased demand for corn has contributed to an expansion of corn area into non - traditional crop areas , raising prices for other major field crops .

many federal budget watchers argue that the expanding biofuels subsidies should be counted with the pool of agricultural price and income subsidies since this has been one of their major effects .

complexity — the program structure for acre and sure requires a substantial amount of individual farm data , assumptions , and calculations .

as a result , determining whether or not the programs benefit an individual producer is not readily apparent beforehand , which affects participation .

similarly , the complexities of such programs require significant setup and ongoing administrative costs .

the complexity has arisen , in part , from budget responsibility that requires actual losses to be determined after the end of the marketing year — possibly for the whole farm , rather than making payments sooner on less comprehensive information .

program limits and farm size — payment limits for the farm commodity programs , with the exception of the marketing assistance loan program , either set the maximum amount of farm program payments that a person can receive per year or set the maximum amount of income that an individual can earn and still remain eligible for program benefits ( a means test ) .

the payment limits issue is controversial because it directly addresses questions about what size farms should be supported , whether payments should be proportional to production or limited per individual , and who should receive payments .

some policymakers want limits to be tightened to save money and reduce the possibility of encouraging expansion of large farms at the expense of small farms .

others say larger farms should not be penalized for the economies of size and efficiencies they have achieved .

crop insurance has no payment limits , a feature that some policymakers say makes crop insurance an attractive centerpiece of farm policy because it helps small and large farms alike , with neither apparently gaining at the expense of the other .

a major constraint affecting future u.s. policy choices is the broad set of rules and disciplines of the world trade organization ( wto ) , which the united states , as a founding member , has agreed to adhere to and abide by .

as one of the world's largest agricultural producers and trading nations , the united states routinely sees its domestic and trade policies subjected to the scrutiny of foreign competitors and the news media .

u.s. farm policy is constantly being evaluated against wto rules .

in particular , u.s. domestic agricultural policy is subject to commitments made under the wto's agreement on agriculture ( aa ) and , to the extent that domestic policy effects spill over into international markets , u.s. farm policy is also subject to certain rules under the agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures ( scm ) .

policies or programs found to be in violation of wto rules may be subject to challenge by another wto member under the wto dispute settlement process .

the importance of wto rules and commitments has been made salient by the so - called "brazil cotton case," in which a wto dispute settlement panel ruled against both the u.s. cotton and gsm - 102 export credit guarantee programs .

the united states is expected to bring both programs into wto compliance or be subject to wto - sanctioned retaliation .

since most governing provisions over u.s. farm programs are statutory , new legislation could be required to implement even minor changes to achieve compliance .

so , a key question that policymakers will ask of virtually every existing farm program , as well as new farm proposals , is how will it affect u.s. commitments under the aa , and u.s. compliance with scm rules ? .

the answer rests not only on cost , but also on the proposal's design , implementation , and market effects .

this section briefly discusses how u.s. farm programs , particularly title i price and income support programs , would possibly comply ( or not ) with the wto's aa and scm .

several forces are acting on policymakers as congress considers revising the farm safety net .

these include the historical development of farm programs and the accompanying political process , concerns about the budget deficit , biofuel and energy policy in general , and u.s. commitments under the wto .

how these and other forces play out during the farm bill debate will determine what if any changes are made to the farm safety net .

