the antiquities act of 1906 authorizes the president to proclaim national monuments on federal lands that contain "historic landmarks , historic and prehistoric structures , and other objects of historic or scientific interest. .

the president is to reserve "the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected. .

congress subsequently limited the president's authority by requiring congressional authorization for extensions or establishment of monuments in wyoming , and by making withdrawals in alaska exceeding 5,000 acres subject to congressional approval .

the antiquities act was a response to concerns over theft from and destruction of archaeological sites and was designed to provide an expeditious means to protect federal lands and resources .

president theodore roosevelt used the authority in 1906 to establish devils tower in wyoming as the first national monument .

seventeen of the 20 presidents since 1906 created 158 monuments , including the grand canyon , grand teton , zion , olympic , statue of liberty , and chesapeake and ohio canal .

president franklin d. roosevelt used his authority the most often ( 36 times ) , and president obama proclaimed the most monument acreage ( about 554 million , primarily in two expanded marine monuments ) .

for a comparison of president obama's and president franklin d. roosevelt's use of the monument authority , see appendix a .

for information on the use of the authority by all presidents since 1906 , see appendix b .

presidential establishment of national monuments under the antiquities act of 1906 has protected sites with historic and scientific values , but it has also been contentious .

various issues regarding presidentially created monuments have generated controversy , lawsuits , statutory changes , and legislative proposals to limit the president's authority .

concerns have centered on the extent of the president's authority to establish and modify monuments , the size of the areas , the types of protected resources and the level of threats to the areas , the inclusion of nonfederal lands within monument boundaries , and the selection of the managing agency .

another issue has been restrictions that may result on land uses , both extractive ( eg , mining ) and recreational ( eg , off - road vehicle use ) .

still another focus is the manner in which the monuments were created .

this includes the lack of a requirement for state or congressional approval prior to presidential monument proclamations , and a perceived lack of consistency between the antiquities act and the policies established in other laws pertaining to land withdrawals , environmental reviews , and public participation .

most monument advocates favor the antiquities act in its present form .

they believe that the act serves an important purpose in preserving resources for future generations .

they maintain that presidents of both parties have used the authority for over a century to protect valuable federal lands and resources expeditiously , and they defend the president's ability to take prompt action to protect resources that may be vulnerable to looting , vandalism , commercial development , and other permanent changes .

they contend that significant segments of the public support monument designations for the protections they afford and the recreational , preservation , and economic benefits that such designations sometimes bring .

they further assert that previous congresses that focused on this issue were correct in not repealing the antiquities act , and that courts have supported presidential actions .

litigation and legislation related to the law have been pursued throughout its history .

to give one historical example , displeasure with president franklin d. roosevelt's proclaiming of the jackson hole national monument in wyoming in 1943 ( which became grand teton national park ) prompted litigation on the extent of presidential authority under the antiquities act , and led to a 1950 law prohibiting future establishment of national monuments in wyoming unless congress made the designation .

as another example , president carter's establishment of monuments in alaska in 1978 also was challenged in the courts and led to a statutory requirement for congressional approval of land withdrawals in alaska larger than 5,000 acres .

president clinton's proclamation of the grand staircase - escalante national monument in 1996 triggered several lawsuits , a law authorizing land exchanges , a law altering the borders of the monument , and proposals to amend or revoke presidential authority under the antiquities act .

initial opposition to some monument designations has turned to support over time .

some controversial monuments later were redesignated as national parks by congress and today are generally considered popular parks with substantial economic benefit to the surrounding communities .

for instance , the grand canyon national monument , proclaimed in 1908 and the subject of a legal challenge , is now a world - famous national park .

the more recent application of national monument authority by president obama and president trump has continued to foster debate among some members of congress , state and local officials , user groups , and others .

president obama issued 34 monument proclamations , including designation of 29 new monuments and enlargement of 5 existing monuments .

president trump has issued three monument proclamations as of november 28 , 2018 , including one to designate a monument and two to reduce monument sizes and alter their terms and conditions .

the actions of both presidents led to lawsuits challenging the authority of the president and appeared to spur legislative proposals to limit the president's authority to create monuments , establish a process for input into monument decisions , and legislatively - establish national monuments , among other measures .

president obama designated 29 new national monuments in 17 states , the district of columbia , and the atlantic ocean , off the coast of new england .

they ranged in size from 0.12 acres to 1.6 million acres .

president obama also enlarged five monuments in california and oregon , off the california coast , and in marine areas .

enlargements ranged from 1,665 acres to 283.4 million acres .

brief information on each monument is included in appendix c .

the obama administration usually cited support for the establishment of the monuments — for instance , from government officials , businesses and local communities , or other stakeholders .

most of the areas that president obama designated as monuments were first proposed for some sort of protective designation in legislation .

in addition , some members and segments of the public had advocated for additional monument designations in their states .

however , some federal and other governmental officials , communities , and stakeholders expressed opposition to monuments established by president obama .

concerns centered on the process used to create monuments , particularly whether there was sufficient consultation with , and support from , congress , local and state governments , residents of the affected areas , and the general public .

other concerns related to restrictions on land uses in new monuments , the frequency with which the president used his monument authority , and the size of some of the larger monuments , among other issues .

president trump proclaimed one new monument in kentucky — camp nelson — with 380 acres .

the president also reduced and modified two monuments in utah .

the grand staircase - escalante national monument , established in 1996 by president clinton , was reduced by about one million acres ( about 47% ) , and the bears ears national monument , established in 2016 by president obama , was reduced by about 1.15 million acres ( 85% ) .

these actions followed a 2017 review of certain national monuments by the secretary of the interior , at the direction of the president .

the secretary's final report recommended that camp nelson ( and two other areas ) be evaluated for national monument designation .

the final report also recommended boundary changes and other modifications to the two utah monuments , as well as changes to several other monuments .

brief information on each monument proclamation by president trump is contained in appendix c .

given the recurring controversies over presidential establishment and modification of national monuments , recent congresses have evaluated whether to abolish , limit , or retain unchanged the president's authority to proclaim monuments under the antiquities act .

among the monument measures considered during recent congresses were bills to impose restrictions on presidential authority , including to: limit the size or duration of withdrawals ; prohibit or restrict withdrawals in particular states or other locations ( eg , the exclusive economic zone ) ; narrow the types of resources that could be protected ; ban the inclusion of nonfederal land within monument boundaries ; encourage public participation in the monument designation process ; revoke the president's authority to designate monuments or require congressional and / or state approval of some or all monument designations ; and promote presidential creation of monuments in accordance with certain federal land management laws and environmental laws .

other measures had a variety of additional purposes .

they included changing land uses within monuments , imposing conditions on agency implementation of restrictions on monument use , addressing use of water within monument boundaries , and altering monument boundaries .

as previously noted , some members and segments of the public have opposed legislation in recent congresses that would restrict the president's authority to establish national monuments .

 ( see the section above on " monument issues and controversies ." ) .

some of these supporters have introduced legislation to bar the president from reducing or abolishing national monuments .

other bills would increase funding for presidentially proclaimed monuments in general or dedicate funds to particular purposes , such as the development of management plans and recreational infrastructure .

appendix a .

use of monument authority in the antiquities act: comparison of two presidents appendix b .

historical use of monument authority in the antiquities act appendix c. summary of president obama's monument proclamations this appendix provides a chronological list of president obama's 34 monument proclamations under the antiquities act .

for additional information on a particular monument , see the pertinent proclamation identified in the footnotes .

fort monroe national monument in virginia was designated on november 1 , 2011 .

in establishing the 325-acre monument , the president stated that "fort monroe on old point comfort in virginia has a storied history in the defense of our nation and the struggle for freedom. .

fort ord national monument in california was designated on april 20 , 2012 .

the purpose of the 14,651-acre fort ord national monument is to maintain its historical and cultural significance , as well as attract tourists and recreationists and enhance the area's unique natural resources , according to the president .

chimney rock national monument in colorado was designated on september 21 , 2012 .

the president cited the "spiritual , historic , and scientific resources of great value and significance" in proclaiming the 4,726-acre monument .

césar e. chávez national monument in california was designated on october 8 , 2012 .

the 10.5-acre monument "marks the extraordinary achievements and contributions to the history of the united states made by césar chávez and the farm worker movement that he led with great vision and fortitude," according to the president .

first state national monument in delaware was designated on march 25 , 2013 .

the 1,108 acres of the monument contain objects and areas of historic interest related to the settlement of delaware and the role of delaware as the first state to ratify the constitution , according to the president .

charles young buffalo soldiers national monument in ohio was designated on march 25 , 2013 .

the 60-acre monument was established to commemorate the life and accomplishments of colonel charles young , the highest - ranking african american commanding officer in the u.s. army from 1894 until his death in 1922 , the commander of a troop of buffalo soldiers , and the first african american superintendent of a national park , as described in the proclamation .

río grande del norte national monument in new mexico was designated on march 25 , 2013 .

in proclaiming the monument , the president stated that protecting the 242,555-acre monument "will preserve its cultural , prehistoric , and historic legacy and maintain its diverse array of national and scientific resources , ensuring that the historic and scientific values of this area remain for the benefit of all americans. .

san juan islands national monument in washington was designated on march 25 , 2013 .

this 970-acre monument contains an archipelago of over 450 islands , rocks , and pinnacles in washington's puget sound .

according to the president , the area contains an "unmatched landscape," numerous wildlife species in diverse habitats , archaeological sites , and historic lighthouses and is a "refuge of scientific and historic treasures and a classroom for generations of americans. .

harriet tubman – underground railroad national monument in maryland was designated on march 25 , 2013 .

this 11,750-acre monument commemorates the life of harriet tubman , a leader of the underground railroad , and protects the landscape and historic features of the area in which she lived , worked , and later led enslaved african americans to freedom , according to the proclamation .

california coastal national monument was enlarged on march 11 , 2014 .

president obama added 1,665 onshore acres to this offshore monument , and named the expanded area the "point arena - stornetta unit. .

according to the proclamation , the area is of "significant scientific importance," and contains archeological and cultural sites and artifacts , a landscape shaped by "powerful geologic forces," and "spectacular wildlife," among other resources and values .

organ mountains - desert peaks national monument in new mexico was designated on may 21 , 2014 .

among other attributes , the 496,330-acre monument includes mountain ranges and lowlands with archaeological resources ; paleontological research areas ; geologic features ; historically significant areas ; and diverse animals , vegetative communities , and ecosystems , according to the president .

pacific remote islands marine national monument was expanded on september 25 , 2014 , by approximately 261.3 million acres .

the proclamation indicates that the expansion area includes opportunities for scientific study and research .

it also identifies diverse species and habitats , such as deep - sea coral species , habitat and range for protected turtles , foraging habitat for seabird species , and an abundance of manta rays .

san gabriel mountains national monument in california was designated on october 10 , 2014 .

in establishing the 346,177-acre monument , the president noted cultural , historic , and geologic features ; recreational and scientific opportunities ; and ecological diversity , among other distinctive elements .

browns canyon national monument in colorado was designated on february 19 , 2015 .

the 21,586-acre monument is described as an "iconic" landscape with diverse plants and wildlife and scientifically significant geological , ecological , riparian , cultural , and historic resources .

it is also important for studying paleoecology , mineralogy , archaeology , and climate change , according to the president .

pullman national monument in illinois was designated on february 19 , 2015 .

in proclaiming the 0.24 - acre monument , the president cited the national significance and contemporary relevance of the pullman historic district , including its architecture , urban planning , transportation , labor relations , and social history .honouliuli national monument in hawaii was designated on february 24 , 2015 .

the 123 - acre honouliuli internment camp was use d during world war ii as a prisoner - of - war camp and an internment camp , with most of the internees of jap a nese descent .

the president called the area "a powerful reminder of the need to protect civil liberties in times of conflict , and the effects of martial law on civil society. .

basin and range national monument in nevada was designated on july 10 , 2015 .

in preserving the cultural , prehistoric , and historic legacy of the 704,000-acre great basin area , the president noted the area's topography , geology , ecologically intact landscape , species diversity , archaeological resources , and a recent work of land art , among other features .

berryessa snow mountain national monument in california was designated on july 10 , 2015 .

the significance of the 330,780-acre site stems from its historic and prehistoric importance as well as its diversity of geologic , natural , cultural , plant and animal , scientific , and other resources , according to the proclamation .

waco mammoth national monument in texas was designated on july 10 , 2015 .

with 7.11 acres , the excavation site contains the remains of columbian mammoths and other animals of the pleistocene epoch .

the president cited the value of the area for further ex ploration and research .

mojave trails national monument in california was designated on february 12 , 2016 .

its 1.6 million acres are used for geological , ecological , and entomological research and contain paleontological resources , habitat for rare plant species and the threatened desert tortoise , and archeological records .

the monument is also important for both transportation and military history , according to the proclamation .

sand to snow national monument in california was designated on february 12 , 2016 .

the president called the 154,000 acre area an "ecological and cultural treasure" and noted its geologic and other geographic diversity , archaeological attributes , historic remains of communities , range of ecosystems and species , and scientific value .

castle mountains national monument in california was designated on february 12 , 2016 .

the "outstanding natural , cultural , and historical values" of the 20,920 acres were highlighted in the proclamation , including its geology ; relatively intact habitat and ecosystems ; priority for scientific research ; prehistoric rock art and archeological sites ; and historic mining , ranching , and railroad uses .

belmont - paul women's equality national monument was designated in washington , dc , on april 12 , 2016 .

the president noted the role of the house at this 0.34-acre monument for its role in women's history , including as the home of the national woman's party and the staging area for legislation and other actions on behalf of women's political , social , and economic equality .

stonewall national monument was designated on june 24 , 2016 , in new york .

the significance of the 0.12-acre park ( christopher park ) stems from its role in the lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender ( lgbt ) civil rights movement .

it forms part of a "historic landscape" that includes the stonewall inn , scene of the "uprising" that galvanized a movement for lgbt equality , according to the president .

katahdin woods and waters national monument in maine was designated on august 24 , 2016 .

in establishing the 87,563-acre monument , the president noted its archaeological records of native people , logging and other historic industrial infrastructure , significant biodiversity , ecosystems of scientific interest , and defining geologic and natural features .

papahanaumokuakea marine national monument was expanded on august 26 , 2016 , by 283.4 million acres .

the president highlighted the geological and biological resources of the expansion area that are sacred to native hawaiians and that constitute "part of a highly pristine deep sea and open ocean ecosystem with unique biodiversity. .

northeast canyons and seamounts marine national monument was designated on september 15 , 2016 .

the 3.1-million - acre monument is composed of two units containing mountains and canyons , and has been an area of scientific exploration in recent decades .

features include habitat for protected and endangered species ( such as sea turtles and whales ) , species of coral exclusive to the area , and other rare fish and invertebrates , according to the president .

bears ears national monument was designated on december 28 , 2016 , in utah .

in designating the 1.35 million - acre monument , the president highlighted the area's "extraordinary archaeological and cultural record that is important to us all," sacredness of the land to many native american tribes , historic and prehistoric legacy , geology , paleontological resources , and diverse vegetation and wildlife species .

gold butte national monument in nevada was designated on december 28 , 2016 .

this 296,937-acre monument contains an "extraordinary variety of diverse and irreplaceable scientific , historic , and prehistoric resources," including plant and animal habitat , geological formations , rare fossils , sites from native american history , and remnants of western ranching and mining , according to president obama .

cascade siskiyou national monument was enlarged on january 12 , 2017 .

the enlargement consisted of 47,624 acres , with 42,349 in oregon and 5,275 in california .

diverse plant and animal species , ecological connectivity , hydrologic resources , historic trails , and opportunities for scientific study are among the features of the area set out in the proclamation .

birmingham civil rights national monument in alabama was designated on january 12 , 2017 .

the purpose of the 0.88-acre monument is to protect the historic a. g. gaston motel , the headquarters of a civil rights campaign led by dr. martin luther king , jr. , among others , which helped lead to the enactment of the civil rights act of 1964 .

freedom riders national monument in alabama was designated on january 12 , 2017 .

the 5.96-acre monument contains two related sites associated with the civil rights movement .

they are a former greyhound bus station and nearby area where , in 1961 , an interracial group of freedom riders was attacked during a journey to test desegregation .

reconstruction era national monument in south carolina was designated on january 12 , 2017 .

the 15.56-acre monument contains four sites in beaufort county , the birthplace of reconstruction , where formerly enslaved people developed a thriving community during and after the civil war .

california coastal national monument was expanded on january 12 , 2017 .

six areas along the california coast were included in the expansion , which totaled 6,230 acres .

these on - and off - shore areas include historic sites , ancient archaeological sites , unique geology , habitat for plants and animals , and marine wildlife , according to president obama .

appendix d. summary of president trump's monument proclamations this appendix provides a chronological list of president trump's three monument proclamations under the antiquities act .

for additional information on a particular monument , see the pertinent proclamation identified in the footnotes .

bears ears national monument in utah was reduced and modified on december 4 , 2017 .

the monument was reduced ( from 1.35 million acres ) to 201,876 acres in two separate units — shash jáa and indian creek .

t he president d escribed objects removed from the 2016 monument as sufficiently protected under other authorities , and / or not unique , not of significant scientific or historic interest , or not threatened so as to require protection in the monument .

modifications relate to the role and membership of the commission created to provide tribal expertise to monument management , use of motorized and non - mechanized vehicles , livestock grazing , and ecological restoration and active vegetation management .

grand staircase - escalante national monument in utah was reduced and modified on december 4 , 2017 .

the reduction to 1,003,863 acres ( from about 1.9 million acres ) identified three units of the monument — escalante canyons , grand staircase , and kaiparowits .

the proclamation removed objects that are adequately protected under other laws , not of unique or distinctive scientific or historic significance , and / or not under threat of destruction , according to the president .

modifications to the 1996 monument pertain to preparing management plans , establishing advisory committees , using motorized and non - mechanized vehicles , grazing livestock , and undertaking ecological restoration and active vegetation management .

camp nelson national monument in kentucky was designated on october 26 , 2018 .

the significance of the 380-acre monument relates to its role as a union army recruitment center of african american soldiers , then known as u.s .

colored troops , during the civil war .

in proclaiming the monument , the president called the area "one of the best - preserved landscapes and archeological sites associated with united states colored troops recruitment and the refugee experiences of african american slaves seeking freedom during the civil war. .

