the explosion of the deepwater horizon oil rig and subsequent oil spill in the gulf of mexico have led to substantial damages , particularly in the form of lost wages and income .

bp has made payments for claims to compensate for losses resulting from the oil spill and established an escrow fund to pay future claims .

one issue that has arisen is the tax treatment of these payments to the recipients , and whether that treatment should be modified .

furthermore , given the magnitude of the economic disruption resulting from the spill , policymakers have begun to explore possible alternative mechanisms for providing relief to the affected region .

relief through changes in tax policy is one option congress may want to consider while exploring options for providing relief to victims of the oil spill .

in the wake of recent natural disasters , congress has used the tax code to provide relief to individuals and businesses , and promote charitable giving directed towards those in need .

this report will briefly discuss existing disaster - related tax provisions and their application to the recent oil spill .

we will then provide an analysis of the tax treatment of the bp payments to the individuals and businesses impacted by the oil spill as well as various policy options for providing tax relief to oil spill victims , highlighting the circumstantial differences between previous natural disasters and the current oil spill .

the report concludes with a brief summary of current legislative efforts .

in recent years , congress has responded to various natural disasters by providing various tax relief measures .

typically , measures have been designed to assist victims with property losses , job displacement , and lost taxpayer records .

the tax code has been used to provide assistance to both individuals and businesses finding themselves victims of a natural disaster .

for example , limits associated with casualty losses for individuals have been scaled back , while businesses have been awarded an extended net operating loss ( nol ) carryback period .

in addition to the aid provided through congressional action for specific disasters , permanent features of the tax code also provide relief .

for example , taxpayers are allowed a deduction for casualty losses .

limits associated with this deduction have been removed following natural disasters in the past .

another example is that qualified welfare or disaster relief payments are not required to be reported as income .

as discussed below , additional tax benefits become available should a disaster be declared a major disaster or emergency under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act ) .

the oil spill in the gulf of mexico presents lawmakers with unique challenges in using the tax code to provide relief .

first , unlike other recent disasters , such as the 2005 hurricanes in the gulf , the oil spill is not a natural disaster .

the oil spill is the result of human action , where unlike a natural disaster , there may be a liable party .

second , the nature of the damages is different from those typically borne by victims of natural disasters .

specifically , damages are more likely to be in the form of lost business income and employment , rather than direct property loss .

certain relief that has been awarded in the past , such as tax filing extensions to assist with the destruction of taxpayer records , is not likely to be an issue .

bp initially established a claims process in which individuals and businesses affected by the oil spill could file claims directly with the company .

as of august 23 , 2010 , all claims are to be filed with the gulf coast claims facility ( gccf ) , an independent entity that is administering the claims , with payments coming from an escrow account funded by bp .

claims may be filed for lost income or wages , damage to real or personal property , physical injury or death , loss of subsistence use of natural resources , and removal and clean - up costs .

one issue that has been raised is the proper tax treatment of the payments made for these claims .

payments received for oil - spill - related claims are includible in the recipient's income ( i.e. , subject to tax ) unless specifically excluded by law .

factors that impact the applicability of an exclusion to a particular payment include ( 1 ) whether the recipient is an individual or business ; ( 2 ) whether the payment's source is bp or a governmental entity ; and ( 3 ) the nature of the payment ( eg , replacement income for lost wages or damages for property destruction ) .

most of the payments have been for claims of lost income or wages .

these payments are generally includible in recipients' gross income because they do not appear to qualify for any exclusion .

for example , they do not appear to be excludible under the provisions that apply to certain disaster - related payments .

while irc ยง 139 provides an exclusion for "personal , family , living , or funeral expenses incurred as a result of a qualified disaster," the oil spill's designation as a spill of national significance does not meet the criteria to be a "qualified disaster" even if a payment could meet the other requirements .

similarly , while certain disaster - related payments made by a government for the general welfare are eligible for exclusion , those circumstances do not appear applicable here .

the payments also generally do not appear to qualify for any other exclusion .

for example , they do not appear to be non - taxable gifts since bp does not have the requisite donative intent in making them as it appears the company has a legal obligation to do so , arguably has a moral duty stemming from its responsibility for the spill , and may receive an economic benefit from compensating claimants outside of litigation .

other claims payments may qualify for different tax treatment .

for example , payments received by individuals due to physical injury or sickness arising from the oil spill may qualify for exclusion under irc ยง 104 .

under that section , damages ( other than punitive damages ) received "on account of personal physical injuries or physical sickness" are excluded from the recipient's gross income .

the damages must be received from a legal judgment or a settlement agreement entered into in lieu of prosecution of a lawsuit .

the tax treatment of payments for the damage or destruction of real or personal property will depend on each situation .

for example , if the payment is less than the taxpayer's adjusted basis in the property , then it is not taxable .

if the payment exceeds the adjusted basis , then the taxpayer has realized a gain , which may not be immediately taxable if the taxpayer purchases similar property within a certain time period and is able to take advantage of the special treatment that applies to involuntary conversions .

if so , the taxpayer may elect to immediately recognize gain only to the extent that the payment exceeds the cost of the new property and will defer any other gain until the replacement property is sold or otherwise disposed of .

from an economic perspective , tax relief may be justified as achieving distributional objectives or addressing market failures .

market failures occur when resources are not efficiently allocated due to unpriced costs or benefits .

markets may fail to efficiently distribute resources following disasters for a number of reasons .

first , imperfect insurance markets may not allow individuals to adequately insure against the risk of a disaster such as a major oil spill .

specifically , the loss to business and individuals may exceed insurance or the claims compensation .

for example , loss of property may be measured , but it is difficult to quantify and compensate for the loss of a consumer base for businesses .

from this perspective , the nation broadly shares the risk of large - scale disasters by providing federal relief where insurance markets are incomplete .

second , labor market frictions may create a mismatch between labor supply and labor demand and result in an inefficient distribution of labor resources .

a number of workers have been displaced as a result of the oil spill .

if these workers are immobile , the excess supply of labor will drive down wages in the affected region relative to wages outside the gulf region .

given the inefficiency associated with the excess supply of labor resulting from labor immobility , policies that subsidize wages may enhance economic efficiency .

given that oil spill losses are primarily income rather than property related , congress may want to consider policies that address the lost ability to earn income .

unlike most natural disasters , the oil spill has not resulted in widespread property loss to individuals and businesses at this time .

compensating individuals will require making up for lost business income , opportunity , and wages .

it is also important to recognize the limitations associated with using the tax code to provide income relief , particularly for low - income individuals with limited tax liability .

for individuals without a tax liability , refundable tax incentives are an option .

given the administrative problems oftentimes associated with using the tax code to provide aid , direct spending might be a more efficient mechanism for distributing aid .

many of the options presented below were used in the wake of hurricane katrina .

prior to 2005 , the use of tax policy as a tool for disaster relief was relatively limited .

many of the policy options below represent tools that have been used to assist victims of natural disasters .

tax policy can be evaluated using the concepts of economic equity and economic efficiency .

the concept of equity in economics can be further assessed by utilizing the concepts of vertical equity and horizontal equity .

vertical equity refers to the notion that those with a greater ability to pay should pay more .

horizontal equity suggests that those in a similar position should be treated the same by the tax code .

economic efficiency refers to the distribution of output , where the economically efficient level is the one that maximizes possible output given a set of inputs .

the following paragraphs provide an economic analysis , using the concepts of economic equity and efficiency , of the tax relief options addressed above .

evaluating tax relief policy options from a vertical equity perspective underscores the difficulty inherent in using the tax code to help the poor .

the current structure of the casualty loss deduction , as an itemized deduction , tends to benefit the higher income as higher income taxpayers are more likely to itemize .

further , deductions are more valuable to taxpayers in higher tax brackets .

low income individuals are also less likely to have savings .

thus , tax policy options that allow individuals to access retirement savings in times of disaster favor those that have savings , who tend to have higher income , and may be less likely to require additional assistance .

finally , incentives designed to promote charitable giving also tend to favor those with higher incomes .

reducing the tax burden for those that give tends to reduce taxes paid by the wealthy .

this is particularly concerning if the tax breaks lead to little additional giving , a conclusion that tends to be supported empirically .

given the difficulty in using the tax code to provide relief to those least well off , direct aid may be a more effective relief mechanism , especially if vertical equity is a primary concern .

from a horizontal equity perspective , one question to ask is to what extent victims of the gulf of mexico oil spill deserve distinct tax treatment .

victims of the oil spill are likely to suffer losses , and if those losses are less than fully compensated , special tax treatment may be warranted .

there are concerns , however , that providing victims of the oil spill with special tax benefits , different from what is awarded to victims of other similar events , may violate notions of horizontal equity .

specifically , if victims of the bp oil spill are provided an enhanced casualty loss deduction , extended nol carrybacks , or allowed greater access to retirement savings , horizontal equity would suggest that all victims of similar disasters be treated the same .

the size and scope of the bp disaster has resulted in substantial national attention .

it is conceivable that victims of relatively small , localized disasters may suffer similar losses in income and property , but not be awarded federal benefits due to limited awareness of the disaster .

thus , horizontal equity would suggest that should special tax treatment be provided to victims of the bp oil spill , measures should be taken to ensure that victims suffering similar consequences from other disasters be awarded the same special tax preferences .

the efficiency of tax incentives can be evaluated according to how much of the intended behavior the tax break causes , or the marginal impact of the incentive .

the marginal impact of a tax break should be evaluated relative to the inframarginal impact .

the inframarginal impact of a tax subsidy is the benefits given to individuals whose behavior is unchanged by the policy .

in the case of charitable giving , the inframarginal impact is the tax savings given to those who would have donated if the charitable tax incentives had not been adopted .

efficient tax incentives are ones where the marginal impact is large relative to the inframarginal impact .

extended nol carryback periods and enhanced access to retirement funds are both policies that potentially benefit those that might not necessarily need the benefit , resulting in inframarginal effects .

this may be more of a concern for the extended nol carryback period , where refunds paid result in federal revenue losses .

to address this concern , the allowance of nol carrybacks should be targeted at groups in need of the income smoothing option .

since allowing enhanced retirement savings to those that may not necessarily need the funds has a small effect on federal revenues , there are fewer efficiency concerns associated with this policy option .

tax incentives for charitable giving following natural disasters have been criticized for being economically inefficient .

since tax incentives generally are relatively ineffective at inducing additional giving , the federal revenue losses associated with the incentive serve to benefit those who would have given in absence of the incentive .

the bp oil spill challenges policymakers to evaluate ( 1 ) to what extent the oil spill is a disaster that merits federal aid , through tax relief beyond existing tax provisions or otherwise ; versus ( 2 ) to what extent bp should be expected and required to fully compensate those individuals for losses .

an oil spill of national significance necessarily demands substantial federal , state , and local resources to contain and clean up the disaster .

given the breadth and complexity of the damages , is it reasonable to expect that bp will be able to effectively compensate individuals and businesses for the damages caused ? .

if not , relief through the tax code may be one of many policy tools the federal government chooses as a vehicle for providing assistance to oil spill victims .

a number of bills have been introduced in both the house and the senate that would provide tax relief to victims of the oil spill .

some of this legislation targets the tax treatment of disaster payments , while other proposals seek to enact a broader package of tax - related relief measures .

a number of bills have been introduced in the house that would provide some form of tax relief to oil spill victims .

the oil spill tax relief act of 2010 ( h.r .

5598 ) would require that any compensation provided by bp to an oil spill victim be treated as a qualified disaster payment , and thereby excluded from gross income for tax purposes .

the gulf coast access to savings act of 2010 ( h.r .

5602 ) would allow for up to $50,000 in tax - free distributions from retirement plans for those sustaining economic losses resulting from the oil spill , provide tax incentives for the use of distributions by affected individuals making home purchases , and increase the amount that may be borrowed from an employer plan without penalty to $100,000 .

both h.r .

5598 and h.r .

5602 have been referred to the house committee on ways and means .

the gulf oil spill recovery act of 2010 ( h.r .

5699 ) would make various tax relief measures available for oil spill victims .

this legislation would create a recovery zone , in which businesses are allowed increased depreciation and expensing allowances , allowed to issue tax - exempt and tax credit bonds , claim a tax credit for wages paid to employees , and a five - year nol carryback period .

additional low - income housing tax credits and new markets tax credits would also be made available .

individuals in the recovery zone would be allowed tax - free withdrawals of up to $100,000 from retirement plans .

in an effort to promote charitable giving , limitations on the deduction for charitable contributions would be suspended for donations to organizations involved in oil spill relief efforts .

h.r .

5699 has been referred to the house committee on ways and means .

in the senate , the gulf coast oil recovery zone tax relief and economic recovery act ( s. 3934 ) , would provide various forms of tax relief for gulf oil spill victims .

like h.r .

5699 , s. 3934 would create a recovery zone and provide similar tax relief measures .

s. 3934 would adopt a number of measures discussed in detail above .

specifically , ( 1 ) oil - spill - related losses would be allowed a five - year nol carryback , ( 2 ) individuals would be awarded enhanced access to retirement accounts , and ( 3 ) a work opportunity tax credit ( wotc ) would be available for firms hiring individuals living in the affected region .

s. 3934 would also provide additional tax relief for certain businesses making qualifying investments in the region .

specifically , businesses would not be required to recognize as income insurance or other claims payments reinvested in the affected region .

eligible investments include those made in commercial or charter fishing businesses , hotels , recreation , entertainment , or restaurants located in the recovery zone .

additional tax relief provisions included in s. 3934 include favorable depreciation and expensing allowances for recovery zone property and tax - exempt bond financing .

a number of provisions in s. 3934 appeared in a gulf coast recovery plan released by gulf coast senators in july 2009 .

one feature of this earlier plan , not included in s. 3934 , is the proposed gulf coast hotel tax holiday .

under this proposal , affected states could reduce tourism related taxes in an effort to attract visitors .

the federal government would reimburse state and local governments for forgone revenue .

