u nder federal law , local governments are compensated through various programs due to the presence of federal lands within their borders .

federally owned lands cannot be taxed by state or local governments but may create demand for services from state or local entities , such as fire protection , police cooperation , or longer roads to skirt the property .

counties with national forest lands or certain bureau of land management ( blm ) lands have historically received a percentage of agency revenues , primarily from timber sales .

in the 1990s , timber sales declined substantially from the historic levels in the late 1980s — by more than 90% in some areas — which had led to substantially reduced payments to the counties .

congress enacted the secure rural schools and community self - determination act of 2000 ( srs ) to provide a temporary , optional system to supplant the revenue - sharing programs for the national forests managed by the forest service ( fs ) in the department of agriculture and for certain public lands administered by the blm in the department of the interior .

the law authorizing these payments ( srs ) originally expired at the end of fy2006 but was extended an additional nine years through several reauthorizations: the 109 th congress considered the program , but did not enact reauthorizing legislation .

the 110 th congress extended the payments for one year through fy2007 , and it then enacted legislation to reauthorize the program for four years with declining payments and to modify the formula for allocating the payments .

the 112 th congress extended the program for one more year through fy2012 and amended the program to slow the decline in payments .

the 113 th congress again approved a one - year extension , reauthorizing the program through fy2013 , but did not reauthorize the program for fy2014 prior to its expiration .

after fs and blm distributed the revenue - sharing payment for fy2014 , the 114 th congress reauthorized srs for two years ( through fy2015 ) and required the agencies to issue the fy2014 srs payment within 45 days of enactment .

srs expired at the end of fy2015 ; payments were disbursed after the fiscal year ended , so the fy2015 payment was made in fy2016 .

this report provides background information on fs and blm revenue - sharing and srs payments and describes the issues that congress has debated and may continue to debate in the 115 th congress .

in 1908 , congress directed fs to begin paying 25% of its gross receipts to states for use on roads and schools in the counties where national forests are located .

receipts come from sales , leases , rentals , or other fees for using national forest lands or resources ( eg , timber sales , recreation fees , and communication site leases ) .

this mandatory spending program was enacted to compensate local governments for the tax - exempt status of the national forests , but the statutory compensation rate ( 10% of gross receipts in 1906 and 1907 ; 25% of gross receipts since ) was not discussed in the 1906-1908 debates .

this revenue - or receipt - sharing program is called forest service payments to states ( also referred to as the 1908 payment , or the 25% payment ) .

the states have no discretion in assigning the funds to the county .

fs determines the amount to be allocated to each county based on the national forest acreage in each county and provides that amount to the state .

the states cannot retain any of the funds ; they must be passed through to local governmental entities for use at the county level ( but not necessarily to county governments themselves ) .

each state must spend the funds on road and school programs , and state law sets forth how the payments are to be allocated between road and school projects .

the state laws differ widely , generally ranging from 30% to 100% for school programs , with a few states providing substantial local discretion on the split .

congress has also enacted numerous programs to share receipts from blm lands for various types of resource use and from various classes of land .

one program — the oregon and california ( o&c ) payments — accounts for more than 95% of blm receipt - sharing .

the o&c payments are made to the counties in western oregon containing the revested oregon and california grant lands that were returned to federal ownership for failure of the states to fulfill the terms of the grant .

the o&c counties receive 50% of the receipts from these lands .

these mandatory payments go directly to the counties for any local governmental purposes .

concerns about , and proposals to alter , fs revenue - sharing payments also typically include the o&c payments , because both are substantial payments derived largely from timber receipts .

congress , counties receiving srs funding , and other observers have raised three principal concerns about fs and o&c revenue - sharing programs .

these are the decline in fs and o&c receipts due to the decline in timber sales , the annual uncertainty about payment amounts , and the linkage between timber revenue and county payments .

in 2000 , congress enacted the secure rural schools and community self - determination act ( srs ) after extensive debates and several different bill versions .

 ( see appendix b for an overview of historic proposals to change the revenue - sharing system prior to the enactment of srs. ) .

the act established an optional alternative payment system for fy2001-fy2006 .

at each county's discretion , the states with fs land and counties with o&c land received either the regular receipt - sharing payments or the srs payment .

each county's srs payment was calculated as 100% of the average of the three highest payments between fy1986 and fy1999 .

title i of the act directed that counties receiving an srs payment less than $100,000 under the alternative system could distribute the entire payment to roads and schools in the same manner as the 25% payments .

however , counties receiving over $100,000 under the alternative system were required to spend 15% - 20% of the payment on either ( 1 ) federal land projects proposed by local resource advisory committees and approved by the appropriate secretary ( secretary of the interior or secretary of agriculture ) if the projects met specified criteria , including compliance with all applicable laws and regulations and with resource management and other plans ( identified in title ii of the act ) or ( 2 ) certain county programs ( specified in title iii of the act ) .

funds needed to achieve the full payment were mandatory spending , and came first from agency receipts ( excluding deposits to special accounts and trust funds ) and then from "any amounts in the treasury not otherwise appropriated. .

srs was originally enacted as a temporary program , expiring after payments were made for fy2006 .

however , srs has been reauthorized five times , extending the payments an additional nine years ( see table 2 ) .

the following sections describe each reauthorization process and any enacted program modifications .

options under congressional consideration include reauthorizing srs , with or without modifications , implementing other legislative proposals to address the county payments , or taking no action ( thus continuing the revenue - based system that took effect upon the program's expiration ) .

seven issues commonly have been raised about compensating counties for the tax - exempt status of federal lands: the geographic distribution of the payments ; the lands covered ; the basis for compensation ; the source of funds ; the authorized and required uses of the payments ; and the duration of the new system .

in addition , any new mandatory spending in excess of the baseline that would result in an increase in the deficit may be subject to budget rules such as congressional pay - as - you - go ( paygo ) rules , which generally require budgetary offsets .

although srs has previously been authorized as mandatory spending , congress might consider funding the program through the regular annual discretionary appropriations process .

the original srs authorization — and most subsequent reauthorizations — have been for mandatory spending .

one policy issue concerns legislation with mandatory spending that would increase federal expenditures , and whether such spending should be offset so as not to increase the deficit .

congress has enacted a set of budget rules requiring that most legislation that creates new or extends existing mandatory spending ( in excess of the baseline ) be balanced — offset — by increases in receipts or decreases in other spending .

congress may choose to waive or set aside these rules in particular instances , but the increased deficit spending remains a consideration .

legislation to reauthorize srs ( with or without other modifications ) , or to enact a different alternative , would require an offset — increased revenues or decreased spending from other mandatory spending accounts — or a waiver to the budget rules .

in 2000 , congress provided such a waiver by including a specific type of provision , called a reserve fund , in the budget resolution .

in 2006 , to fund a six - year reauthorization of srs , the bush administration proposed selling some federal lands .

to fund the o&c payments , the blm would have accelerated its land sales under section 203 of the federal land policy and management act of 1976 ( flpma ; 43 u.s.c .

§1713 ) .

for the fs payments , estimated at $800 million , the fs would have sold approximately 300,000 acres of national forest land .

this would have required legislation , as the fs currently has only very narrow authority to sell any lands .

the administration offered draft legislation to authorize these land sales , but no bill to authorize that level of national forest land sales was introduced in the 109 th congress .

instead , congress again included a reserve fund for srs payments in the budget resolution .

in 2007 , the bush administration again proposed selling national forest lands to fund a phase - out of srs payments , with half of the land sale revenues to be used for other programs ( including land acquisition and conservation education ) .

again , no legislation to authorize national forest land sales was introduced .

another issue for congress is the geographic allocation of the srs and pilt payments ( see figure 3 ) .

table 3 shows the payments for fy2014 that were made in fy2015 .

the only blm srs payment is made to oregon for the o&c lands , and oregon also receives the largest fs srs payment .

with a total srs payment of approximately $94 million , oregon received nearly one - third of the total srs payments made in fy2015 .

the next - largest srs payments are in california and idaho , which both received just under 10% of the total payment that year .

pilt payments are more evenly distributed , with no state receiving more than 10% of the total payments .

srs includes payments only for national forests and the o&c lands .

these compensation programs provide substantial funding for the specified lands , but other federal lands that are exempt from state and local taxation receive little or nothing .

the easiest comparison is with the counties that contain national grasslands , which receive 25% of net receipts and were excluded from srs .

both forests and grasslands are part of the national forest system , although the laws authorizing their establishment differ .

however , it is unclear why national forest counties are compensated with 25% of gross receipts and were protected from declines in receipts under srs , whereas national grassland counties are compensated with 25% of net receipts and did not receive the option of receiving srs payments .

more significantly , many other tax - exempt federal lands provide little compensation to local governments .

the blm has numerous compensation programs , but generally the payments are quite small .

 ( the o&c payments account for about 95% of blm compensation payments , but o&c lands are only about 1% of blm lands. ) .

the national park service has two small compensation programs related to public schooling of park employees' children at two parks .

pilt provides some compensation for most federal lands , but many lands — inactive military bases , indian trust lands , and certain wildlife refuge lands , for example — are excluded , and the national forests and o&c lands get pilt payments in addition to other compensation .

in 1992 , the office of technology assessment recommended "fair and consistent compensation for the tax exempt status of national forest lands and activities. .

congress could consider several options related to extending a compensation program to all tax - exempt federal lands , although determining a fair and consistent compensation level likely would generate significant debate .

the legislative histories of the agriculture appropriations acts establishing the fs payments to states ( the last of which , enacted on may 23 , 1908 , made the payments permanent ) indicate that the intent was to substitute receipt - sharing for local property taxation , but no rationale was discussed for the level chosen ( 10% in 1906 and 1907 ; 25% in 1908 and since ) .

similarly , the rationale was not clearly explained or discussed for the reagan tax - equivalency proposal , for the owl payments ( a declining percent of the historical average ) , or for the legislation debated and enacted by the 106 th congress ( generally the average of the three highest payments during a specified historical period ) .

the proposals' intents were generally to reduce ( reagan administration ) or increase ( more recently ) the payments .

the geographic basis has been raised as a potential problem for fs payments .

fs revenue - sharing payments ( 25% payments ) are made to the states , but are calculated for each county with land in each national forest .

depending on the formula used — the average of selected historical payments from each national forest or to each county or each state — the calculations could result in different levels of payments in states with multiple national forests .

 ( this is not an issue for o&c lands , because the o&c payments are made directly to the counties. ) .

as noted above , the fs revenue - sharing payments ( 25% payments ) are permanently appropriated from agency receipts and were established prior to federal income taxes and substantial federal oil and gas royalties .

most of the proposals for change also would establish mandatory payments ; lacking a specified funding source , funds would come from the general treasury .

srs directed payments first from receipts , then from the general treasury .

figure 4 shows the breakdown of fs srs funding between receipts and the general treasury .

the amount of funding that came from the treasury fluctuated in part due to the declining full funding level but also due to fluctuations in the level offset by receipts .

critics are concerned about the continued availability of general treasury funds , given the current fiscal climate and some members' desire to reduce government spending .

on the other hand , recipients of these funds argue that continuing treasury funding is fair compensation for the presence of fs lands in their jurisdiction .

another concern for some is that retaining the linkage between agency receipts ( eg , from timber sales ) and county payments ( albeit less directly than for the 25% payments ) still encourages counties to support timber sales over other fs uses .

compared to the revenue - sharing programs , srs modified how the counties could use the payments by requiring ( for counties with at least $100,000 in annual payments ) that 15% - 20% of the payments be used for other specified purposes: certain local governmental costs ( in title iii ) ; federal land projects recommended by local advisory committees and approved by the secretary ( under title ii ) ; or federal land projects as determined by the secretary ( under §402 ) .

use of the funds for federal land projects has been touted as "reinvesting" agency receipts in federal land management , but opponents argue that this "re - links" county benefits with agency receipt - generating activities and reduces funding for local schools and roads .

the forest counties payments committee recommended granting local governments more flexibility in their use of the payments .

the committee also recommended that the federal government prohibit the states from adjusting their education funding allocations because of the fs payments .

in practice , such a prohibition could be difficult to determine and enforce .

the o&c payments are available for any local governmental purpose .

other policy questions that arise from the srs payments include ( 1 ) how often congress should review the payment systems ( these or any other county compensation programs ) to assess whether they still function as intended and ( 2 ) which options , if any , congress might consider ( eg , a sunset provision ) to induce future congresses to undertake such a review .

the fs revenue - sharing payments and the o&c payments are permanently authorized .

srs was originally enacted as a six - year program that expired on september 30 , 2006 , but was extended an additional nine years through five separate reauthorizations .

as noted earlier , srs expired on september 30 , 2015 , with the final payment made in fy2016 .

the last three reauthorizations have been for one or two years .

the annual uncertainty about the continuation and funding level of the program concerns those interested in providing a consistent and predictable payment for local governments and also may concern those interested in reviewing federal spending more broadly .

appendix a. srs payments in fy2006 and fy2009 as described in the text ( under " four - year extension through fy2011 enacted in the 110th congress " ) , p.l .

110-343 modified the srs payment formula to include federal acreage and relative income in each county , as well as transition payments in some states .

the result was a change in the payments and the allocation of total payments in the modified formula .

these changes are shown in table 2 .

note , however , that the change in the payment formula led some counties that had chosen 25% payments for fy2006 to opt for srs payments for fy2009 , and vice versa .

some of the increase in srs payments in fy2009 is due to more counties opting for srs payments in some states , such as michigan , new hampshire , ohio , puerto rico , and wisconsin .

in at least one state — pennsylvania — a portion of the decline is due to some counties opting for 25% payments in fy2009 .

appendix b .

historical proposals to change the revenue - sharing system concerns about the fs and blm programs have led to various proposals over the years to alter the compensation system .

most have focused on some form of tax equivalency — compensating the states and counties at roughly the same level as if the lands were privately owned and managed .

many consider this to be a valid approach for fairly and consistently compensating state and county governments .

however , most also note the difficulty in developing a tax equivalency compensation system , because counties and states use a wide variety of mechanisms to tax individuals and corporations — property taxes , sales taxes , income taxes , excise taxes , severance taxes , and more .

thus , developing a single federal compensation system for the tax - exempt status of federal lands may be very difficult if not impossible .

in his 1984 budget request , president reagan proposed replacing the receipt - sharing programs with a tax equivalency system , with a guaranteed minimum payment .

the counties argued that the proposal was clearly intended to reduce payments , noting that the budget request projected savings of $40.5 million ( 12% ) under the proposal .

the change was not enacted .

the fy1986 fs budget request included a proposal to change the payments to 25% of net receipts ( after deducting administrative costs ) .

legislation to effect this change was not offered .

in 1993 , president clinton proposed a 10-year payment program to offset the decline in fs and o&c timber sales , and thus payments , resulting from efforts to protect various resources and values including northern spotted owls in the pacific northwest .

congress enacted this program in section 13982 of the 1993 omnibus budget reconciliation act ( p.l .

103-66 ) .

these "owl" payments began in 1994 at 85% of the fy1986-fy1990 average payments , declining by 3 percentage points annually , to 58% in 2003 , but with payments after fy1999 at the higher of either this formula or the standard payment .

in his fy1999 budget request , president clinton announced that he would propose legislation "to stabilize the payments" by extending the owl payments formula to all national forests .

the proposal would have directed annual payments from "any funds in the treasury not otherwise appropriated," at the higher of ( 1 ) the fy1997 payment , or ( 2 ) 76% of the fy1986-fy1990 average payment .

this approach would have increased payments in areas with large payment declines while decreasing payments in other areas , as well as eliminating annual fluctuations in payments and de - linking the payments from receipts .

the administration's proposed legislation was not introduced in congress .

the fy2000 and fy2001 fs budget requests contained similar programs , but no legislative proposals were offered .

the national association of counties ( naco ) proposed an alternative in 1999 .

the naco proposal would have provided the counties with the higher of ( 1 ) the standard payment , or ( 2 ) a replacement payment determined by the three highest consecutive annual payments for each county between fy1986 and fy1995 , indexed for inflation .

naco also proposed "a long - term solution ... to allow for the appropriate , sustainable , and environmentally sensitive removal of timber from the national forests" by establishing local advisory councils .

the naco approach would have maintained or increased the payments and might have reduced the annual fluctuations , and would likely have retained the linkage between receipts and payments in at least some areas .

appendix c. fy2013 sequestration issues section 302 of the budget control act ( bca ) required the president to sequester , or cancel , budgetary resources for fy2013 , in the event that congress did not enact a specified deficit reduction by january 15 , 2012 .

congress did not enact such deficit reduction by that date , and on march 1 , 2013 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) determined the amount of the total sequestration for fy2013 to be approximately $85 billion .

under the bca , half of the total reduction for fy2013 was allocated to defense spending , and the other half to non - defense spending .

within each half , the reductions were further allocated between discretionary appropriations and direct spending .

discretionary appropriations are defined in the bca as budgetary resources provided in annual appropriations acts .

in contrast , direct spending was defined to include budget authority provided by laws other than appropriations acts .

the bca further required omb to calculate a uniform percentage reduction to be applied to each program , project , or activity within the direct spending category .

for the direct spending category , omb determined this percentage to be 5.1% for fy2013 .

section 102 ( d ) ( 3 ) ( e ) of srs directed that payments for a fiscal year were to be made to the state as soon as practicable after the end of that fiscal year , meaning that the fy2012 payment was made in fy2013 .

because the authority to make these payments is not provided in an annual appropriations act , such payments are not discretionary spending for purposes of the bca .

these payments were classified as non - defense , direct spending for purposes of sequestration .

the bca exempts a number of programs from sequestration ; however , the payments under srs were not identified in the legislation as exempt .

consequently , these payments were subject to sequestration as non - defense , direct spending .

however , blm and fs managed the sequestration of the fy2013 payments in different ways .

blm sequestration of srs funds blm issues srs payments only for the o&c lands in oregon .

in february 2013 , blm distributed $36 million to the 18 o&c counties in oregon for fy2012 srs payments .

however , doi had held back 10% of the scheduled payments across all three titles in anticipation of the possibility of sequestration .

the reduction to doi's srs program required by sequestration was 5.1% of the total payment , or $2.0 million .

since the sequestered amount was less than the amount withheld , doi - blm owed an additional srs payment for the difference .

in may 2013 , blm distributed the remaining 4.9% of the payment , resulting in a total of $38 million for the srs payment to the o&c counties for fy2012 .

forest service sequestration of srs funds the forest service distributed the full fy2012 srs payments in january and february 2013 , without withholding any amount in preparation for the potential sequester order .

on march 19 , 2013 , the forest service announced it would seek to recover from the states the 5.1% of the payments that were subject to sequestration .

in letters sent to each affected governor , the forest service outlined two repayment options and asked for the states to respond by april 19 , 2013 , with how they planned to repay .

invoices for repayment were not included .

in addition to repaying the 5.1% , the fs offered the states the option of having the full sequestered amount taken out of title ii funds ( for those states with enough title ii money ) .

three states — alaska , washington , and wyoming — publicly indicated their intention not to repay the srs funds .

in an april 16 , 2013 , hearing before the senate committee on energy and natural resources , the fs indicated that invoices for the repayment would be sent in late april 2013 .

on august 5 , 2013 , the forest service sent additional letters which included invoices for the repayment to the governors of the 18 states with insufficient title ii money to cover the sequestered amount .

the invoices outlined three options for the affected states to take within 30 days: pay the debt in full ; agree to a payment plan ; or petition for administrative review of the debt .

the invoices also included a notice of indebtedness to the u.s. forest service and intent to collect by administrative offset , which describes the basis of the indebtedness and the forest service's intent to offset future payments — without assessing penalties — from future forest service and department of agriculture state payments .

as of may 21 , 2014 , two states had remitted an srs sequester - related payment — new hampshire paid $27,884.17 and maine paid $3,648 — and no collection efforts have been initiated by the forest service or treasury department in the remaining 16 states .

on august 20 , 2013 , the forest service sent additional letters to the governors of the 22 states that had sufficient title ii money to cover the sequestered amount .

the letters informed the governors that the title ii allocations were reduced by the sequestered amount .

to date , the last congressional action on the issue was a house committee on natural resources oversight hearing on january 14 , 2014 .

