the post - world war ii era has been characterized by a global movement toward liberalizing trade and creating frameworks under which trade disputes can be avoided and resolved .

in particular , the trade agreements of the last half - century can be seen as adopting the view that government bodies need a global legal framework to ensure that they effectively conform their countries' policies and laws with their citizens' interests .

legal theorists posit that trade policy failure , in both the global and domestic arenas , as well as inequitable power dynamics among countries engaged in trade negotiations , are the products of a legal architecture that does not sufficiently discipline how governments represent their citizens' interests .

in this vein , the international trade law regime has attempted to strengthen its enforcement mechanism over time to ensure that national governments comply with trade law despite shifting domestic pressures .

as international trade law has developed , there has been interplay between domestic and global trade law .

initially , international trade agreements focused on tariffs , but , over time , they have broadened to encompass aspects of domestic policymaking and establish fairly stringent dispute settlement mechanisms .

this interplay , however , has led to criticism that trade agreements infringe national sovereignty and autonomy by ( 1 ) limiting the kinds of policy decisions a country can make and ( 2 ) giving international trade dispute settlement bodies too much power to shape and constrain domestic law .

this report provides an overview of the legal framework that governs trade - related measures .

this framework is composed of both international agreements and domestic laws .

the particular agreements and statutes selected for this report are those that are most commonly implicated by u.s. trade interests and policy .

this report is not intended to be a comprehensive review of trade law .

often , a single trade issue , such as dumping ( the sale of goods in foreign markets at lower prices than in the domestic market ) , is governed by both international agreements and federal laws .

accordingly , this report first discusses international trade agreements and then turns to domestic law .

the united states has international trade obligations under ( 1 ) the world trade organization ( wto ) agreements , which include the general agreement on trade and tariffs ( gatt ) and other "covered agreements" ; ( 2 ) its own free trade agreements ; and ( 3 ) other international agreements with narrower policy goals , such as the conservation of natural resources .

the scope of this report , however , is limited to obligations incurred under agreements that seek to liberalize international trade .

in the wto context , trade agreements are categorized as either multilateral ( accepted by all wto members as a condition of membership ) or plurilateral ( accepted by only some wto members ) .

other free trade agreements may be classified as bilateral agreements ( which bind only two countries ) and regional agreements ( which bind countries within a discrete region of the world ) .

no matter their classification , most trade agreements have a corresponding body of domestic law .

in the united states , international trade law is developed and implemented through a joint effort between congress and the executive .

consistent with its constitutional authority , the congress enacts trade laws , which the executive implements and enforces .

however , in the context of international trade agreements , the roles can seem reversed , with the executive negotiating the agreement and the congress "implementing" it through legislation .

sections 301 through 310 of the trade act of 1974 ( commonly referred to as "section 301" ) require the ustr to impose trade sanctions on foreign countries that either ( 1 ) violate trade agreements , ( 2 ) have acts , policies , or practices that are inconsistent with a trade agreement , or ( 3 ) have acts , policies , or practices that are unjustifiable and burden u.s. commerce .

section 301 also gives the ustr the option of imposing trade sanctions on foreign countries that maintain acts , policies , or practices that are unreasonable or discriminatory and burden or restrict u.s. commerce .

the ustr is the only body authorized to challenge foreign trade practice on behalf of the united states ( or united states industries ) under this law .

before imposing mandatory sanctions under section 301 , the ustr engages in a two - step process .

first , the ustr must determine under section 304 ( a ) ( 1 ) whether a foreign country's acts or policies ( 1 ) violate u.s. rights under any trade agreement ; ( 2 ) are inconsistent with a trade agreement ; or ( 3 ) are unjustifiable and burden or restrict u.s. commerce .

if the ustr determines that the country's acts or policies fall into one of those categories , then the ustr may , subject to any specific direction of the president , ( 1 ) suspend or withdraw benefits of u.s. concessions under the trade agreement ; ( 2 ) impose duties or other restrictions on the foreign country's goods or services ; or ( 3 ) enter a binding agreement with the foreign country that commits it to eliminating or phasing out the burden or practice in question or to provide the u.s. with compensatory trade benefits .

for example , in the fall of 2010 the united steelworkers filed a petition with the ustr alleging that china employed a wide range of wto - inconsistent policies that unfairly protected and supported their domestic producers in the green energy sector .

the ustr responded by initiating an investigation and subsequently requested consultations with china , alleging that that china provided prohibited subsidies to wind turbine manufacturers .

in june 2011 , the united states and china reached an agreement , and china terminated the subsidy program at issue .

the ustr is not required to act , however , if a wto panel or dispute settlement ruling finds that u.s. rights have not been violated .

the ustr is also not required to act if it finds ( 1 ) that the foreign country is taking satisfactory measures to grant u.s. trade agreement rights ; ( 2 ) that the foreign country is taking satisfactory measures to either eliminate the practice , provide an imminent solution to it , or provide satisfactory compensatory benefits ; or ( 3 ) that taking the action would cause serious harm to the u.s. national security .

any interested person may file a petition with the ustr requesting that action be taken under section 301 .

the ustr must review the petitioner's allegations and publish , in the federal register , notice of the determination and a summary of the reasons behind it .

the ustr can also initiate investigations to determine whether a matter is actionable .

title vii of the tariff act of 1930 governs the process by which the united states decides to impose countervailing duties ( cvds ) in response to subsidies by foreign countries that either cause or threaten material injury to u.s. industry .

cvds are additional import duties imposed on the subsidized imports .

title vii creates two different sets of rules: one set governs the imposition of cvds on goods from countries that are part of the agreement on subsidies and countervailing duties ( scm agreement ) and the other set governs the imposition of cvds on countries that are not part of the scm agreement .

the u.s. international trade commission and the u.s. department of commerce ( through the international trade administration ) jointly investigate allegations of countervailable subsidies .

their investigations commence when an interested party files a countervailing duty petition with both ita and the itc alleging that an industry in the united states is materially injured or threatened by reason of the sale of subsidized imports in the united states at less than their fair value .

the petition must be filed "by or on behalf of the industry," meaning that the domestic producers or workers who support the petition must account for at least 25% of the total production of the domestic like product and for more than 50% of the production of the domestic like product produced by that portion of the industry expressing support for the petition .

interested parties may file both antidumping and countervailing duty petitions involving the same imported merchandise .

both the ita and the itc are willing to review a petition before it is filed to enable the petitioner to learn about any deficiencies in the petition that might delay or prevent the initiation of an investigation .

once a petition is received , the ita and the itc enter the first of two rounds of the investigation .

in this first round , the agencies must make preliminary determinations on the existence of both a material injury to domestic industry and of a countervailable subsidy by the foreign country .

the itc's preliminary determination evaluates whether there is a "reasonable indication" of a material injury , that is , whether the domestic industry is materially injured or threatened with material injury or whether its establishment is materially retarded .

however , the itc will not engage in this preliminary analysis if the allegedly subsidizing country is not a member of the wto and therefore entitled , under the scm agreement , to an injury determination .

if , on the other hand , the itc finds that there is no reasonable indication of material injury , the investigation is terminated and the ita does not continue its own preliminary investigation .

the ita's preliminary determination evaluates whether there is a reasonable basis to believe or suspect that a countervailable subsidy is being provided with respect to the subject merchandise .

if the ita and the itc reach affirmative determinations , namely that there is a reasonable basis to believe the country being investigated is providing countervailable subsidy that is causing a material injury to the domestic industry , the importers of the targeted merchandise must post bond or provide some other security for the estimated subsidy for all entries of the subject merchandise .

in addition , at that point , the investigation enters the second round in which both agencies must make final determinations .

the ita makes its determination first .

the ita must determine whether or not a countervailable subsidy is being provided with respect to the merchandise .

following the ita's final determination , the itc determines whether the domestic industry is materially injured or threatened with material injury or whether its establishment in the united states is materially retarded by reason of imports , sales , or likely sales of merchandise that the ita has deemed subsidized .

however , as with the preliminary injury determination , the itc will not engage in this final analysis if the allegedly subsidizing country is not a member of the wto .

if the two agencies' final determinations conclude that a countervailable subsidy was provided with the effect of causing or threatening material injury to a domestic industry or its establishment , then , upon publishing its finding , the department of commerce issues a countervailing duty order .

the duty levied in that order must be equal to the estimated amount of the government or other public subsidization .

the u.s. customs and border protection is then required to collect cash deposits of cvd duties on the merchandise in question when it enters the united states .

the cash deposits represent an estimate of the actual duties owed .

the final amount of the duties collected will be either the cash deposit , or , if an administrative review is requested , the duty established by that review .

generally , the final duty is determined by an administrative review .

the process by which the united states investigates allegations of dumping — that is , allegations that a foreign manufacturer charges a price for its product that is "less than its fair value" — is similar to the process discussed above for investigating allegations of countervailable subsidies .

the procedures for assessing and collecting antidumping ( ad ) duties are prescribed in title vii of the tariff act of 1930 .

any interested party may petition the department of commerce to investigate allegations of dumping , and these investigations may also be self - initiated by commerce .

the petitions must be filed "by or on behalf of the industry. .

like cvd investigations , ad investigations are jointly administered over the course of two rounds by the department of commerce and the itc .

like countervailable subsidy investigations , the first round of an antidumping investigation requires preliminary determinations by the ita and the itc .

if the itc determines that there is a reasonable indication of material injury , the ita assesses whether there is a reasonable basis to believe or suspect that the merchandise is being sold , or is likely to be sold , at less than its fair value .

predictably , the second round is the round in which the ita and itc make their final determinations on these same questions .

as under cvd law , if both the ita and itc make affirmative determinations on these questions , then the ita issues an order instructing the u.s. customs and border protection to collect cash deposits of the ad duties on the merchandise in question when it enters the united states .

antidumping duties are based on the "weighted average dumping margin" as determined by the ita under 19 u.s.c .

section 1677f - 1 .

in determining the size of a dumping margin for a particular product , the department of commerce has historically used a practice known as "zeroing" in its administrative reviews .

zeroing entails aggregating the dumping margins for all of the sub - products but assigning the value of zero to a sub - product's dumping margin when its export price exceeds its normal ( home market ) value .

the department of commerce's practice of using zeroing to calculate dumping margins generated complaints from other wto members .

while the court of international trade found that commerce's decision to use "zeroing" to calculate the dumping margin is a reasonable and permissible interpretation of the law , the wto consistently ruled against the u.s. practice — declaring it a violation of u.s. obligations under the wto antidumping agreement .

in february 2012 , the united states announced that it had reached agreements with the european union and japan to end "zeroing. .

pursuant to those agreements , the u.s. department of commerce published a final rule in the federal register pursuant to which the department will abandon zeroing in administrative review , new shipper review , and expedited antidumping reviews of ad orders except , perhaps , where it determines that zeroing would be appropriate .

under this new rule , the department will calculate weighted - average margins of dumping and antidumping duty assessments in a manner that provides offsets for non - dumped comparisons .

the department also adopted a timetable for modifying its practice in five - year "sunset" reviews of ad orders so that it will no longer rely on weighted - average dumping margins that were calculated using methodology deemed wto - inconsistent .

sections 201 through 204 of the trade act of 1974 provide the authority and procedures for the president to take action , including import relief , to facilitate a domestic industry's adjustment to import competition .

successful adjustment to import competition is defined as the domestic industry's ability to successfully compete or its orderly transfer of resources to other productive pursuits .

under section 201 , if the international trade commission determines that an article is being imported in such increased quantities as to be a substantial cause , or threat , of serious injury to the domestic industry producing the like or directly competitive article , the president shall take all appropriate action to facilitate the domestic industry's adjustment .

any entity that is representative of an industry may petition the itc to make this determination .

the law lists several factors , including a relative increase in imports and decline in the proportion of the domestic market supplied by domestic producers , that the itc must consider in making its determination .

however , the statute does not cabin the itc's investigation to those factors .

if the itc makes an affirmative determination , it must recommend the action that would address the serious injury , or threat thereof , to the domestic industry .

specifically , it is authorized to recommend , among other actions: an increase or imposition of a duty , a tariff - rate quota , and a modification or imposition of a quantitative restriction .

upon receiving a report of the itc's determination and recommendations , the president must determine and take "all appropriate and feasible action" to make a positive adjustment to import competition .

the president is required to consider certain factors before determining what action to take .

if the president concludes that there is no appropriate and feasible action to take , the president must transmit to congress a document setting forth the reasons for the decision .

in addition to section 201 , title iv of the trade act of 1974 also provides country - specific safeguards under which the president can provide domestic industries with relief from domestic market disruption .

in advance of china's accession to the wto , for example , the united states and china negotiated two temporary china - specific safeguards , which are scheduled to expire in 2013 .

the first "china safeguard," which is contained in section 421 of the trade act of 1974 , entitles the president to temporarily increase duties or other import restrictions to remedy an import surge that threatens — or causes — market disruption of a domestic producer of a similar product .

in 2009 , the obama administration exercised this authority after determining that imports of new pneumatic car tires from china were being imported into the united states in a fashion that caused or threatened to cause market disruption to domestic car tire products .

accordingly , the president proclaimed an additional duty on certain chinese tires .

although china requested wto consultations with the united states , both the wto panel and appellate body reports supported the u.s. measures .

the second china - specific safeguard , section 422 of the trade act of 1974 , is an import monitoring provision .

it provides that if any wto member other than the united states requests consultations with china under the product - specific safeguard provision , the united states customs service must monitor imports of those same products into the united states .

to date , the president has not taken action pursuant to section 422 .

the harmonized tariff schedule ( hts ) was enacted by the omnibus trade and competitiveness act of 1988 .

it identifies the "rates of duty" for particular classes and articles of imported and exported goods .

the hts is divided into three columns laying out ( 1 ) the rates of duty for products receiving most favored nation treatment , ( 2 ) the rates of duty for products that do not receive that treatment , and ( 3 ) the rates of duty for special duty - free and other preferential rates that are accorded under free trade agreements and trade preference programs .

in addition , there are three different bases for assessing duties: ( 1 ) ad valorem rates , which assess duties by the value of the article ; ( 2 ) specific rates , which assess duties by the weight or quantity of the article ; and ( 3 ) compound rates , which assess duties by a combination of ad valorem and specific rates .

however , chapters 98 and 99 of the hts also include special provisions and modifications that permit , in certain circumstances , duty - free or partial duty - free entry of goods that would otherwise be subject to duty .

among the exceptions to the hts are suspensions or reductions of duties resulting from free trade agreements and other international obligations , from a u.s. tourist's purchases while overseas , and from the application of the generalized system of preferences , discussed below .

title v of the trade act of 1974 , p.l .

93-618 , as amended , governs the u.s. generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) .

the gsp provides non - reciprocal , duty - free tariff treatment to certain products imported from over one hundred designated developing countries .

the gsp originated in dialogues between the developed and the developing world in which the latter successfully pushed for special access to industrial markets .

under the gsp , any united states producer of an article that competes with gsp imports can petition to have a country or particular group of products removed from the program .

similarly , any foreign exporter can petition for product or beneficiary country status in the program .

as discussed below , the president has broad authority to withdraw , suspend , or limit the application of duty free entry under the gsp system .

for example , in 2012 , the united states suspended argentina's eligibility as a beneficiary of the gsp because of the country's failure to pay investor - state arbitration awards to two u.s. firms .

a list of gsp qualified nations and territories is contained in hts general note 4 .

certain countries and categories of countries are statutorily barred from benefitting from the gsp program .

for example , congress has identified eight countries plus the european union member states that are ineligible for the gsp .

other countries prohibited from benefiting from the gsp include , inter alia , communist states that meet certain criteria ; nations that collude with other countries to withhold supplies or resources from international trade or otherwise raise the price of goods in a way that could seriously disrupt the world economy ; countries that have not taken or are not taking steps to afford internationally recognized worker rights to workers ; and countries that have aided or abetted an individual or group that has committed an act of international terrorism .

outside of these bars on eligibility , the president has substantial discretion over which countries and products receive beneficiary status .

in determining whether a country is eligible , the administration must evaluate , inter alia , if that country is upholding workers' rights , protecting intellectual property rights , extending equitable and reasonable access to its markets , reducing trade distorting investment practices ( such as export performance requirements ) , and reducing barriers to trade in services .

although the administration must consider these and other factors in assessing a country's eligibility , the president may determine that a country qualifies for beneficiary status despite having a less desirable record on any one or set of them if the administration finds gsp duty free entry would be in the national economic interest of the united states .

the administration's review of a country's eligibility under the gsp program is ongoing , which allows for disqualification , reinstatement , and graduation of gsp beneficiary nations .

moreover , the president must graduate a beneficiary country from the gsp program if the administration determines that the nation has become a "high income" country .

any country designated as a beneficiary nation under the gsp program that is subsequently disqualified or graduated must receive notice and an explanation of the decision .

in addition , before the president designates a country as a gsp beneficiary , graduates a country , or terminates a country's gsp beneficiary status , the president must notify congress .

the president issues a list of products from each country that qualify for duty free entry .

"import sensitive" products , however , are statutorily ineligible for the gsp program .

these products include most textiles and apparel goods , watches , footwear and other accessories , and certain categories of electronics , steel , and glass products .

in addition to the statutory bars on an import's eligibility for duty - free treatment under the gsp program , there are two "competitive need" limitations .

the first competitive need limitation bars duty - free entry for a product from a beneficiary country if , during the preceding year , that country exported to the u.s. more than a designated dollar volume of that product .

the second bars duty - free entry for a product if , during the preceding year , the beneficiary country exported 50% or more of the total u.s. imports of that particular product .

however , the president has authority to waive these limitations in certain circumstances .

in addition to the u.s. gsp program , the united states has similar non - reciprocal duty - free entry programs for particular regions .

one program is the caribbean basin initiative of 1983 ( cbera ) , which offers substantial duty free entry to nearly all of the islands in , and many countries bordering , the caribbean sea .

a second is the andean trade preference act of 1991 , under which the president is authorized to grant duty free treatment to imports of eligible articles from colombia , peru , bolivia , and ecuador .

a third trade preferences program is contained in the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) , which authorizes the president to designate sub - saharan african countries as beneficiary countries eligible to receive duty - free treatment for certain articles .

although the united states has imposed trade embargoes since the earliest days of the republic , economic sanctions have become an increasingly prevalent feature of u.s. foreign policy in recent decades .

in general , the president imposes these sanctions by issuing an executive order under existing statutory authorities .

however , congress also has a history of enacting legislation that purports to impose sanctions directly or instructs the president as to what actions may or must be taken with respect to imposing sanctions on a particular country or entity .

once imposed , sanctions are implemented primarily by the u.s. department of treasury , office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) and the u.s. department of commerce .

this section briefly discusses two of the most commonly cited sources of the president's statutory authority for country - specific economic sanctions: the trading with the enemy act and the international emergency economic powers act .

however , sanctions , like other trade measures , must be crafted to comply with not only domestic laws but also principles of customary international law and wto obligations .

when the united states imposes unilateral sanctions , it can provoke friction not only with the target country but also with countries that trade with the target country .

in turn , these countries may challenge the sanctions through wto dispute settlement proceedings or other avenues .

the trading with the enemy act ( twea ) was intended to authorize country - specific sanctions during times of war .

congress briefly expanded twea to authorize sanctions during periods of declared national emergency , but , in 1977 , congress relocated the statutory authority for issuing sanctions in national emergencies from twea to the international emergency economic powers act ( ieepa ) .

despite these changes , the powers granted by section 5 of twea have remained relatively stable , and twea remains , at least in part , the statutory basis for some u.s. sanctions programs .

twea authorizes the president to take a wide variety of actions with respect to virtually any transaction that is conducted by a person subject to u.s. jurisdiction or that involves property subject to u.s. jurisdiction and in which the foreign country — or a national thereof — has an interest .

specifically , twea states that the president may [i]vestigate , regulate , direct and compel , nullify , void , prevent , or prohibit any acquisition , holding , withholding , use , transfer , withdraw , transportation , importation or exportation of , or dealing in , or exercising any right , power , or privilege with respect to , or transactions involving , any property in which any foreign country or a national thereof has any interest by any person , or with respect to any property , subject to the jurisdiction of the united states .

twea's prohibitory language is often tracked in the regulations implementing various economic sanctions programs .

however , the president has also exercised his affirmative authorities under twea by , for example , directing and compelling certain foreign assets to be held in interest - bearing accounts .

ieepa replaced twea in 1977 as the source of authority for the president to issue economic sanctions during periods of declared national emergency — as opposed to wartime .

before the president may exercise his ieepa authorities , he must declare a national emergency with respect to the threat involved .

in addition , the president must consult with congress , whenever possible , before declaring a national emergency and regularly while the national emergency remains in force .

the question of whether a threat rises to the level of a national emergency sufficient to trigger ieepa - based sanctions appears to be nonjusticiable .

however , congress may enact — and is required at a certain point to consider — a joint resolution terminating a declaration of national emergency .

although the statutory trigger is different , the powers of ieepa are very similar to those granted by twea .

under ieepa , the president may "investigate , regulate , prevent , or prohibit" virtually any foreign economic transaction , from import or export of goods and currency to transfer of exchange or credit .

the usa patriot act further augmented the president's ieepa authority by vesting him with the additional power to ( 1 ) block property during the pendency of an investigation and ( 2 ) confiscate and vest property of any foreign country or foreign national that has planned , authorized , aided , or engaged in armed hostilities with or attacks against the united states .

ieepa exempts very few international transactions from the president's control , and it grants the president broad authority to prescribe definitions .

for example , the president may define who is a "u.s. person" subject to the prohibitions and restrictions of sanctions issued under ieepa .

over the past few decades , ieepa has become the primary source of authority for country - specific sanctions regimes .

it was first used by president carter in response to the iranian hostage crisis .

similarly , after 9 / 11 , president george w. bush relied on ieepa to block property and property interests of foreign persons who committed acts of terrorism against u.s. nationals or the u.s. economy .

among the sanctions programs currently based , at least in part , on the president's ieepa authority are the u.s. sanctions against myanmar ( burma ) , cote d'ivoire , iran , north korea , sudan , and syria .

