the impoundment control act ( ica ) , enacted as title x of the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 , established a new framework for congressional notification and review of rescissions requested by a president .

the 1974 law requires the president to inform congress of all proposed rescissions in a special message , containing specified information on each proposed rescission .

with regard to congressional oversight of presidential rescissions , the ica provides that the funds must be made available for obligation unless both houses of congress take action to approve a rescission request included in the message received from the president within 45 days of "continuous session" ; days in which either chamber is in recess for more than three days are not counted .

in contrast , "enhanced rescission," briefly available under the line item veto act ( liva ) of 1996 , altered the rescission framework to create a presumption favoring the president .

under enhanced rescission , spending reductions identified in special presidential messages remain permanently cancelled unless congress enacts a disapproval bill .

should the president veto that disapproval bill , a two - thirds majority in both chambers would be needed to override the veto .

as an alternative , "expedited rescission," instead of allowing congress to ignore presidential recommendations for rescissions , facilitates congressional consideration of the rescission messages and an up - or - down vote by at least one house on the president's proposals .

if either house disapproves the request , the other house need take no action because approval by both houses is necessary to make the rescission permanent .

expedited rescission bills focus on procedural changes in congress and typically contain a detailed schedule to ensure immediate introduction of a measure to approve the president's rescission request , prompt reporting by committee or automatic discharge , special limits on floor amendments and debate , and so on .

under expedited rescission , congressional approval is still necessary to rescind the funding , but the fast - track procedures may help to encourage an up - or - down vote on the president's proposal .

the expedited rescission approach has attracted support over the years , because it is generally regarded as transferring less power from congress to the president than most other approaches that would modify the ica framework .

in 1992 , 1993 , and 1994 , the house passed an expedited rescission bill each year .

more recently , in the 109 th congress the house passed h.r .

4890 , the legislative line item veto act , as amended , on june 22 , 2006 .

on january 25 , 2011 , senator mccain , along with senator carper and 21 other original cosponsors , introduced s. 102 , the reduce unnecessary spending act of 2011 , which incorporates the administration's expedited rescission proposal from 2010 and is virtually identical to s. 3474 from the 111 th congress .

on march 11 , 2011 , congressman van hollen introduced a companion bill ( by request ) as h.r .

1043 , with the same title , but which has two slight differences from the senate bills and is virtually identical to h.r .

5454 in the 111 th congress .

these measures would amend the ica of 1974 to provide an expedited process for consideration of certain rescission requests from the president .

within 45 days after signing a bill into law , the president would be able to submit a package of rescissions for reducing or eliminating discretionary appropriations or non - entitlement non - appropriated funding contained in the bill as enacted .

such proposed rescissions from the president would be considered as a group and would be subject to expedited procedures in congress , designed to make an up - or - down vote on the package more likely .

more detailed consideration of these bills , along with some other expedited rescission measures from the 111 th congress , is provided in the following section .

president obama sent his budget submission for fy2012 to congress on february 7 , 2011 .

as was the case with his previous two budgets , president obama endorsed various proposals for reforming the budget process , including an expedited process for considering rescission requests ( exemplified in s. 102 and h.r .

1043 ) .

the discussion accompanying the fy2012 submission stated , "in sum , the [expedited rescission] proposal provides the president with important , but limited powers that will allow the president and congress to work together more effectively to eliminate unnecessary funding. .

on march 15 , 2011 , the senate subcommittee on federal financial management , government information , federal services , and international security , held a hearing titled "enhancing the president's authority to eliminate wasteful spending and reduce the budget deficit. .

four witnesses testified , including two from the congressional research service at the library of congress and two from private sector entities .

later in this report , some possible issues for congress relating to expedited rescission authority for the president are identified and examined under the two rubrics of budgetary savings and respective prerogatives of the president and congress .

at the march hearing in the senate , such issues were considered .

the witnesses seemed to concur that while budgetary savings to be achieved with expedited rescission might be relatively modest , the mechanism still may prove helpful in deficit reduction efforts .

for example , senator carper stated in his opening remarks that while expedited rescission authority "is not a silver bullet or a magic solution to our fiscal problems," the approach "may well prove to be a useful tool in our toolbox. .

the witness from the committee for a responsible federal budget suggested that expedited rescission authority for the president might "increase [congressional] accountability and serve as a deterrent to members for adding low - priority spending that is likely to be included in a presidential rescissions package. .

there likewise appeared to be some consensus among the witnesses and members present that s. 102 would not encounter the same constitutional problems cited by the supreme court in its decision striking down the 1996 line item veto act .

the witnesses and most members present at the hearing also tended to agree that providing expedited rescission authority for the president would not lead to any enhancement of power for the executive branch .

senator carl levin , however , indicated that he "couldn't disagree more" with this assessment .

according to the senator , expedited rescission would give the president additional power to advance his rescission proposals , particularly in the senate .

in the senator's view , the expedited procedures in s. 102 that would mandate an up - or - down vote on a rescission package , without any amendments , without motions to table , and with very limited time for debate , embodied procedural restrictions not often employed in the senate , and would unduly advantage passage of the administration's rescission package in comparison to alternative rescission measures .

on march 4 , 2009 , the congressional accountability and line - item veto act was reintroduced in the 111 th congress .

in the senate , s. 524 was cosponsored by senators feingold and mccain , and in the house h.r .

1294 was introduced by representatives paul ryan and mark kirk .

senator gregg and cosponsor senator lieberman introduced s. 640 , the second look at wasteful spending act of 2009 , on march 19 , 2009 .

s. 640 was similar to a bill in the 109 th congress , s. 3521 ( title i ) as reported by the senate budget committee in 2006 ( then chaired by senator gregg ) .

senator carper , along with 20 cosponsors , introduced s. 907 , the "budget enforcement legislative tool act of 2009," on april 28 , 2009 .

the senate subcommittee on federal financial management , government information , federal services , and international security , on december 16 , 2009 , held a hearing on "tools to combat deficits and waste: expedited rescission authority," and considered s. 524 , s. 640 , and s. 907 .

the senate judiciary subcommittee on the constitution held a hearing on may 25 , 2010 , focusing on "the legality and efficacy of line - item veto proposals," with reference to the three expedited rescission measures pending in the senate and the proposal from the administration , later introduced as s. 3474 ( see below ) .

on may 24 , 2010 , president obama transmitted an administration draft bill providing for expedited rescission procedures to congress , called the reduce unnecessary spending act of 2010 .

as discussed already , slightly differing versions of the measure have been reintroduced in the 112 th congress as s. 102 and h.r .

1043 .

the proposal would provide expedited rescission procedures for consideration of certain requests from the president .

within 45 days after signing a bill into law , the president would be able to submit a package of rescissions for reducing or eliminating discretionary appropriations or non - entitlement mandatory spending contained in the bill as enrolled .

the measures provide that certain proposed rescissions from the president would be considered as a group and would be subject to expedited procedures in congress , designed to ensure an up - or - down vote on the package .

on may 28 , 2010 , the administration proposal was introduced as h.r .

5454 by representative spratt .

on june 9 , 2010 , senator feingold introduced s. 3474 , with two changes from the administration draft , as discussed below .

expedited rescission proposals received notable attention , but varied levels of support in the 111 th congress .

the hearings in the senate by the subcommittee on financial management and by the subcommittee on the constitution were both chaired by proponents of pending measures — senator carper and senator feingold .

both hearings were predominantly favorable in their treatment of an expedited process for certain rescissions requested by the president .

on june 17 , 2010 , the house budget committee held a hearing focused explicitly on the "administration's expedited rescission proposal. .

the sole witness was the acting deputy director of the office of management and budget ( omb ) , dr. jeffrey liebman .

this hearing revealed differences of opinion among members present regarding the expedited rescission bills under consideration .

some voiced opposition to the basic approach , viewing it as disadvantageous to congress in relation to the president .

on the other hand , the ranking member offered strong support for expedited rescission generally , as did others from the majority side .

as described in a news article , "the [administration's] proposal received a mixed response from [budget] panel lawmakers , who are notoriously protective of preserving their constitutional spending powers. .

the omb witness provided an upbeat view , stating , "i am encouraged that the administration's proposal has received bipartisan and bicameral support.... we applaud these efforts , and look forward to working with congress to hammer out the details and enact this authority into law. .

representative spratt , former chairman of the budget committee , had been a supporter of the expedited rescission approach for many years and introduced h.r .

5454 by request .

he nonetheless raised a number of concerns during the budget committee hearing .

for example , he questioned whether a 45-day period for executive branch review of spending measures might be too long .

dr. liebman explained that omb's major concern was the prospect of an omnibus bill being passed in mid - december with some staff away for the holidays and time pressure for final decisions on the president's upcoming budget submission to congress in early february , but omb could probably agree to a shorter window for submitting rescission packages for a regular appropriations law .

the chairman also expressed concern that the member who had "sponsored" an item contained in the rescission package would be guaranteed a minimum time allotment during floor debate to defend and justify the provision .

representative spratt , on the other hand , expressed pleasure with cosponsors of h.r .

5454 that "span the democratic [party] spectrum" and stated , "i look forward to working with all interested parties as we consider ways to improve this bill and move it through congress. .

several other measures in the 111 th congress would have established expedited rescission procedures , including h.r .

1294 ( companion to s. 524 ) , h.r .

1390 , h.r .

4921 ( companion to s. 907 ) , and s. 3423 .

other bills would have provided for expedited rescission along with various other budget process reforms , such as increased earmark accountability or spending controls .

in the 111 th congress , h.r .

3268 , h.r .

3964 , s. 1808 , and s. 3026 provided examples of such omnibus budget process bills .

none of the expedited rescission measures received further action in the 111 th congress .

the following analysis provides a comparative overview of some major features in the three senate measures considered in hearings in the 111 th congress along with house companion bills ( s. 524 / h.r .

1294 , s. 640 , and s. 907 / h.r .

4921 ) .

the obama administration's bill , introduced in the 112 th congress as s. 102 and h.r .

1043 , is also featured in the table .

it was previously introduced in the 111 th congress as h.r .

5454 and s. 3474 .

two modifications appearing in the senate bills have been noted in the table and would affect the deadline for submission of special rescission messages by the president and the disposition for any savings realized .

all of the measures featured in table 1 would share a similar purpose of establishing expedited procedures in congress for the consideration of certain rescission proposals by the president by amending the ica to add the new features .

as described above , under the framework established by the ica , the president may propose to rescind funding provided in an appropriations act by transmitting a special message to congress and obtaining the support of both houses within 45 days of continuous session .

if denied congressional approval during this time period , either by congress ignoring the presidential rescission request or by one or both houses rejecting the proposed rescission , the president must make the funding available to executive agencies for obligation and expenditure .

while all four bills would have amended the ica , the changes to the ica contained in s. 524 would have been the most extensive .

s. 524 would have amended title x of the ica by striking all of the existing part b , "congressional consideration of proposed rescissions , reservations , and deferrals of budget authority," with the exceptions of sections 1016 ( regarding suits by the comptroller general ) and 1013 ( pertaining to deferral authority of the president ) , and likewise striking all of title x , part c , which contains the line item veto act of 1996 ( p.l .

93-344 ) , overturned by the supreme court in 1998 .

in lieu of these deletions , the provisions of s. 524 would have been added to title x .

some of the provisions in s. 524 would have directly replaced a deleted section , such as that containing definitions .

three existing sections of title x , part b , however , would have been eliminated outright in s. 524 , including section 1014 , providing for the transmission of messages from the president to congress and to the comptroller general and for publication of messages in the federal register ; and section 1015 , providing for review of rescission and deferral actions and reporting to the congress by the comptroller general .

deletion of these sections might well have decreased transparency in the rescission process .

arguably the most significant of the deletions in part b would have been section 1012 , containing the original provisions for rescission of budget authority ; henceforth the president would be limited to submitting rescission requests under the expedited procedures .

in contrast , s. 640 would have retained title x , parts a and b as is , but struck part c ( in effect , deleting the liva provisions ) , and would have added the text of the expedited rescission bill , which would have become the "new" part c. provisions found in s. 907 would have inserted the text of the act with its expedited rescission procedures immediately after existing part b , section 1012 ( original rescission provisions ) and then would have redesignated sections 1013-1017 as sections 1014-101 .

like s. 640 , s. 3474 would have deleted part c and replaced it with the bill language , but s. 3474 would also have added clarifying amendments to part a ( containing general provisions ) .

in brief , while s. 524 would have replaced existing provisions in the ica with those in the new act , s. 640 , s. 907 , and s. 3474 would have provided the new expedited rescission authority in addition to the existing ica provisions .

as shown in table 1 , the bills differed in the scope of new authority that would have been granted to the president .

under s. 524 , special messages from the president could have proposed rescission of any congressional earmarks , as well as cancellation of certain limited tax and tariff benefits .

in s. 907 , the purview of expedited rescission authority would have applied solely to amounts of discretionary budget authority and could not have exceeded 25% of the total appropriated for any authorized programs .

under the administration bill the president could propose to rescind any new budget authority or non - appropriated mandatory spending except for entitlements .

the scope of the new expedited rescission authority in s. 640 , arguably the most far reaching , would have covered entire amounts of discretionary budget authority in appropriations acts or represented separately in committee reports , certain limited tax benefits , and new items of direct spending , meaning budget authority provided in other than appropriations acts , mandatory spending provided in appropriations acts , and entitlement authority .

the proposed deadlines for the president to submit special rescission or cancellation messages following enactment of a relevant measure varied considerably , according to the data in table 1 .

s. 907 would have allowed 3 days , s. 524 would have allowed 30 days , s. 3474 would have allowed 45 days , while s. 640 would have allowed one year .

note that h.r .

1043 and s. 102 differ with regard to deadlines .

the original administration language would be retained in h.r .

1043 , 30 days of congressional session , whereas s. 102 would revise the window to 45 calendar days , the latter period generally expected to have fewer days .

regarding limits on the number of special messages permitted the president when using the expedited rescission authority , s. 524 would have provided for a limit of one special message for each regular act and two for an omnibus budget reconciliation or appropriation measure .

similarly , s. 102 would allow one special message per regular appropriations act and two messages for a continuing resolution , supplemental measure , or omnibus measure .

s. 640 would have permitted up to a total of four special messages in a calendar year , including one submitted with the president's budget .

s. 907 would have allowed one message per act unless the act included appropriations accounts under the jurisdiction of more than one appropriations subcommittee ; in the latter case , the president would have transmitted a special message and approval bill for each subcommittee involved .

none of the bills would have allowed the president to propose duplicative proposals for rescinding the same funds .

some provisions were unique to one measure , as depicted in table 1 .

for example , only s. 524 contained a sense of the congress provision regarding abuse of the proposed cancellation authority by the president or other executive branch official vis - a - vis a member of congress .

these provisions paralleled language in the house - passed version of expedited rescission in the 109 th congress ( h.r .

4890 ) .

other types of provisions appeared , not necessarily in the same form , in more than one of the bills .

for example , s. 524 and s. 640 and s. 102 ( in a modification from the administration draft ) stipulate that any amounts rescinded or cancelled would have been or would be dedicated only to reducing the deficit or increasing a surplus , whereas explicit provisions for using any savings for deficit reduction were not found in s. 907 .

on the other hand , h.r .

1043 , retaining the language in the administration draft , stipulates that any funds rescinded under parts b or c would revert back to the fund from whence they came , rather than being used for purposes of deficit reduction .

all of the bills mandated expedited or fast - track procedures for committee action and floor consideration which do not allow for amendments , but the administration bill ( s. 102 / h.r .

1043 ) show three differences "from other fast - track no - amendment procedures that exist or have existed in recent decades. .

first , the house clerk , when turning the rescission package into a bill , would omit individual rescissions "that are not eligible for the fast - track procedure," as determined by the chairman of the house budget committee , following required consultations .

examples of impermissible rescissions would include a request to rescind funding from an entitlement program or from some other bill besides the recently enacted funding bill covered in the special message .

a second new feature would allow any member , during floor consideration of the approval bill in the house , to "raise a point of order against any numbered rescission in the package on the grounds that it contains impermissible matter , and if the point of order is sustained , the item is automatically knocked out of the package. .

the third innovation would allow any senator likewise to raise a point of order "claiming that the house - passed package contains impermissible matter. .

if sustained , the package would not be altered but the approval bill would immediately lose the fast - track protections and would become subject to standard senate rules .

the president's authority to temporarily withhold funds proposed for rescission was directly addressed in three of the measures .

s. 524 and s. 640 would have allowed withholding of such funds for a period not to exceed 45 calendar days from the transmittal or receipt of the president's special message , whereas s. 102 would allow withholding for a period not to exceed 25 calendar days in which the house or senate had been in session .

in comparison , the ica currently allows the withholding of amounts proposed for rescission for 45 calendar days of continuous session of congress , which would almost always constitute a longer period of time than that provided in any of the three aforementioned provisions in expedited rescission bills .

in s. 907 , as in the ica , there was a "requirement to make available for obligation" section .

the ica requires the release of funds included in a special rescission message unless congress completes action on a rescission bill within the prescribed 45-day period .

on the other hand , s. 907 would have required that funds proposed in a special message be released on the day following defeat of the approval measure in either chamber , which arguably creates an incentive for congressional action on a proposed rescission package beyond the framework of expedited procedures .

finally , all the bills had or have sunset provisions .

authority in s. 640 would have expired on december 31 , 2010 , in s. 907 , on the date in 2012 when congress adjourns sine die , and in s. 524 , on december 31 , 2014 .

expedited rescission authority in the 112 th congress bills would continue until december 31 , 2014 .

there are some broader considerations related to expedited rescission measures that may be of interest to congress .

a variety of issues may be placed under the rubric of two general topics .

the discussion which follows focuses first on expedited rescission procedures and possible budgetary savings and then turns to the possible effects of expedited rescission authority on the respective prerogatives of the legislative and executive branches .

expedited rescission proposals received notable attention , but varied levels of support in the 111 th congress .

hearings were held in both chambers , but no further action occurred .

some have viewed greater involvement by the obama administration in advancing an expedited rescission measure as critical to prospects for enactment .

representative minnick was quoted in a news article in accord with this perspective: if expedited rescission is to be passed , he stated in an interview in the summer of 2010 , the administration will have "to get behind it [expedited rescission bill] and indicate it's a priority. .

in the budget for fy2012 , transmitted to congress on february 7 , 2011 , president obama again endorsed expedited rescission procedures , specifically requesting for congress to enact the administration's proposal transmitted in the spring of 2010 .

it remains to be seen to what extent the obama administration may become more actively engaged in promoting enactment of such an expedited rescission measure in the 112 th congress .

likewise , time will tell whether an expedited rescission measure is reported favorably from committee in the 112 th congress , and whether subsequent floor action occurs .

at the senate hearing on expedited rescission held in march 2011 , senator carper observed that expedited rescission provisions , as found in s. 102 , may be offered as an amendment to a must - pass measure , such as one raising the statutory debt limit or providing appropriations for fy2012 .

the author of this report concluded a statement before the senate subcommittee on financial management on march 15 , 2011 , by noting: "it remains an open question whether providing the president with expedited rescission authority would increase the employment or effectiveness of the rescission tool in reducing unnecessary spending. .

one might suggest that it also remains an open question as to what impact expedited rescission authority for the president might ultimately have on respective prerogatives of the legislative and executive branches in the federal budget process .

