prior to the financial crisis that began in 2007 , over - the - counter ( otc ) derivatives were generally regarded as a beneficial financial innovation that distributed financial risk more efficiently and made the financial system more stable , resilient , and resistant to shocks .

the crisis essentially reversed this view .

the dodd - frank act ( p.l .

111-203 ) attempts to address the aspect of the otc market that appeared most troublesome in the crisis: the market permitted enormous exposure to risk to grow out of the sight of regulators and other traders .

derivatives exposures that could not be readily quantified exacerbated panic and uncertainty about the true financial condition of other market participants , contributing to the freezing of credit markets .

under dodd - frank , risk exposures of major financial institutions must be backed by capital , minimizing the shock to the financial system should such a firm fail .

in addition , regulators will have information about the size and distribution of possible losses during periods of market volatility .

the dodd - frank act requires that most derivatives contracts formerly traded exclusively in the otc market be cleared and traded on exchanges .

traders in these products now are required to post margin in the fashion described above and have their contracts repriced at the close of each trading day .

it is important to note that not all derivatives contracts are required to be traded in this way by the act .

the dodd - frank act presumes that some derivatives contracts will still be traded in the otc market ; however , it grants regulators broader powers to obtain information about these derivatives and impose margin and capital requirements on them as well .

the cftc and the sec have been working to issue regulations that implement these provisions .

in 2008 , as energy and grain prices set new records , speculators in derivatives were blamed by some for price volatility and for price levels that many observers believed were not justified by the underlying economic fundamentals .

although the cftc maintained that markets were functioning normally and that the price discovery process was not being distorted , the 110 th congress considered legislation intended to insulate commodity prices from the impact of excessive speculation and manipulation .

congress implemented this goal by including a number of provisions in title vii of the dodd - frank act that enhanced the authority of the cftc to police these markets and impose limits where the agency saw a need .

to this end , congress enhanced the cftc's power to set margin and position limits and also amended the cftc's authority to prohibit manipulation in markets for commodities and swaps .

what follows is a brief description of the current status of these enhanced authorities .

section 716 originated in the senate agriculture committee and was included in the bill that passed the senate in may 2010 .

the section prohibited federal assistance , defined as the use of any funds to loan money to , buy the securities or other assets of , or to enter into "any assistance arrangement" with a "swaps entity. .

swaps entities included swap dealers and major swap participants ( and the equivalents in security - based swaps ) , securities and futures exchanges , sefs , and clearing organizations registered with the cftc , the sec , or any other federal or state agency .

the intent of the provision was to ensure that taxpayer funds would not have to be used to meet obligations of financial institutions engaged in risky derivatives trading .

such activity was deemed too risky to be under the federal safety net that covers insured depository institutions .

the chairwoman of the senate agriculture committee at the time , senator lincoln explained it this way: this provision seeks to ensure that banks get back to the business of banking .

under our current system , there are a handful of big banks that are simply no longer acting like banks... .

in my view , banks were never intended to perform these [derivatives] activities , which have been the single largest factor to these institutions growing so large that taxpayers had no choice but to bail them out in order to prevent total economic ruin .

supporters of the original version of section 716 described it as an appropriate means to compel banks to spin off their swap dealings , or to "push them out" into separately capitalized affiliates .

opponents of the measure argued that the definitions of federal assistance and swaps entity were so broadly drafted that there might be unanticipated consequences .

for example , if citigroup sold off its swap dealer operations , it would still have hundreds of billions of loans and other risky assets on its balance sheet , which it would need to hedge with interest rate swaps and other derivatives .

this hedging activity would likely put the bank into the major swap participant category , and thus foreclose access to the discount window , fdic insurance , and other features of the safety net .

similarly , if the federal reserve were supplying liquidity to the financial system during a future crisis , would it be prudent to deny such support to clearinghouses which represent concentrations of risk ? .

the conference committee adopted a modified version of section 716 , which narrowed the definitions of swaps entity and permitted banks to act as swap dealers under some circumstances .

in the final legislation , exchanges , sefs , and clearing organizations are not swaps entities .

in addition , the term "swaps entity" does not include a major swap participant or major security - based swap participant that is an insured depository institution .

the final version clarifies that the prohibition on aid does not prevent a bank from creating an affiliate that is a swaps entity , provided that the affiliate complies with sections 23a and 23b of the federal reserve act and other requirements of the fed , the sec , and the cftc .

moreover , the bank itself may continue to act as a swaps dealer for contracts involving rates or reference assets that are permissible for investment by a national bank .

this means that banks can continue as dealers in swaps linked to interest rates , currencies , government securities , and precious metals , but not other commodities or equities .

credit default swaps are treated as a special category: banks may deal in them if they are cleared by a derivatives clearing organization regulated by the sec or cftc .

dealing in uncleared credit default swaps , however , is not deemed to be a permissible bank activity .

finally , section 716 mandates that no taxpayer funds may be used to prevent the liquidation of a swaps entity .

any funds expended in such a liquidation proceeding , and not covered by the swaps entity's assets , may be recouped through assessments on the financial sector .

section 716 has not taken effect yet .

a guidance issued by the office of the comptroller of the currency , the board of governors of the federal reserve , and the federal deposit insurance corporation has indicated that section 716 will not take effect until july 16 , 2013 .

