on march 13 , 2010 , the u.s. department of education ( ed ) released a blueprint for reform: the reauthorization of the elementary and secondary education act ( hereafter referred to as the blueprint ) .

the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , particularly its title i - a program for education for the disadvantaged , is the primary source of federal aid to k - 12 education .

the esea was initially enacted in 1965 ( p.l .

89-10 ) , and was most recently amended and reauthorized by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) , which authorized virtually all esea programs through fy2008 .

the blueprint indicates that it builds on reforms already being implemented , which are being supported through funding initiatives included in the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

the arra created three sources of federal funding that have , in part , shaped ed's blueprint for reauthorization: the state fiscal stabilization fund , the race to the top program ( rttt ) , and the investing in innovation fund ( i3 ) .

the state fiscal stabilization fund provided funding to states when many were experiencing budgetary shortfalls to help increase state support for elementary and secondary education and public institutions of higher education ( ihes ) .

from the $53.6 billion made available under the state fiscal stabilization fund , $5 billion was reserved for the secretary of education to implement three competitive grant programs: rttt , the rttt assessment program , and i3 .

these programs are particularly relevant to some of the priorities identified in the blueprint .

the blueprint outlines five key priorities: 1 .

college - and career - ready students includes a focus on improving standards for all students , supporting the development of better assessments , and providing students with a well - rounded education .

2 .

great teachers and leaders in every school focuses on effective teachers and principals , the distribution of effective teachers and leaders , and teacher and leader preparation and recruitment .

3 .

equity and opportunity for all students includes a focus on rigorous and fair accountability , meeting the needs of diverse learners , and resource equity .

4 .

raise the bar and reward excellence focuses on achieving these goals through continuing rttt , supporting public school choice , and promoting a "culture of career readiness and success. .

5 .

promote innovation and continuous improvement includes a focus on "fostering innovation and accelerating success," supporting local innovations , and supporting student success .

these five priorities and their associated foci are discussed in greater detail in the blueprint .

however , within the blueprint , the topics highlighted under each of the priorities are not consistently discussed in the same order as the priorities , nor are they consistently discussed under broad headings that necessarily match the priorities under which they are initially discussed .

thus , table a - 1 in this report provides a crosswalk between ed's priorities that are briefly discussed at the beginning of the blueprint and a more detailed discussion of the specific elements of ed's reauthorization proposal .

it is often the case that when administrations release an overview document outlining plans for reauthorizing major legislation , the approach is thematic in nature .

the blueprint is a document that generally addresses themes and priorities , and details associated with the design of new strategies , programs , and provisions are provided in varying levels of depth , and sometimes not at all .

the blueprint has received considerable attention and some regard it as a starting point for esea reauthorization discussions .

this report has been prepared in response to considerable congressional demand for a document that helps map the proposals in the blueprint against the esea .

in preparing this document , we have relied heavily on the blueprint itself , and in some instances have drawn on other sources , such as the administration's fy2011 budget proposal when it explicitly elaborates on proposals in the blueprint .

throughout this report , we have attempted to identify where the blueprint offers precise proposals , and where a general direction is suggested .

under the latter scenario , there may be instances where we believe a direction is implied when it is not .

that said , we have attempted to be thorough and to carefully describe the basis for our depictions of administration proposals .

this document reflects our attempt to more directly map themes introduced in the blueprint against current law , and since the alignment is not perfect , the exercise requires some judgment .

as has been noted , this report principally examines ed's esea reauthorization proposal and , where appropriate , draws comparisons between the proposal and current law .

the report is organized around the broad themes presented in the blueprint , beginning with college - and career - ready students and ending with additional cross - cutting priorities .

the majority of the headings included in the report reflect those used in the blueprint .

headings that appear in italics are crs headings that have been included to either help frame the overall discussion of a broad theme or clarify whether provisions being discussed are based on current law or the blueprint .

wherever possible , comparisons between the proposal and the esea are drawn for elements included in the blueprint .

some sections of the blueprint did not provide sufficient detail to make relevant comparisons to current policy in the esea .

the comparative discussions covering the individual elements of the proposal , therefore , differ substantially in length and detail depending on the extent to which ed provided detail in the blueprint .

in some instances , other relevant sources , such as the fy2011 budget request , were used to provide additional information and analysis of a particular part of the blueprint proposal .

for some elements of the proposal , however , there was little that could be said beyond restating what was included in the blueprint or budget request .

the examination of the blueprint is followed by several appendix tables .

there has been some demand for a concise side - by - side comparison of key provisions of the blueprint to current law .

table a - 2 provides a summary of similarities and differences of key provisions ; however , it does not include the same level of detail as the discussion in the text and does not discuss every section of the blueprint .

to demonstrate how the provisions included in the blueprint could affect line - item appropriations for esea , table a - 3 examines the consolidation of programs proposed by the administration's fy2011 budget request and the blueprint to identify which programs would be consolidated ; the program type ( eg , formula or competitive grants ) for current and proposed programs ; the fy2010 funding level for the program ; and the proposed funding levels for fy2011 .

as a companion to table a - 3 , table a - 4 examines funding for esea programs that would not have been subject to consolidation under the fy2011 budget request , including the types of grants awarded under each program .

finally , table a - 5 lists esea programs that were slated for elimination under the administration's fy2011 budget request .

while congress has not enacted legislation to reauthorize the esea , on september 23 , 2011 , president obama and the secretary announced the availability of an esea flexibility package for states and described the principles that states must meet to obtain the included waivers .

the waivers apply to school years 2011-2012 , 2012-2013 , and 2013-2014 .

states have the option to apply for a one - year waiver extension for the 2014-2015 school year .

the waivers exempt states from various academic accountability requirements , teacher qualification - related requirements , and funding flexibility requirements that were enacted through nclb .

state educational agencies ( seas ) may also apply for an optional waiver related to the 21 st century community learning centers program .

however , in order to receive the waivers , seas must agree to meet four principles established by ed for "improving student academic achievement and increasing the quality of instruction. .

the four principles , as stated by ed , are as follows: ( 1 ) college - and career - ready expectations for all students ; ( 2 ) state - developed differentiated recognition , accountability , and support ; ( 3 ) supporting effective instruction and leadership ; and ( 4 ) reducing duplication and unnecessary burden .

taken collectively , the waivers and principles included in the esea flexibility package amount to a fundamental redesign by the administration of many of the accountability and teacher - related requirements included in current law that aligns with many of the priorities included in the blueprint .

as of december 2012 , ed had approved esea flexibility package applications for 34 states and the district of columbia and was reviewing applications from several other states .

if congress continues to work on esea reauthorization during the 113 th congress , it is possible that provisions included in any final bill may be similar to or override the waivers and principles established by the administration .

the remainder of this report focuses only on current law and does not discuss the details of the esea flexibility package or how it modifies current law .

for more information about the esea flexibility package , see crs report r42328 , educational accountability and secretarial waiver authority under section 9401 of the elementary and secondary education act .

this report discusses each aspect of the esea flexibility package , as well as similarities between the esea flexibility package and the blueprint .

over the last decade , more attention has been focused on strategies that emphasize accountability in elementary and secondary education .

these strategies generally require the following components: ( 1 ) the development of academic standards that aim to provide a clear and consistent understanding of what students are expected to learn across grades and subject areas ; ( 2 ) the adoption of "standards - based instruction" that is aligned to the academic standards ; and ( 3 ) the use of test - based accountability to measure students' progress toward meeting the academic standards .

under accountability systems , schools are typically rewarded for their success in boosting student achievement or face consequences for failing to do so .

with the enactment of the no child left behind act , new provisions regarding standards , assessments , and accountability were incorporated into the elementary and secondary education act .

these provisions built upon those already included in the esea , focusing specifically on holding schools , local educational agencies ( leas ) , and states accountable for the academic achievement of all students .

the nclb required all states to develop an accountability system featuring state - developed content and performance standards and assessments for reading / language arts ( hereafter referred to as language arts ) and mathematics in grades 3 through 8 and for one grade in grades 10 through 12 .

the nclb required states to establish benchmarks for the percentage of students who will score at the proficient level in language arts and mathematics based on the ultimate goal of having all students reaching the proficient level ( as defined by the state ) in language arts and mathematics by the end of the 2013-2014 school year .

each year , schools and leas are held accountable for student proficiency on the required assessments , student participation in the required assessments , and student performance on one additional academic indicator .

how well a school or lea does with respect to these requirements determines whether a school or lea makes adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) .

schools and leas that fail to make ayp are subject to a series of outcome accountability requirements , including corrective action and restructuring .

under the blueprint , many of the current requirements regarding standards , assessments , and accountability would be altered .

most notably , the administration has indicated that it would eliminate the concept of ayp , require standards to be developed in language arts and mathematics for grades 3 through 12 , alter assessment requirements , and modify the actions required when students in a school or lea do not meet their performance targets .

in addition , the administration would eliminate the goal of all students reaching the proficient level in language arts and mathematics by the end of the 2013-2014 school year , replacing it with the goal of all students being college - and career - ready by 2020 .

this section of the blueprint focuses on the use of title i - a , education for the disadvantaged funds with respect to standards , assessment , and accountability .

according to the fy2011 budget request , this program would be renamed college - and career - ready students .

the blueprint notes that students are not graduating from high schools with the skills and knowledge needed to be successful in postsecondary education or employment .

it also notes that elementary and secondary education act reauthorization must "follow the lead of the nation's governors" to focus on state - developed , college - and career - ready standards and related assessments .

finally , this section of the blueprint discusses rewarding schools making significant progress , bringing change to low - performing schools , and addressing "persistent gaps" in student academic achievement and graduation rates .

these issues are addressed below under three main headings: college - and career - ready students , assessing achievement , and school turnaround grants .

the federal government has historically had a limited role in shaping policy related to teachers .

decision making around issues such as hiring , promotion , tenure , and compensation has typically been conducted at the local level .

with the enactment of the no child left behind act , new provisions regarding teachers were incorporated into the elementary and secondary education act .

these provisions established minimum teacher quality requirements and charged states and leas with developing plans to meet them .

under the nclb , each state educational agency ( sea ) receiving title i - a funding was required to have a plan to ensure , by no later than the end of the 2005-2006 school year , that all public school teachers teaching in core academic subjects within the state would meet the highly qualified teacher definition .

during implementation , the nclb highly qualified teacher requirement came to be seen as setting minimum qualifications for entry into the profession and was criticized by some for establishing standards so low that nearly every teacher met the requirement .

meanwhile , policy makers have grown increasingly interested in the output of teachers' work — that is , their performance in the classroom and the effectiveness of their instruction .

under the blueprint , ed proposes to shift the emphasis from highly qualified teachers to effective teachers and also to effective leaders .

this shift would require states for the first time to define effective teachers and leaders based , in part , on student academic growth .

this section of the blueprint focuses on the federal teacher and leadership programs , particularly on the largest of these programs — the esea , title ii - a , improving teacher quality state grants .

the blueprint makes the following assertions: the interaction between teacher and student is the primary determinant of student success , great teachers can help students achieve at high levels , and great leaders can help teachers succeed as part of a strong , well - supported instructional team .

the proposal seeks to improve current programs by consolidating and refocusing them on the conditions that allow teachers and leaders "to get meaningful information about their practice , and support them in using this information to ensure that all students" receive effective instruction .

the blueprint places emphasis on improving the evaluation of teacher and leader effectiveness , rewarding and advancing effective teachers and leaders , and strengthening the recruitment and preparation of teachers and leaders .

these issues are addressed below under three main headings: effective teachers and leaders , teacher and leader innovation fund , and teacher and leader pathways .

one purpose of the no child left behind act is to ensure that all children have a fair , equal , and significant opportunity to obtain a high - quality education .

to ensure that all children have access to an education , the elementary and secondary education act supports programs to meet the educational needs of student groups that face unique challenges in obtaining a high - quality education .

current programs supported by the esea include title i programs that support migrant children and neglected and delinquent children ; title iii programs that support language instruction for english language learners ( ells ) ; title vi programs that support rural education ; title vii programs that support indian , native hawaiian , and alaska native education ; and title viii programs that support children connected with federal activities .

in addition , title vii of the mckinney - vento act supports access to education for homeless students .

under the blueprint , ed proposes to thematically group the various educational programs that support access to high - quality education for student groups that face unique challenges .

current programs would be supported under the new heading of meeting the needs of english learners and other diverse learners .

this section of the blueprint seeks to strengthen the existing elementary and secondary education programs that target support to diverse learners .

the blueprint recognizes that schools are responsible for ensuring that all students , including diverse learners , are ready to succeed in college or a career upon high school graduation .

diverse learners include students with disabilities , ells , the children of migrant workers , homeless children , neglected and delinquent children , american indians , children residing in rural areas , and children connected with federal activities .

the following sections briefly outline esea programs related to diverse learners and highlight any changes that the blueprint would make to existing programs .

the elementary and secondary education act does not promote specific curricula or instructional methods in content areas such as reading , mathematics , history , and so on .

there are , however , content area instructional programs that are authorized and supported by the esea .

content area instructional programs are supported throughout various titles of the esea .

for example , larger content area instructional programs , such as literacy programs , are currently supported in titles i , ii , and v. smaller content area instructional programs , such as economic education , arts education , and civic education , are supported in titles ii and v. the blueprint proposes to group disparate programs under thematic headings that reflect the content area being taught ( eg , literacy ; science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ; etc. ) .

the blueprint would consolidate academic programs under the heading of a complete education .

a complete education is a collection of programs that addresses improving teaching and learning across multiple academic content areas .

while college - and career - ready standards may address elementary and secondary education standards in language arts and mathematics , a complete education would make investments across multiple content areas — from literacy and stem to history , civics , foreign languages , the arts , financial literacy , environmental education , and other subjects .

the following sections discuss the thematic areas addressed by the blueprint under this heading .

these thematic areas include literacy , stem , ensuring a well - rounded education , college pathways and accelerated learning , and activities to strengthen a complete education .

the elementary and secondary education act is composed predominantly of programs designed to provide for improved student achievement .

it also includes programs that focus on other aspects of the lives of children that affect their academic achievement , including attending schools with a safe learning environment , having access to afterschool programs , and having opportunities to attend schools where educational opportunities , community services , and systems of family support are aligned .

currently , programs that address the needs of students beyond academics or the traditional school day are concentrated in titles iv and v of the esea .

the blueprint proposes to increase funding for programs that support safe learning environment and proposes to fund programs that would support a range of activities to meet students' needs by consolidating multiple existing programs , expanding an existing program , and changing an existing program from a formula grant program to a competitive grant program .

this section of the blueprint focuses on proposed changes to the esea , title iv programs ( 21 st century community learning centers and the safe and drug free schools and communities act ) , and on the proposed expansion of the promise neighborhoods program .

under the blueprint , a new program — titled supporting student success — would fund innovative , comprehensive approaches to meet the full range of children's needs .

this program would support a range of activities currently supported through the aforementioned esea , title iv and v programs .

funded activities could include promise neighborhoods , before - and after - school programs , full - service community schools , extended learning time opportunities , and activities to ensure all students are safe , healthy , and supported in their schools and communities .

these activities are discussed within three sections of the blueprint : promise neighborhoods ; 21 st century community learning centers ( 21 st cclc ) ; and successful , safe , and healthy students .

the elementary and secondary education act supports educational programs through both formula and competitive funding .

the majority of the funding is provided through title i - a formula grants .

with the passage of the american recovery and reinvestment act , however , ed was authorized to use an unprecedented amount of funding to conduct competitive grant programs .

ed has expressed interest in continuing these competitive grant programs through esea reauthorization in addition to the existing formula grant programs .

ed has also expressed an interest in continuing to offer public school choice options , such as charter schools and magnet schools .

under the blueprint , programs that support competition , innovation , and choice are discussed under the heading of fostering innovation and excellence .

this section of the report discusses the blueprint proposal with respect to supporting innovative programs that prepare students to be college - and career - ready and provide students with high - quality public school options .

these programs include an expanded race to the top ( rttt ) program , additional funding for the investing in innovation fund ( i3 ) , a modified charter schools program , and funding for public school choice and magnet schools .

division a , sections 14006 and 14007 of the arra authorized state incentive grants and the innovation fund .

these programs are now known as race to the top and i3 , respectively .

the other programs discussed in this section are authorized under the elementary and secondary education act , titles v - b and c. each program and ed's relevant proposal are discussed below .

ed has outlined a set of additional priorities that cut across numerous programs within the elementary and secondary education act .

these priorities are not directly tied to any program in particular and making comparisons between current law and these priorities is difficult because there is no parallel section of "priorities" within the esea .

this report does not , therefore , attempt to make direct comparison between current law and the blueprint within each of the following sections .

direct comparisons between the esea and the blueprint are made in select sections , where appropriate .

under the blueprint , ed outlines its priorities for reauthorized programs under the esea in additional cross - cutting priorities .

ed states in the blueprint that it seeks to "redefine the federal role in education: shifting from a focus merely on compliance to allowing state and local innovation to flourish , rewarding success , and fostering supportive and collaborative relationships with states , districts , and nonprofit partners. .

ed seeks to redefine the federal role in several ways .

for example , under the blueprint , states and leas would be granted more flexibility in return for "improved outcomes. .

ed also proposes to expand programs , projects , and strategies that show results and focus on "key priorities" across programs .

ed's discussion of cross - cutting priorities seems to be an effort to unite the proposed educational programs and policies and to create focus during the reauthorization of the esea .

although ed describes these priorities as "cross - cutting," the blueprint does not offer sufficient detail to determine how each cross - cutting priority is reflected in the proposed programs and policies .

the remaining sections of this report follow the blueprint in its discussion of cross - cutting priorities and , where possible , provide details on how the priorities are incorporated into proposed programs and policies .

"additional cross - cutting priorities" discussed within the blueprint include flexibility for success , growing success , evaluation and building the knowledge base , and cross - cutting priorities .

in general , federal k - 12 education assistance program requirements include activities or outcomes that seas or leas are expected to provide or achieve in order to establish accountability for the use of funds consistent with the purposes of authorizing statutes .

these requirements are usually intended to provide target accountability , ensuring that funds are focused on eligible localities , students , and purposes ; outcome accountability , ensuring that funds are used effectively to improve student achievement and improve the quality of k - 12 instruction ; and fiscal accountability , ensuring financial integrity and providing that federal funds constitute a net increase in resources .

current law .

the esea contains several special flexibility authorities that allow exceptions to these general requirements .

these include ed - flex ; secretarial case - by - case waivers ; esea , title i - a schoolwide programs ; flexibility for small , rural leas ; the innovative programs block grant ; and transferability authority ; plus the state and local flexibility demonstration program ( state - flex and local - flex ) .

in general , these authorities increase the ability of states or leas to use federal funding in accordance with their own priorities .

these authorities , however , are significantly limited in terms of the number of states and leas that may participate , the number and size of the programs affected , or the range of requirements that may be waived .

blueprint .

under the blueprint , ed would provide states and leas with additional flexibility in how they spend "federal dollars" to improve student outcomes .

states and leas would be given the flexibility to use most federal administrative funds and reservations to build their capacity to support "reform and improvement. .

most leas would also be provided with flexibility in how they spent more of their esea program funds , as long as they complied with the requirements associated with the funds and were improving student outcomes .

under the blueprint , ed indicates that it would reward grantees who are improving student outcomes but would also seek to replicate their best practices .

thus , for each competitive grant program discussed in the blueprint , grantees that are "significantly improving" student outcomes would be eligible to received continuation funds as well as funds to expand their strategies to additional students , schools , leas , or states .

this particular strategy for "growing success" would be used as a way to target federal funds to successful projects .

the blueprint proposes that federal , state , and local levels work together to use data for continuous improvement , test innovative ideas , evaluate and replicate promising approaches , and "scale - up" programs that show evidence of improved results .

under the authority of the american recovery and reinvestment act , ed has begun to establish competitive grant programs that allow state and local levels to apply for funding to further certain school reform goals and to evaluate their progress toward these goals .

in addition , ed has offices that conduct policy analysis and evaluation at the federal level .

the blueprint may seek to expand these current mechanisms of evaluation or seek to align state , local , and federal evaluation .

several offices currently conduct research that evaluates policies , programs , and practices for elementary and secondary education students .

for example , the office of planning , evaluation , and policy development ( opepd ) conducts evaluations of proposed education policy and designs , conducts , and reports on evaluations to describe program operations and outcomes to promote program improvement .

in addition , the institute of education sciences ( ies ) has several centers that conduct evaluations of educational policies , programs , and interventions .

opepd and ies conduct both congressionally mandated evaluations and evaluations of broad national interest determined by ed .

under the blueprint , a "new evaluation authority" would authorize rigorous , objective evaluations of the esea programs , policies , and practices and support performance measurement of those programs .

the secretary would also submit to congress a biennial plan on esea evaluation and performance measurement and would establish an independent panel that advises the secretary on the plan .

it is unclear whether the "new evaluation authority" refers to granting a new authority to an existing research and evaluation office within ed ( eg , opepd or ies ) or creating a new office specifically designed to evaluate and foster ongoing improvement of esea programs .

the administration's fy2011 budget includes $9.2 million for a "reauthorized title i evaluation authority," which would continue to evaluate the impact and implementation of title i programs , including college - and career - ready students and school turnaround grants programs .

opepd currently conducts evaluations of title i , so the "new" authority may extend their evaluation authority to conduct this type of work .

the blueprint discusses five other priorities that may be relevant to several areas of education reform: technology , evidence , efficiency , supporting english learners and students with disabilities , and supporting rural and other high - need areas .

these priorities would not represent specific esea programs ; however , states , leas , and schools would be encouraged to incorporate these priorities across their educational programs and policies .

to date , ed has incentivized these priorities in some of its competitive grant programs , such as rttt and i3 , and may continue to do so in future competitive grant competitions .

based on the discussion in the blueprint , it appears that the cross - cutting priorities are particularly relevant to competitive grants because competitive grants are a funding mechanism that typically allows the secretary to grant "priority" to applicants .

it is unclear how the secretary would incentivize states to apply these priorities in formula grant programs .

in the blueprint , ed states that the use of technology can improve how schools work , how teachers teach , and how students learn .

ed would give priority to programs , projects , or strategies that leverage digital information or communications technology to accomplish the goals of a grant .

currently , ed incentivizes the use of technology in the rttt and i3 grant programs .

within rttt , states were given competitive priority if they proposed a high - quality plan to emphasize stem across grades and disciplines and prepare more students for advanced study in stem careers .

in addition , both rttt and i3 give priority to applications that improve how schools work in terms of improving data systems and using data to improve student outcomes .

within the blueprint , technology is incorporated into several programs , such as a complete education ( i.e. , literacy , stem , ensuring a well - rounded education , and activities to strengthen a complete education ) ; however , as discussed previously , the ed - tech program would no longer receive a separate funding stream under the esea .

current law .

under the esea , the concept of "evidence" is addressed through requirements for using "scientifically based research. .

scientifically based research is defined in the esea as "research that involves the application of rigorous , systematic , and objective procedures to obtain reliable and valid knowledge relevant to education activities and programs. .

the term includes empirical methods — both experimental and quasi - experimental — that rely on observation or experimentation and have results that are accepted by a peer - reviewed journal or a panel of independent experts .

blueprint .

in the blueprint , ed proposes that funding be devoted to areas with the most evidence of effectiveness in improving outcomes for students .

ed would give priority to programs , projects , or strategies on the strength of their evidentiary base .

the i3 program currently uses a three - tiered framework of evidence to award competitive grants .

some of the selection criteria within the rttt program also requires states to provide specific evidence to support educational programs proposed within the grant .

in the blueprint , "evidence - based" is mentioned within the context of college - and career - ready students , effective teachers and leaders , literacy , stem , ensuring a well - rounded education , i3 , expanding educational options , and evaluation and building the knowledge base .

in most cases , ed has not defined the type or level of evidence required for a program or policy to be "evidence - based. .

it is unclear at this time whether the shift from "scientifically based research" to "evidence - based" programs and policies is intentional or whether this would have any discernible effect on the type or level of evidence required to determine the effectiveness of a program or policy .

in the blueprint , ed states that priority may be given to programs , projects , or strategies that are designed to significantly increase the efficiency in the use of resources to improve student outcomes .

it is unclear how the priority of efficiency relates to current or proposed ed programs .

in the rttt program , the application briefly mentions that applicants may be judged on their ability to effectively and efficiently implement their rttt programs , including grant administration and oversight , budget and reporting , and performance measure tracking and reporting , and fund disbursement .

within the blueprint , efficiency is only mentioned in the cross - cutting priorities section and is not mentioned in relation to any proposed programs .

in the blueprint , ed restates a central theme of the esea: schools , leas , and states must be held accountable for educating all students , including english language learners and students with disabilities .

ed states that more work could be done to develop and scale - up effective strategies for these two groups of students .

the secretary may grant priority to programs , projects , or strategies that are designed to specifically improve the performance of english language learners or students with disabilities .

english language learners and students with disabilities are mentioned throughout the blueprint .

the primary legislation covering the elementary and secondary education of english language learners is the esea , while the primary legislation covering the education of students with disabilities is the individuals with disabilities education act .

the blueprint provides some detail on ell education programs ( as discussed in " english learner education " ) but relatively little information on education programs for students with disabilities .

in general , ells and students with disabilities are mentioned together within specific programs in the blueprint ( eg , college - and career - ready students , assessing achievement , great teachers and great leaders , etc. ) .

although both groups of students are mentioned together and some students are in both groups , each group has unique educational needs that cannot necessarily be addressed by the same policy , program , or practice .

for example , an assessment that accurately measures what ells know and can do may not be an appropriate assessment for some students with disabilities .

as another example , teachers who are effective in the instruction of ells may not be trained to teach students with disabilities .

within the current i3 program , applicants are given competitive preference points for proposing to meet the unique learning needs of ells or students with disabilities .

in the i3 program , the needs of ells or students with disabilities could be addressed within any of the four absolute priority areas .

under the blueprint , ed would implement strategies to ensure that rural districts and other high - need districts are not disadvantaged in the process of applying for competitive grants .

these "strategies" are not discussed in the blueprint , but it is possible that ed may offer more technical assistance to rural and other high - need districts in applying for and administering competitive grants .

it may also be possible for ed to structure new competitive grant programs in a way that either gives priority to rural and other high - need districts or incentivizes partnerships between these districts and districts that may be perceived to be more competitive in the grant process .

currently , the i3 program awards competitive preference points to applicants that propose to develop or implement innovations that serve schools in rural leas .

in the i3 program , applicants could propose to support rural and other high - need areas within any of the four absolute priority areas .

if the i3 program is reauthorized as a new esea program , as outlined by the blueprint , it is possible that support of rural and other high - need areas may be continued through the use of competitive preference points .

below are highlights of key changes the administration proposes with respect to priorities across esea programs .

the presence of clearly defined priorities across esea programs would represent a new organizational construct for the legislation that is not currently used across the esea .

it is unclear how or where these additional cross - cutting priorities would be represented in new legislation .

