since the deepwater horizon oil spill began on april 20 , 2010 , congress has given much attention to the compensatory liability provisions in the oil pollution act .

these set out the liability of an oil spill's "responsible parties" for the costs inflicted on others by the oil spill — in particular , cleanup costs and economic damages ( such as injury to natural resources , destruction of private property , and loss of profits or impairment of earning capacity ) .

congress has also addressed the compensatory liability provisions of the jones act and the death on the high seas act in connection with the deaths of 11 workers when the deepwater horizon platform exploded on april 20 .

to reiterate , the function of these liability provisions is to compensate those injured ; that function determines the dollar amount of the liability .

also discussed in relation to the deepwater horizon oil spill are federal statutory provisions of a very different nature .

these provisions , the topic of this report , impose civil and criminal penalties .

their function is not to compensate , but rather , like all civil and criminal penalties , to punish and / or deter .

on june 1 , 2010 , attorney general eric holder announced that the u.s. department of justice had launched a civil and criminal investigation into the gulf spill , including the deaths of the 11 workers on the deepwater horizon mobile offshore drilling unit .

observers have noted that civil and criminal penalties under federal law — leaving aside those under state law — could be substantially greater than responsible party liability for cleanup costs and economic damages .

this report summarizes selected federal civil and criminal penalty provisions that may be found violated in connection with the gulf spill and related worker fatalities .

it does not purport to be exhaustive .

crs stresses that it has no knowledge of the facts surrounding the gulf spill other than what has been publicly reported ; hence the provisions listed here are only an informed guess as to those that ultimately may be found violated .

that the federal laws listed herein extend to the gulf spill seems clear , notwithstanding that the spill site is 50 miles off the coast of louisiana , well beyond the territorial limits of the united states on the outer continental shelf .

except for the migratory bird treaty act and occupational safety and health act , all the included laws expressly apply beyond the u.s. territorial sea , either out to the limit of the united states' exclusive economic zone at 200 nautical miles offshore , or , as applied to persons subject to u.s. jurisdiction , anywhere on the high seas .

as for the migratory bird treaty act and occupational safety and health act , the outer continental shelf lands act broadly declares that the laws of the united states are extended to the subsoil and seabed of the outer continental shelf , "and to all artificial islands , and all installations and other devices permanently or temporarily attached to the seabed" to explore for or produce resources .

thus , by one route or the other , the extraterritorial location of the deepwater horizon spill is not an obstacle to the imposition of civil and criminal penalties under the covered statutes .

at the outset , the reader should note that the penalty ceilings stated in the program statutes listed here may not be the applicable ones .

as for civil penalty ceilings , congress has enacted the federal civil penalties inflation adjustment act of 1990 to ensure that inflation over a long period does not erode the deterrent force of a penalty ceiling .

this act requires federal agencies to adjust at least once every four years the maximum ( and minimum , if any ) dollar amount on civil penalties within their jurisdiction to reflect movement in the consumer price index .

it applies whether the civil penalty is administratively or judicially imposed .

 ( the occupational safety and health act , listed below , is expressly exempted. ) .

under one statute covered here , the outer continental shelf lands act , this inflation - adjustment requirement also is imposed by the individual program statute .

by whatever authority imposed , these inflation adjustments to the program - statute maximums are indicated in the following list by the phrase " ( adjusted to [dollar amount] ) . .

as for ceilings on criminal penalties , the criminal fine improvements act ( cfia ) often applies .

this statute , enacted in 1984 and amended in 1987 , reflected congress's sense that some fines in the u.s. code were too low .

the cfia was intended to substantially increase them .

under this statute , the maximum criminal fine a court may impose may be up to the greater of the amount specified in the law setting forth the offense or various alternative ceilings in the cfia .

for organizations , the cfia alternative ceilings are ( 1 ) the greater of twice any person's gross gain from the offense or twice any non - defendant person's gross loss ; ( 2 ) for a felony or a misdemeanor resulting in death , $500,000 ; ( 3 ) for a class a misdemeanor not resulting in death , $200,000 ; ( 4 ) for a class b or c misdemeanor not resulting in death or for an "infraction," $10,000 .

for individuals , the penalty caps are half those for organizations .

the indicated categories of offenses — class a , b , and c misdemeanors , and infractions — are defined elsewhere in the u.s. code based on the maximum term of imprisonment for the offense .

there are two circumstances when the cfia does not , or may not , apply .

first , the cfia says that if a law setting forth an offense explicitly exempts the offense from the cfia , then the defendant may not be fined more than the caps in that law .

none of the statutes discussed in this report contains such a cfia exemption .

second , a district court has held that cfia penalty caps do not trump the lower penalty caps in the endangered species act , enacted as they were subsequent to the 1984 and 1987 enactment of the cfia .

though the endangered species act does not explicitly exempt itself from the cfia , the court argued convincingly that applying the cfia cap to override the post - cfia - amended lower cap would reduce the latter to a nullity , contrary to the rule of statutory construction that a statute should be read to give every word operative effect .

at the same time , the court acknowledged that "other courts have summarily stated that [the cfia] controls over other statutes that do not specifically exempt themselves. .

it remains to be seen whether this one court's view will win acceptance by other courts , as to the endangered species act specifically or as to smaller - than - cfia penalty caps enacted post - cfia generally .

several provisions in the federal penal code — title 18 of the u.s. code — that are not specifically environmental are often used in the prosecution of federal environmental crimes .

it has been noted that proof of crimes under the environmental statutes may involve complex technical issues that , in most instances , are not present in title 18 prosecutions , and that federal prosecutors are often more familiar with title 18 offenses and hence more comfortable prosecuting them .

such federal provisions include ( in paraphrased form ) : aiding and abetting , 18 u.s.c .

§ 2: whoever aids or abets the commission of a federal crime is punishable as a principal .

similarly , whoever willfully causes an act to be done which if directly performed would be a federal crime , is punishable as a principal .

conspiracy , 18 u.s.c .

§ 371: if two or more persons conspire to commit any offense against or to defraud the united states , and one or more persons acts to effect the object of the conspiracy , each person shall be fined under title 18 or imprisoned not more than five years , or both .

false statements , 18 u.s.c .

§ 1001: whoever , in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive , legislative , or judicial branch of the federal government , knowingly and willfully falsifies , conceals , or covers up a material fact , or makes any materially false statement or representation , or makes any false writing knowing it to contain any materially false statement , shall be fined under title 18 or imprisoned not more than five years , or both .

mail fraud , 18 u.s.c .

§ 1341: whoever , having devised a scheme to defraud , mails any matter or thing in furtherance thereof , or receives any such matter or thing , shall be fined under title 18 or imprisoned not more than 20 years , or both .

wire fraud , 18 u.s.c .

§ 1343: whoever , having devised a scheme to defraud , transmits by wire , radio or television communication in interstate commerce any writing , signs , signals , pictures , or sounds for the purpose of executing such scheme , shall be fined under title 18 or imprisoned not more than 20 years , or both .

obstruction of justice , 18 u.s.c .

§ 1512: whoever knowingly uses intimidation , threatens , or corruptly persuades another person , or misleads another person , intending to influence the testimony of a person in an official proceeding or hinder the communication to a law enforcement official or judge of information relating to the commission of a federal offense , shall be fined under title 18 or imprisoned not more than 20 years , or both .

on december 15 , 2010 , the u.s. department of justice filed a civil complaint against multiple parties alleged to be responsible for the gulf spill — the only suit it has filed thus far related to the gulf spill .

the case was filed in the federal district court for the eastern district of louisiana , the same court which the judicial panel on multidistrict litigation designated last summer as the proper venue for the hundreds of compensatory liability suits now pending .

as pertinent to this report — dealing only with penalties rather than compensatory recovery — the key paragraph in the complaint recites that: pursuant to [clean water act § 311 ( b ) ( 7 ) , discussed above] and 40 c.f.r .

§ 19.4 , defendants bp , anadarko exploration , anadarko petroleum , moex , triton , transocean holdings , transocean offshore , and transocean deepwater are each subject to a judicially assessed civil penalty of up to $1,100 per barrel of oil that has been discharged or up to $4,300 per barrel of oil that has been discharged , to the extent that the discharge of oil was the result of gross negligence or willful misconduct by such defendant .

the complaint does not request a specific dollar amount of civil penalty , only that the court declare the defendants' liability to the united states "in an amount to be determined at trial. .

a second request for relief in the complaint addresses compensatory recovery under the oil pollution act and is beyond the topic of this report .

in a paragraph reserving the right to amend the complaint , the document also signals that the department of justice may be investigating further liabilities of the defendants and / or additional parties — for penalties , damages , or other remedies .

specifically mentioned as possible sources of such liability are the clean water act , oil pollution act , outer continental shelf lands act , endangered species act , marine mammal protection act , national marine sanctuaries act , and park system resource protection act .

