many governments acknowledge that environmental degradation and climate change pose international and trans - boundary risks to human populations , economies , and ecosystems that could result in a worsening of poverty , social tensions , and political stability .

to confront these global challenges , countries have negotiated various international agreements to protect the environment , reduce pollution , conserve natural resources , and promote sustainable growth .

while some observers have called upon developed countries to take the lead in addressing these issues , efforts are unlikely to be sufficient without similar measures being implemented in developing countries .

developing countries , however , focused on poverty reduction and economic growth , may not have the financial resources , technological know - how , or institutional capacity to deploy such measures .

therefore , international support for these areas has remained the principal method for governments to assist developing country action on global environmental problems .

the united states and other industrialized countries have committed to financial assistance for environmental initiatives through several multilateral agreements ( eg , the montreal protocol ( 1987 ) , the united nations framework convention on climate change ( 1992 ) , united nations convention to combat desertification ( 1994 ) , and the copenhagen accord ( 2009 ) ) .

international financial assistance takes many forms , from fiscal transfers to market transactions , and includes foreign direct investment ( fdi ) , bilateral overseas development assistance ( oda ) , and contributions to multilateral development banks ( mdb ) and other international financial institutions ( ifi ) , as well as the offering of export credits , loan guarantees , and insurance products .

table 1 outlines recent u.s. financial support for multilateral environmental initiatives .

congress is responsible for several activities in this regard , including ( 1 ) authorizing periodic appropriations for u.s. financial contributions to the institutions , and ( 2 ) overseeing u.s. involvement in the programs .

issues of congressional interest include the overall development assistance strategy of the united states , u.s. leadership in global environmental and economic affairs , and u.s. commercial interests in trade and investment .

as congress considers potential authorizations and / or appropriations for initiatives administered through the department of state , the department of the treasury , and other agencies with international programs , it may have questions concerning the direction , efficiency , and effectiveness of current bilateral and multilateral programs .

this report provides an overview of two of the larger and more recently instituted multilateral mechanisms — the climate investment funds ( cifs ) — and analyzes their structure , funding , and objectives in light of the many challenges within the contemporary landscape of global environmental finance .

each year , billions of dollars in environmental aid flow from developed country governments — including the united states — to developing ones .

while the efficiency and the effectiveness of these programs are of concern to donor country governments , a full analysis of the purposes , intents , results , and consequences behind these financial flows has yet to be conducted .

international relations , comparative politics , and developmental economics can often collide with global environmental agendas .

critics contend that the existing system has had limited impact in addressing major environmental concerns — specifically climate change and tropical deforestation — and has been unsuccessful in delivering global transformational change .

a desire to achieve more immediate impacts has led to a restructuring of the mdbs' role in environmental finance and the introduction of many new bilateral and multilateral funding initiatives .

the cifs grew out of these concerns .

the effectiveness of the cifs depends on how the trust funds address their programmatic issues , build upon their national investment plans , react to recent developments in the financial landscape , and respond to emerging opportunities .

the following section investigates some of the current challenges facing the cifs and summarizes some of the responses initiated by the funds .

since their inception , the cifs have attempted to provide innovative approaches to global environmental issues and have introduced several processes to address the limitations of previous environmental finance .

these innovations include , but are not limited to , the following: programmatic design .

while the cifs still aim to scale up existing practices and fund activities at the project level , they also were created to serve as laboratories for new financing schemes and vehicles for developing sustainable strategies .

funding strives to target the potential for large - scale transformation and to attain global environmental benefits .

stakeholders seek to share knowledge gained and inspire the use of best practice .

as such , multinational or regional investment plans that support global development goals , energy security , industrial growth , diversification , and regional integration ( eg , the m.e.n.a .

plan ) best exemplify the cifs' programmatic approach .

country - led process .

beyond a simple project - by - project approach , the purpose of the cifs is to bolster the efforts of countries' official adaptation plans and their actions toward low - carbon , climate - resilient development .

the country - led approach aims to integrate funding into the country - owned development strategies consistent with the paris declaration .

innovative governance and stakeholder engagement .

in an effort to attain transparency and accountability , the governing structure of the cifs is equally balanced between donor and developing countries .

all decisions are taken by consensus , with no provision for voting .

if a consensus is not possible , the proposal is postponed or withdrawn .

representatives from other international organizations , the private sector , and civil society are included as observers .

all observer roles are "active," allowing them to take the floor to make interventions , propose agenda items , and recommend experts .

the choice of financial mechanism and its administration is an important element to environmental finance .

the differences among multilateral or bilateral assistance , grant or lending institutions , regional or global organizations , etc. , all play a role in the structure of assistance .

the decision to employ the mdbs as trustees for the cifs has both advantages and disadvantages .

historically , the mdbs have provided financial assistance to developing countries , typically in the form of loans and grants , for investment projects and organizational capacity .

donor country support for the mdbs — including u.s. support — has assisted efforts to promote institutions , strengthen financial systems , undertake large infrastructure and social welfare projects , and develop property rights and rules of law .

through increased global integration , the aim of the mdbs has been to bolster economic growth , poverty alleviation , and resource allocation ( including greater access to electricity ) in developing countries while simultaneously building new markets for developed countries' exports and jobs .

in 2008 , at the urging of some donor countries , a strategy to address climate change was added to the mdbs' development agenda .

the "strategic framework on development and climate change" analyzed the risks of climate change to economic development and served as a basis for integrating mitigation and adaptation planning into national development plans .

donor countries see several advantages to financing climate programs through the institutional structure of the mdbs .

these advantages include , but are not limited to , the following: commitment to private sector development .

many donor countries — including the united states — believe that climate - friendly economic growth can be led by the private sector through such efforts as improving access to financial markets , building the capacity of entrepreneurs , and providing training to civilian society .

one aim of the mdbs is to help foster private sector development by leveraging donor funds into highly effective co - financing arrangements .

historically , the u.s. administration has supported these efforts .

in a march 25 , 2010 , hearing before the house appropriations subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related programs , the treasury department went on record as stating that the united states invests in the mdbs because "they help generate new engines of growth that benefit the u.s. economy and the global economy as a whole. .

economies of scale , coordination , and co - f inancing .

proponents of the mdbs argue that multilateral assistance can solve problems of scale and efficiency by providing specialized expertise while lowering administration and coordination costs .

similarly , more competitive procurement rules , attractive cost - sharing opportunities , and the ability to leverage co - financing from other public and private organizations allow the mdbs to play a catalytic role in mobilizing financial aid .

at the march 25 , 2010 , hearing noted above , the treasury department stated that the mdbs "provide strong , effective and highly leveraged means to advance global prosperity.... for every dollar the united states contributes to paid - in capital for the world bank , six dollars of additional capital is generated by other donors .

and , for every dollar we invest in the world bank , $26 worth of aid is delivered. .

responsiveness to donors .

the treasury department has similarly stated that the united states invests in the mdbs because they "promot[e] core american interests and values. .

this arrangement is due primarily to the structure and organization of the banks .

mdbs' governance is weighted on the basis of the cumulative financial contributions and commitments by the donor countries , and thus , while a single trust fund , like the cifs , may be designed to balance equally the roles of developed and developing countries , the mdbs are designed to give greater weight to the major donors .

the united states retains the most influence on world bank matters , with a 14.97% voting share and the ability to veto major policy decisions .

it is followed by japan in second place , germany in third , and france and the united kingdom tied for fourth .

the only developing or emerging country with as much voting interest is china , at fifth , with 3.21% .

with a governing structure that requires one representative from the world bank , as trustee , and one representative from the group of remaining mdbs , as well as eight representatives from participating donor countries , the overall governance structure of the cifs has remained responsive to donor interests .

possession of fiduciary standards .

both current and past u.s .

administrations have argued that the world bank has the proper internal safeguards to oversee large amounts of financing .

as reported by the department of treasury , "the world bank is an attractive trustee [for environmental funds] precisely because of its strong fiduciary standards and its extensive capacity to uphold them. .

possession of institutional expertise , information , and credibility provisions .

proponents of the mdbs claim that multilateral agencies offer larger and better trained staffs with greater technical expertise .

they state that large infrastructure investment , particularly in innovative technologies and methods , requires professionals who are experienced in identifying and facilitating access to technology , sharing risks associated with commercialization , and improving institutional capacity .

beyond institutional knowledge , multilaterals also collect , interpret , and disseminate costly information on a global scale and provide credibility controls for both recipient and donor governments .

while advantages exist to financing climate programs through the institutional structure of the mdbs , concerns also persist .

a variety of recipient countries and nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) have highlighted a number of issues , including , but not limited to , the following: coordination with other funds .

proponents argue that the fundamental principle of the cifs is coordination at the country - level among interested stakeholders , including other developmental partners .

however , some observers believe that the cifs have created a parallel structure for financing climate change efforts outside both bilateral and the ongoing multilateral framework for climate change negotiations .

they are concerned that without harmonization between the cifs and the other sources of environmental finance ( eg , funds managed by the u.n. , the global environment facility , and bilateral sources ) , overlaps , redundancies , competing views , and lack of synergy may affect climate priorities , funding processes , and qualifying criteria .

potential to prejudice u.n .

climate provisions .

some commentators and several governments have expressed concerns that the establishment of the cifs as trust funds in the mdbs may prejudice the outcomes of the international negotiations on climate finance within the framework of the united nations .

many developing countries have expressly stated that they do not consider funds contributed to the cifs as meeting u.n. annex i obligations .

furthermore , the design of the cifs includes a "sunset clause" stating that the cifs "will take necessary steps to conclude its operations once a new [unfccc] financial architecture is effective. .

the nature of these steps has yet to be determined .

further , additional contributions to the cifs beyond the initial 2008 pledges ( eg , by canada ( $193 million ) , united kingdom ( £375 million ) , denmark ( $8 million ) , germany ( $12 million ) , norway ( $19 million ) , sweden ( $25 million ) , and switzerland ( $6 million ) ) may complicate these negotiations .

potential for additionality .

the unfccc provides that developed country signatories to the convention "provide new and additional financial resources to meet the agreed full costs incurred by developing country parties" in their efforts at mitigation and adaptation .

some observers fear that the design of the cifs establishes a parallel process for climate financing that does not result in new and additional resources .

they are concerned that significant portions of the aid budgets of donors may be diverted into the cifs and counted as part of their annual oda commitments .

lack of polluter responsibility .

some commentators claim that the provision of loans as a financial instrument to eligible developing countries contradicts the internationally agreed principle of "polluter pays" as stated in the rio declaration .

some argue that the repayment of a loan , notwithstanding the degree of concessionality , burdens a developing country with self - paying for a problem ( climate change ) that was caused by others ( i.e. , developed countries ) .

they believe this burden may affect the country's ability to generate resources for growth .

commercial influence .

while advantages exist in prioritizing market - based solutions to dealing with the problems of climate , some groups express concern that the private sector may be unduly driven by commercial interests at the expense of social or environmental safeguards .

concern also exists that a dependence on market mechanisms as a source of climate financing may be inadequate and inconsistent for meeting the financial needs of developing countries charged with the responsibility of both implementing climate change commitments and mediating the social , economic , and environmental dislocations brought on by climate change .

energy and en vironmental policy at the banks .

many observers claim that the history of the world bank's energy and infrastructure lending undermines its credibility as an institution committed to combating the impacts of climate change .

environmental ngos have often highlighted the inconsistencies between the bank's rhetoric on climate change and its operational policies and practices .

they emphasize that while the bank has increased financing for renewable energy and energy efficiency in recent years , its fossil fuel lending still accounts for 56% of the energy sector share for fiscal years 2008 to 2010 ( compared to 15% for renewable energy , 20% for energy efficiency , and 9% for large hydropower ) .

the controversy is compounded by the bank's inability to reach a consensus on the definition of "clean energy technology," retaining provisions for ultra - supercritical coal - fired power generation in its environmental strategies .

recent guidance from the u.s. administration regarding the world bank's engagement with coal - fired power generation in developing countries similarly leaves the definition open , stating that projects "could include more carbon efficient fossil fuel generation" in their portfolio .

while observers generally agree that funding from the cifs is unlikely to be used in coal - fired power generation projects , most agree that continued investment by the world bank in fossil fuel energy and infrastructure may have several unintended effects , including ( 1 ) counteracting any gains made with the bank's renewable portfolio , ( 2 ) directing resources toward large - scale power generation for industrial use rather than energy access and poverty reduction in poor urban and rural communities , and ( 3 ) drawing the bank's professional and technical staff away from a concentration on energy efficiency and renewable energy activities to remain involved with fossil fuels .

