one of the most controversial issues in u.s. foreign assistance concerns restrictions on u.s. funding for abortion and family planning activities abroad .

for many , the debate focuses on three key questions: do countries or organizations that receive u.s. assistance perform abortions or engage in coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization activities with u.s. funds ? .

should u.s. funding be permitted or withheld from countries or organizations that participate in these activities ? .

what impact , if any , might the withholding of u.s. funds have on population growth , family planning , and reproductive health services in developing countries ? .

members of congress have engaged in heated debates regarding these issues in connection with a broader domestic controversy regarding u.s. abortion policy .

these debates have continued since the supreme court's 1973 landmark ruling in roe v. wade , which holds that the constitution protects a woman's decision whether to terminate her pregnancy .

in nearly every congress since roe , members who oppose abortion have introduced legislation that would prohibit the practice in the united states .

many congressional opponents have also sought to attach provisions to annual appropriations measures banning the use of federal funds to perform abortions .

before the roe decision , the majority of discussions in congress regarding the federal funding of abortion focused on domestic authorization and appropriations legislation , particularly labor and health and human services appropriations .

after roe , however , the controversy spread to u.s. foreign assistance , leading to the enactment of abortion and voluntary family planning restrictions in foreign assistance authorizations and appropriations .

debate over international abortion restrictions has also reached the executive branch .

in 1984 , president reagan issued what has become known as the "mexico city policy," which required foreign nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) receiving u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) family planning assistance to certify that they would not perform or actively promote abortion as a method of family planning , even if such activities were undertaken with non - u.s. funds .

in the intervening years , the mexico city policy has been rescinded and reissued by various administrations .

most recently , it was rescinded by president barack obama in january 2009 and reinstated and expanded by president donald trump on january 23 , 2017 .

during the 115 th congress , members have continued to debate prohibitions and restrictions on abortion and family planning activities abroad .

as in prior appropriations cycles , some members sought to renew , add , modify , or remove language addressing these issues in state - foreign operations legislation .

in addition , some introduced legislation aiming to make the mexico city policy ( also referred to as "protecting life in global health assistance," or plgha ) , or its reversal , permanent law .

federal funding for abortion and family planning activities remains a controversial issue in foreign assistance , and congressional interest in the subject is likely to continue into the next congressional session .

this report examines key legislative and executive branch policies that restrict or place requirements on u.s. funding of abortion or voluntary family planning activities abroad .

it discusses when and how the policies were introduced and the types of foreign aid to which they apply .

many of the restrictions attached to u.s. funding of abortion and requirements relating to voluntary family planning programs abroad are included in foreign aid authorizations , appropriations , or both , and affect different types of foreign assistance .

some provisions have come to be known by the name of the lawmakers who introduced them ( for example , the "helms amendment" ) , while others are identified by the subjects they address ( for example , "involuntary sterilization" ) .

legislation that authorizes foreign aid establishes , continues , or modifies an agency or program for a fixed or indefinite period of time .

the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( faa ) , as amended , is the cornerstone of permanent foreign aid authorization law .

the faa is divided into several "parts" that authorize different types of foreign assistance , including development assistance ( part i ) ; military and security assistance ( part ii ) ; general , administrative , and miscellaneous provisions ( part iii ) ; the enterprise for the americas initiative ( part iv ) ; and debt reduction for developing countries with tropical forests ( part v ) .

congress has routinely amended the faa since 1961 and has authorized new programs in stand - alone acts , but it has not comprehensively reauthorized most programs in the faa since 1985 .

subsequent authorization bills have often stalled in the face of debates and disagreements on controversial issues ( including abortion and family planning ) , a tight legislative calendar , or foreign policy disputes between congress and the executive branch .

in the absence of the regular enactment of foreign aid authorizations , congress has annually considered appropriations measures that set spending levels for nearly every foreign assistance account .

in recent years , these measures have become increasingly significant for congress in influencing how u.s. foreign aid is disbursed .

many of them have included family planning or abortion - related restrictions or requirements .

the links among the various requirements and restrictions , as well as their inclusion in different legislation , are complex and in some cases not immediately apparent .

for example , some amendments that were already enacted in the faa , such as the helms and biden provisions , appear to be added to other foreign assistance - related legislation for emphasis .

in other cases , the provisions may have been added so that they apply to additional categories of foreign aid not covered under the faa .

moreover , some restrictions and requirements stand on their own , while others seek to clarify and amend other existing restrictions .

the leahy amendment , for instance , defines the term "motivate" as written in the helms amendment , while the livingston amendment seeks to clarify prohibitions in the deconcini amendment .

this section details enacted legislative restrictions relating to u.s. funding of abortion and requirements related to voluntary family planning programs abroad .

they are listed in chronological order by the year they were enacted .

this section provides an overview of two executive branch policies addressing abortion or voluntary family planning: the mexico city policy ( also referred to as "protecting life in global health assistance," or plgha ) , and usaid policy determination 3 ( pd - 3 ) on voluntary sterilization .

the mexico city policy has traditionally restricted u.s. family planning assistance to foreign ngos engaged in voluntary abortion activities , even if such activities are conducted with non - u.s. funds .

unlike the aforementioned laws which are enacted by congress , the policy has , for the most part , been implemented and reversed through statements and instruments issued by the executive branch .

such actions have generally been split along party lines , with republicans supporting the policy and democrats opposing it .

most recently , the trump administration reinstated and expanded the policy to include all global health assistance .

the mexico city policy has remained a controversial issue in u.s. foreign assistance .

it was first issued by president reagan at the international conference on population held in mexico city in 1984 .

at the time , it represented a shift in u.s. population policy ; under the aforementioned helms amendment and other international abortion and family planning - related restrictions , no u.s. funds could be used to pay for the performance of an abortion as a method of family planning or for involuntary sterilizations .

however , u.s. and foreign recipients of usaid grants could use their own resources and funds received from other sources to engage , where legal , in abortion - related activities — though they were required to maintain separate accounts for u.s. money in order to demonstrate compliance with u.s. abortion restrictions .

the policy , as issued under president reagan , required foreign ngos receiving usaid family planning assistance ( either as a direct recipient or a subrecipient through a u.s. ngo that receives usaid funds ) to certify in writing that they did not , and would not during the time of the funding agreement , perform or actively promote abortion as a method of family planning .

the mexico city policy as described above was maintained by president george h. w. bush and rescinded by president clinton in 1993 .

president george w. bush issued a memorandum reinstating the policy in january 2001 and expanded it in august 2003 to include all assistance for voluntary population planning furnished to foreign ngos by the state department .

president bush also instituted exceptions for cases of rape , incest , conditions that threatened the life of the mother , and for postabortion care .

several months later , he announced additional exceptions for funding provided through the president's emergency plan for hiv / aids relief ( pepfar ) , and intergovernmental organizations , such as the united nations and its affiliated entities .

president obama revoked president bush's policy in january 2009 , issuing a memorandum stating that "these excessively broad conditions on grants and assistance awards are unwarranted .

moreover , they have undermined efforts to promote safe and effective voluntary family planning programs in foreign nations. .

in january 2017 , president trump reinstated george w. bush's january 2001 memorandum that reestablished the mexico city policy and expanded it to include global health assistance .

in the memo , he directed the secretary of state to "implement a plan to extend the requirements of the reinstated memorandum to global health assistance furnished by all departments or agencies" in coordination with the secretary of health and human services , and to "ensure that u.s. taxpayer dollars do not fund organizations or programs that support or participate in the management of a program of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization. .

the expanded policy , which the trump administration named "protecting life in global health assistance" ( plgha ) , was approved by the secretary of state in may 2017 .

according to administration officials , "global health assistance" applies to about $8.8 billion in funding for international health programs appropriated to the department of state , usaid , and the department of defense — including programs addressing hiv / aids , maternal and child health , malaria , global health security , and family planning and reproductive health .

plgha excludes global health assistance to national or local governments , public international organizations , and other similar multilateral entities .

it also excludes humanitarian assistance , such as state department migration and refugee assistance activities , usaid disaster and humanitarian - relief activities , and defense department disaster and humanitarian relief .

similar to previous iterations of the policy , it includes exemptions for rape , incest , and conditions that threaten the life of the mother , as well as postabortion care .

in may 2018 , the trump administration published a six - month review summarizing the implementation of plgha based on feedback from u.s. government agencies and other stakeholders , such as health groups and ngos .

broadly , the report acknowledged that with less than six months of implementation , it was "too early to assess the full range of benefits and challenges of the plgha policy for global health assistance. .

it stated that four prime recipients , and 12 subrecipients ( out of 733 awards tracked ) refused to agree to the plgha terms .

it also identified a number of challenges and possible action items — one of the foremost being to improve understanding of the policy's intent , implementation , compliance , and oversight .

 ( for example , many implementing organizations sought clarification of the definition of certain terms related to plgha to ensure they understand the full scope of the policy and implications for their participation. ) .

the department plans to conduct a further review of implementation by december 15 , 2018 .

policy determination 3 ( pd - 3 ) on voluntary sterilization ( vs ) was issued by usaid in september 1982 with the purpose of ensuring that voluntary sterilization services funded by the u.s. government protect the needs and rights of individuals .

according to usaid , such protections are necessary given the special nature of vs as a highly personal and permanent surgical procedure .

pd - 3 outlines a number of requirements for usaid voluntary sterilization services , including the following: informed consent — usaid assistance to vs service programs is contingent on satisfactory determination that such services , performed in whole or in part with usaid funds , are performed only after the acceptor of the procedure has voluntarily presented himself or herself at the treatment facility and given his or her informed consent .

ready access to other methods — where vs services are available , other means of family planning should also be readily available at a common location , thus allowing the acceptor to have a choice of family planning methods .

no incentive payments — usaid funds cannot be used to pay potential acceptors of sterilization to induce their acceptance of vs .

in addition , the fee or cost structure applied to vs and other contraceptives shall be established in such a way that no financial incentive is created for sterilization over another method .

pd - 3 also provides guidance on payments to vs service acceptors , providers , and referral agents .

certain types of payment are not considered incentives provided they are "reasonable. .

determination of a reasonable payment must be based on a country - and program - specific basis using knowledge of social and economic circumstances .

specifically: vs acceptors may generally receive recompense for legitimate extra expenses related to vs ( such as transportation , food , medicines , and lost wages during a recovery period ) ; vs service providers may receive per - case payment and compensation for related items ( such as anesthesia , personal costs , transportation , and pre - and postoperative care ) ; and vs service referral agents may receive per - case payment for extra expenses incurred in informing or referring vs clients .

pd - 3 applies to family planning assistance from any account where usaid funds are used for whole or partial direct support of the performance of voluntary sterilization activities .

it applies to u.s. ngos , foreign ngos , public international organizations , and governments .

