in recent years congress has shown considerable interest in promoting the strength and international competitiveness of u.s. industry .

several recent legislative proposals have concerned the intellectual property laws , a widely recognized mechanism for promoting innovation .

in the 113 th congress , h.r .

2466 , the private right of action against theft of trade secrets act of 2013 , would introduce a private cause of action for misappropriation of trade secrets under federal law .

s. 1770 , the future of american innovation and research act of 2013 , would establish a private cause of action against a person who misappropriates a trade secret while located outside the united states , provided that the misappropriation causes or is reasonably anticipated to cause an injury within the united states or to a u.s. person .

as of the date of publication of this report , neither bill had been enacted .

the term "trade secret" generally refers to secret , commercially valuable information , including such subject matter as confidential formulae , techniques for manufacturing a product , and customer lists .

trade secret protection is largely a matter of state law .

under those laws , misappropriation of a trade secret may be enjoined by a court and the defendant may also be liable for compensatory and punitive damages .

one notable federal statute , the economic espionage act of 1996 , makes the theft or misappropriation of a trade secret a federal crime under certain circumstances .

trade secrets play a role in u.s. innovation policy .

trade secrets may establish incentives to innovate because they provide a mechanism for firms to capture the benefits of their inventions .

yet trade secrets also have proven controversial because they suppress , rather than disclose , particular innovations to the public .

they also may have a significant impact upon the mobility of highly trained employees between firms .

further , because innovators often face a mutually exclusive choice between patenting their inventions or maintaining them as trade secrets , alterations to one of these regimes may alter the perceived attractiveness of the other .

this report provides an overview of the law and policy of trade secrets .

it discusses the role of trade secrets in u.s. innovation policy .

it then reviews the sources of trade secret law and the substantive rules that they provide .

the report then provides a more detailed review of existing federal legislation that pertains to trade secrets .

in its next section , the report then discusses the relationship between patent law and trade secret law .

the report closes with an identification of congressional issues and options within this field .

many businesses have developed proprietary information that provides a competitive advantage because it is not known to others .

this category may include "high - tech" information such as chemical formulae , manufacturing techniques , product design , and technical data .

but it may also include relatively "low - tech" information such as customer lists , business leads , marketing strategies , pricing schedules , and sales techniques .

potentially of additional competitive value is "negative know - how": previously attempted , but flawed techniques or "blind alleys" that did not achieve their intended results .

as the united states continues its shift to a knowledge - and service - based economy , the economic strength and competitiveness of firms increasingly depend upon their know - how and intangible assets .

leonard i. nakamura , assistant vice president and economist of the federal reserve bank of philadelphia , explains that in the u.s economy over the past half - century , "mass production and tangible investment have become less important , while new products .

 .

 .

and intangible investment have become more important. .

one recent estimate placed the value of trade secrets owned by u.s. publicly traded companies at five trillion dollars .

another way of measuring the increasing importance of intangible assets is by considering the value of the standard & poor's 500 .

the "s&p 500" consists of the marketplace value of 500 large publicly held companies .

in 1975 , 16.8% of the total value of the s&p 500 reportedly consisted of intangible assets .

in 2005 , intangible assets reportedly constituted 79.7% of the total value of these firms .

according to attorney r. mark halligan , "the vast bulk of intangible assets are trade secret assets. .

yet the rise of computer technology , the ubiquity of cell phones and the internet , and our transition to the information age have increased the difficulty that firms encounter in maintaining the confidentiality of their proprietary information .

years ago , the theft of trade secrets may have involved the taking of laboratory notebooks , memoranda , or other papers from a competitor's office despite the presence of security personnel or surveillance cameras .

today , a trade secret misappropriator can download proprietary information from company computers , or take photographs of confidential documents using a cell phone camera , within moments .

as attorney victoria a. cundiff concisely states: "the digital world is no friend to trade secrets. .

as u.s. firms become increasingly immersed in global competition , some observers believe that foreign firms and even foreign governments have devoted significant resources towards industrial espionage .

according to the office of the national counterintelligence executive , "[t]he united states remains the prime target for foreign economic collection and industrial espionage by virtue of its global technological leadership and innovation. .

these efforts have been linked not just to the economic competitiveness of the united states , but also to its national security .

the legal concept of trade secrets addresses these circumstances .

principles of trade secret law guard against the misappropriation of information that is not generally known .

in view of the increasing prominence of information , it is unsurprising that michael risch , a member of the law faculty of the west virginia university college of law , asserts that trade secrets are "arguably the most important and most heavily litigated intellectual property right. .

framing the trade secret law requires a balancing of competing interests .

a robust trade secret law that provides strong protection to proprietary commercial information potentially holds many advantages .

it may allow firms to capture the benefits of the costs and time it takes to develop the information , without having to share the benefits of that information with others .

trade secret law therefore may be seen as providing incentives to innovate .

trade secret law may also encourage firms to invest in human capital .

a firm is more likely to invest in employee development if it has some confidence that employee cannot immediately use his knowledge in the service of a competitor .

firms may also establish a trade secret easily through self - help measures .

commercially valuable information is protected once a firm makes reasonable efforts to maintain it in confidence .

there is no need for formal government involvement , in contrast to patents .

trade secret law also confirms and regulates standards of commercial ethics and morality .

the misappropriation doctrine applies only against wrongdoers — those who have breached a duty of confidence , engaged in espionage , or otherwise acted in bad faith .

trade secret law thus recognizes that even within a marketplace based open free competition , certain kinds of competitive behavior step beyond our social norms and should be discouraged .

on the other hand , trade secret laws potentially have negative aspects .

first , although trade secret law may promote advancement , it might facilitate a particular kind of innovation — the development of information that is itself amenable to being kept secret .

in addition , the protection of trade secrets necessarily requires firms to conceal their new developments .

but as judge goldberg observed 40 years ago , "for our industrial competition to remain healthy there must be breathing room for observing a competing industrialist. .

thus , while some degree of information protection may be needed to promote innovation , some amount of information sharing may be essential for competition and proper functioning of the market .

as well , firms must expend resources to maintain information as a trade secret .

employees must sign confidentiality agreements , locks and safes must be installed , and electronic protection measures must be in place on computer systems .

these measures entail time and expense .

employers also may be encouraged to limit access to valuable information to select employees .

disclosing valuable trade secrets on a "need to know" basis to one's employees may restrict employee development and ultimately hinder the operation of the firm .

trade secret law may negatively impact employee mobility .

individuals who are unable to take their knowledge from job to job may be limited in their ability to change employers .

as explained by alan l. durham , a member of the law faculty of the university of alabama , an overly robust view of trade secret law potentially may "limit individual freedom , weaken employee bargaining power , and harm society through diminished competition. .

the various rules that together comprise the discipline of trade secret law may be fashioned in an effort to maximize the potential advantages of trade secrets while minimizing their disadvantages .

this report next provides a more detailed review of the doctrines that regulate the acquisition and enforcement of trade secrets .

as noted previously , trade secrets have traditionally been the subject of state law .

prior to 1996 , arguably the most significant federal legislation on point was the trade secrets act .

although broadly titled , this 1948 statute is actually of narrow application .

it forbids federal government employees and government contractors from making an unauthorized disclosure of confidential government information , including trade secrets .

the sanctions for violating this criminal offense are removal from office or employment , and a fine and / or imprisonment of not more than one year .

the law does not apply to state or local government actors or to private sector employees .

in 1996 , motivated by concerns over growing international and domestic economic espionage against u.s. firms , congress enacted new legislation pertaining to trade secrets .

the economic espionage act ( eea ) criminalizes both "economic espionage" and the "theft of trade secrets. .

the "economic espionage" provision punishes those who knowingly misappropriate , or attempt or conspire to misappropriate , trade secrets with the intent or knowledge that the offense will benefit a foreign government , instrumentality or agent .

the "theft of trade secrets" prohibition is of more general application .

the principal elements of an eea claim for theft of trade secrets are: ( 1 ) the intentional and / or knowing theft , appropriation , destruction , alteration , or duplication of ( 2 ) a trade secret placed in interstate commerce ( 3 ) with intent to convert the trade secret and ( 4 ) intent or knowledge that such action will injure the owner .

the eea provides for substantial fines and imprisonment penalties .

for economic espionage , the maximum penalties increase to $500,000 for individuals and imprisonment of 15 years , or $10 million for corporations .

theft of trade secrets is punishable by a fine of up to $250,000 for individuals as well as imprisonment of up to 10 years .

organizations can be fined up to $5 million .

the eea also provides for criminal forfeiture of property and court orders preserving the confidentiality of trade secrets .

the eea has been subject to critical commentary .

attorney r. mark halligan expressed the view that the legislation was "ineffective" and observed , in 2008 , that there had been fewer than 60 prosecutions in keeping with its provisions .

susan w. brenner , a member of the law faculty of the university of dayton , and security expert anthony c. crescenzi opine that the "paucity" of prosecutions under the eea are due to a number of factors , including the complexity of the cases , the desire of the department of justice only to bring cases it can win , the diplomatic repercussions of bringing such a case , and the unwelcome possibility of additional disclosure of trade secrets during the litigation .

brenner and crescenzi conclude that the "individual and combined effect of the systemic factors discussed above is to erode the eea's effectiveness as a weapon against economic espionage. .

trade secrets and patents form two distinct fields within the u.s. intellectual property system .

in one sense , trade secrecy serves as the chief alternative to the patent system .

most inventors must choose one of three options: ( 1 ) maintain a technology as a trade secret , ( 2 ) seek patent protection , ( 3 ) or decline to seek intellectual property protection at all and allow the technology to enter the public domain .

in view of the close relationship between trade secrets and patents , this report next provides an overview of the patent system and its interaction with trade secret law .

a variety of options are available for congress with respect to trade secrets .

if the current situation is deemed appropriate , then no action need be taken .

alternatively , congress may wish to consider the adoption of a federal trade secret law .

several commentators believe that this step would promote the uniformity of trade secret law throughout the united states .

as attorney david s. almeling asserts: trade secrets stand alone as the only major type of intellectual property governed primarily by state law .

trademarks , copyrights , and patents are each governed primarily by federal statutes .

trade secrets , by contrast , are governed by fifty state statutes and common laws .

the result is that trade secret law differs from state to state .

it is time to eliminate these differences — and the significant problems they cause — by enacting a federal trade secrets act ( "ftsa" ) .

according to alemeling , general federal trade secret legislation would establish greater uniformity in substantive and procedural law than is possible in a state - based regime .

other commentators have further suggested that the current state - based trade secrets system places the united states in violation of its obligations under two international agreements: the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) and the world trade organization agreement on trade - related aspects of intellectual property ( trips agreement ) .

both nafta and the trips agreement require member states to provide certain levels of trade secret protection .

because the portions of nafta and the trips agreement concerning trade secrets were modeled after the uniform trade secrets act ( utsa ) , those states that have adopted the utsa without restrictive modifications likely comply with these international standards .

but some states have not adopted the utsa , and some states that have done so have arguably included more restrictive standards .

some commentators have asserted that these states place the united states in violation of nafta and the trips agreement .

however , others have observed that any shortcomings of u.s. law on this point have yet to be challenged under either international agreement .

still other observers assert that no compelling case has been made to federalize trade secret law .

some believe that this step might create additional burdens and costs upon the federal judiciary .

others cite federalism concerns , believing that the states possess a strong interest in regulating local economies in view of their own , local norms .

in addition , variation between the laws of the different states does not necessarily compel federalization of the field .

for example , meaningful distinctions between the states exist in other areas of law , including such fundamental disciplines as contract law .

yet these disciplines remain subject to state law .

a second possibility for congress is to amend the economic espionage act so as to create a private , federal cause of action for trade secret misappropriation .

h.r .

2466 , the private right of action against trade secrets act of 2013 , would do just that .

under that proposed legislation , any person who suffers an injury from trade secret misappropriation "may maintain a civil action against the violator to obtain appropriate compensatory damages and injunctive relief or other equitable relief. .

h.r .

2466 does not appear wholly to federalize trade secret law — under this proposal , trade secret law would remain primarily a matter of state law .

this legislation had not been enacted as of the publication of this report .

s. 1770 , the future of american innovation and research act of 2013 , provides another possibility for future reform efforts .

this bill would establish a private cause of action against a person who misappropriates a trade secret while located outside the united states , provided that the misappropriation causes or is reasonably anticipated to cause an injury within the united states or to a u.s. person .

this legislation had not been enacted as of the publication of this report .

in addition , congress may wish to remain apprised of the potential effect of continuing patent reform efforts upon trade secrets .

as this report has discussed , trade secrets and patents act in complementary ways to protect innovation in the united states .

further , to some degree the two forms of intellectual property act as imperfect substitutes for each other .

as a result , legislative reforms that are perceived to make patents more effective may reduce industrial reliance upon trade secrets .

conversely , amendments to the patent act that are believed to reduce the effectiveness of patents may increase the willingness of firms to retain information as trade secrets .

trade secrets form a significant component of the intellectual property system of the united states .

the importance of trade secrets will likely increase as u.s. industry continues to participate within a knowledge - based , global economy with increasingly sophisticated competitors .

because trade secrets are currently a matter of state law , congressional influence over the system has thus far been indirect: through the enactment of a criminal statute , the economic espionage act , and through amendment to the patent law .

whether further intervention is required in the u.s. trade secret system remains a matter of congressional judgment .

