the florida everglades is a unique network of subtropical wetlands that is now half its original size .

the federal government has had a long history of involvement in the everglades , beginning in the 1940s with the u.s. army corps of engineers constructing flood control projects that shunted water away from the everglades .

many factors , including these flood control projects and agricultural and urban development , have contributed to the shrinking and altering of the wetlands ecosystem .

federal agencies began ecosystem restoration activities in the everglades more than 15 years ago , but it was not until 2000 that the majority of restoration activities became coordinated under an integrated plan .

with the water resources development act of 2000 ( wrda 2000 ; p.l .

106-541 ) , congress approved the comprehensive everglades restoration plan ( cerp ) as a framework for everglades restoration .

the legislation authorized $700 million for the federal share of appropriations for initial projects .

according to the process established in wrda 2000 , additional everglades projects are to be presented to congress for authorization as their planning is completed .

once authorized , the projects will be eligible to receive federal appropriations , but must also receive appropriations from the state of florida in order to be completed .

in wrda 2007 ( p.l .

110-114 ) , three additional projects were authorized .

indirectly related to combined federal and state work under cerp is a subset of everglades restoration projects being undertaken by the state .

these projects may contribute to everglades restoration , but are not formally credited toward non - federal requirements under cerp .

the river of grass acquisition by the state of florida is the most recent of these "non - cerp" projects by the state .

it involves a proposed land acquisition agreement by the south florida water management district ( sfwmd ) to purchase large tracts of land south of lake okeechobee from the u.s. sugar corporation .

the goal of the purchase is to acquire lands that will improve water quality and help regulate outflows from lake okeechobee .

under the plan , sfwmd would remove u.s. sugar land from cultivation for sugarcane and citrus farming , and use it to move , store , and treat water flowing south to the everglades .

this proposal is of interest to congress because it could affect the state's ability to contribute funding under cerp and , as a result , has the potential to alter the schedule of work on some cerp projects .

the river of grass land acquisition dates to mid - 2008 , and has been revised on multiple occasions since then .

in june 2008 , florida governor charlie crist and the u.s. sugar corporation announced that the state of florida would pursue purchasing all of the firm's agricultural lands and assets ( including 187,000 acres of farmland and additional associated sugar and citrus processing facilities ) at a cost of $1.75 billion .

the acquired sugarcane and citrus farmland around lake okeechobee would be used to store and treat water flowing south toward the everglades and eventually into florida bay .

based on subsequent real estate evaluations , a slightly scaled - back version of the original proposal ( 180,000 acres ) was approved by the sfwmd governing board in december 2008 , at an estimated cost of $1.34 billion .

the land acquisition would be financed by the sale of bonds issued by sfwmd , which would be repaid from a portion of the property taxes collected by the 16 counties that comprise sfwmd .

under florida law , these bonds are subject to judicial review to determine whether they serve a "valid public purpose. .

in may 2009 , sfwmd announced an amended proposal that further scaled back the original proposal .

 ( see table a - 1 . ) .

under the amended proposal , sfwmd would purchase 40% of the lands originally envisioned ( i.e. , 73,000 acres ) for $536 million .

notably , u.s. sugar would lease back some of the land sold to sfwmd for a minimum of seven years , with provisions that would allow this arrangement to be extended for up to 20 years .

sfwmd would have the option to acquire the other 107,000 acres included in the initial plan at a fixed price per acre during the first three years , and at the appraised market value during the next seven years .

as a result of a combination of factors , including ongoing financial difficulties , sfwmd announced in august 2010 a second amended purchase agreement .

this purchase , which proposes to scale down the river of grass acquisition yet again , was approved by the sfwmd governing board on august 12 , 2010 .

under the revised agreement , sfwmd will purchase 26,800 acres immediately at a cost of $197 million .

 ( see figure a - 2 . ) .

the acreage consists primarily of sugarcane and citrus acreage in hendry and palm beach counties , and the majority of it will be leased back to u.s. sugar corporation until restoration projects can be fully designed .

the remainder of the land from the initial proposed purchases ( 153,200 acres ) would be available for optional purchases over a 10-year period .

in contrast to previous versions of the acquisition , this land would be bought directly with sfwmd funds , and will not be funded through bonds .

since late 2008 , opponents have filed objections in state court to the bonds initially issued by sfwmd .

these opponents claim that sfwmd did not have authority to finance the transaction because the acquisition is not a "valid public purpose. .

a major sugar producing firm , florida crystals , has argued that the purchase gives an unfair advantage to its main competitor at taxpayer expense .

additionally , the miccosukee tribe of indians , whose reservation lies south of u.s. sugar lands , has argued that sfwmd is not financially able to meet the terms of the deal , which does not provide public benefits in the form of everglades restoration .

supporters , including sfwmd and some environmental groups , argue that the land acquisition is in the public interest and will contribute significantly toward ecosystem restoration goals .

on april 7 , 2010 , the florida supreme court heard arguments from all sides on the opponents' appeal of an earlier court ruling that limits the amount of bonds the district could issue .

the court's final decision could affect the latest version of the land acquisition , which will not be finalized until october 11 , 2010 .

several questions have been raised regarding previous versions of the proposed land acquisition by the state of florida .

some questions center on the potential advantages and disadvantages of the land sale for restoring the everglades , the effect of the land acquisition on florida's role in implementing restoration projects under cerp , and the overall effect of the land acquisition on reducing excessive phosphorus in the ecosystem .

the proposed land acquisition is an investment in restoration that may be realized over a longer time horizon than many restoration projects that are currently planned or under construction , including federally authorized cerp projects .

the impact of the land acquisition on other everglades restoration projects will depend on budgetary decisions made in late september 2010 , which could potentially reduce or delay state funding for some cerp projects .

near - term delays resulting from any funding reductions for cerp projects could affect the everglades ecosystem , including those efforts pertaining to phosphorus mitigation and planned water storage capacity .

congress may have to decide whether currently planned cerp activities should be reconsidered in light of these circumstances .

