all the apportionment methods described above arguably have properties that recommend them .

each is the best formula to satisfy certain mathematical measures of fairness , and the proponents of some of them argue that their favorite meets other goals as well .

for example , the major issue raised in the montana case was , which formula best approximated the "one person , one vote" principle ? .

the apportionment concerns identified in the massachusetts case not only raised "one person , one vote" issues , but also suggested that the hill method discriminates against more populous states .

it is not immediately apparent which of the methods described above is the "fairest" or "most equitable" in the sense of meeting the "one person , one vote" standard .

as already noted , no apportionment formula can equalize districts precisely , given the constraints of ( 1 ) a fixed size house ; ( 2 ) a minimum seat allocation of one ; and ( 3 ) the requirement that districts not cross state lines .

the practical question to be answered , therefore , is not how inequality can be eliminated , but how it can be minimized .

this question too , however , has no clearly definitive answer , for there is no single established criterion by which to determine the equality or fairness of a method of apportionment .

in a report to congress in 1929 , the national academy of sciences ( nas ) defined a series of possible criteria for comparing how well various apportionment formulas achieve equity among states .

this report predates the supreme court's enunciation of the "one person , one vote" principle by more than 30 years , but if congress decided to reevaluate its 1941 choice to adopt the hill method , it could use one of the nas criteria of equity as a measure of how well an apportionment formula fulfills that principle .

although the following are somewhat simplified restatements of the nas criteria , they succinctly present the question before congress if it chooses to take up this matter .

which of these measures best approximates the one person , one vote concept ? .

the method that minimizes the difference between the largest average district size in the country and the smallest ? .

this criterion leads to the dean method .

the method that minimizes the difference in each person's individual share of his or her representative by subtracting the smallest such share for a state from the largest share ? .

this criterion leads to the webster method .

the method that minimizes the difference in average district sizes , or in individual shares of a representative , when those differences are expressed as percentages ? .

these criteria both lead to the hill method .

the method that minimizes the absolute representational surplus among states ? .

this criterion leads to the adams method .

the method that minimizes the absolute representational deficiency among states ? .

this criterion leads to the jefferson method .

in the absence of further information , it is not apparent which criterion ( if any ) best encompasses the principle of "one person , one vote. .

although the nas report endorsed as its preferred method of apportionment the one currently in use — the hill method — the report arguably does not make a clear - cut or conclusive case for one method of apportionment as fairest or most equitable .

are there other factors that might provide additional guidance in making such an evaluation ? .

the remaining sections of this report examine three additional possibilities put forward by statisticians: ( 1 ) mathematical tests different from those examined in the nas report ; ( 2 ) standards of fairness derived from the concept of states' representational "quotas" ; and ( 3 ) the principles of the constitutional "great compromise" between large and small states that resulted in the establishment of a bicameral congress .

if congress decides to revisit the matter of the apportionment formula , this report illustrates that there could be many alternative criteria from which it can choose as a basis for decision .

among the competing mathematical tests are the pair - wise measures proposed by the national academy of sciences in 1929 .

the federal government proposed the statistical test of variance as an appropriate means of computing a total for all the districts in the country in the 1992 litigation on this matter .

the plaintiffs in massachusetts argued that the variance can be computed for different criteria than those proposed by the federal government — with different variance measures leading to different methods .

the contention that one method or another best implements the "great compromise" is open to much discussion .

all of the competing points suggest that congress would be faced with difficult choices if it decided to take this issue up prior to the 2020 census .

which of the mathematical tests discussed in this report best approximates the constitutional requirement that representatives be apportioned among the states according to their respective number is , arguably , a matter of judgment — rather than an indisputable mathematical test .

