an english - speaking caribbean nation with a population of about 2.8 million , jamaica has had a relatively stable parliamentary political system stemming from its history of british colonial rule , even though extensive political violence often marred national elections in the 1970s and 1980s .

two political parties — the people's national party ( pnp ) and the jamaica labour party ( jlp ) have dominated the political system since before the country's 1962 independence .

in the 1970s and 1980s , the two parties had distinct ideological differences , with the pnp under michael manley ( 1972-1980 ) espousing democratic socialism and increasing state ownership of the economy , and the jlp under edward seaga ( 1980-1989 ) adopting a policy of economic liberalization and privatization .

when michael manley returned to power in 1989 , however , his pnp government did not roll back the jlp's pro - business polices , but instead adopted a similar approach .

since that time , there have been few ideological differences between the two parties .

percival j .

"p.j. .

patterson of the pnp , who took over as prime minister when manley resigned in 1992 for health reasons , won three elections and served as head of government until his retirement in march 2006 .

he was replaced by portia simpson miller of the pnp , who became jamaica's first female prime minister .

pnp rule under p.j .

patterson and later simpson was characterized by a policy orientation of market liberalization , support for the private sector , and close ties with the united states .

while prime minister simpson had the support of rank - and - file pnp supporters , she only narrowly won a party leadership contest in 2007 over minister of national security peter phillips who had the support of party leaders .

the pnp's 18-year stretch of governing ultimately ended in september 2007 , when the jlp , headed by bruce golding as party leader , returned to power .

one of the contributing factors to the change of government was that prime minister simpson's government faced growing public dissatisfaction with increasing crime and violence .

the jlp currently holds a narrow margin , 32 of 60 seats , in jamaica's house of representatives , the lower body in the country's bicameral parliament , while the pnp holds the remaining 28 .

the jlp ran on an anti - crime and anti - corruption platform , but the golding government has continued to face challenges in both areas .

u.s. relations with jamaica are close , and are characterized by significant economic and cultural linkages and cooperation on a range of bilateral and transnational issues , including cooperation on anti - drug trafficking efforts .

both the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and the peace corps have provided assistance to jamaica since its independence in 1962 .

some 10,000 americans , many dual nationals , live in jamaica , and over a million u.s. tourists visit the country each year .

there had been increasing tension in u.s. - jamaican relations in recent months because of the golding government's reluctance to extradite jamaican gang leader christopher coke to the united states on drug trafficking charges .

but in the aftermath of the jamaican government's efforts to capture coke and extradite him to the united states in late june 2010 , u.s. officials commended the golding government for its efforts .

when violence broke out in late may 2010 between government security forces and criminal gangs in the capital of kingston and surrounding areas , the state department issued a travel alert to let u.s. citizens know about the situation .

the most recent travel alert was issued on june 24 , 2010 and expires on july 23 .

it notes that the jamaican government has imposed a state of emergency in kingston , st. andrew parish , and st. catherine parish , including spanish town ( see figure 1 ) , and that u.s. citizens in jamaica should monitor local news and radio when venturing from their homes or hotels in the kingston area .

 ( see the full travel alert , available at http: / / travel.state.gov / travel / cis_pa_tw / pa / pa_4985.html . ) .

over the years , jamaica has received considerable amounts of u.s. foreign assistance .

over $500 million was provided in the 1990s , while from fy2000-fy2006 , u.s. foreign aid averaged almost $23 million annually .

most of this aid was development assistance ( da ) and economic support funds ( esf ) for usaid to implement a variety of development projects .

more recently , u.s. assistance to jamaica has declined somewhat .

from fy2007 through fy2010 , u.s. assistance averaged about $12.7 million annually .

for fy2011 , the obama administration requested $13.1 million in assistance for jamaica , with $10.8 million in da implemented by usaid to support a wide variety of projects ( such as community policing and other police reform programs , youth and education programs , local community - based organizations involved in providing social services , technical assistance for trade , investment and economic growth projects , and agriculture diversification ) ; $1.5 million for child survival and health ( csh ) assistance for activities to combat hiv / aids ; and $800,000 for international military education and training ( imet ) .

usaid work in jamaica in recent years has focused on five program areas: 1 ) economic growth , including efforts to promote free market policies and improve worker skills ; 2 ) rural development , with efforts focused on agribusiness , eco - tourism , and cottage industries that help preserve jamaica's biodiversity ; 3 ) health , especially projects supporting hiv / aids activities ; 4 ) democracy , including efforts to help underserved communities beset with violent crime and to improve community policing initiatives ; and 5 ) education , with efforts to improve literacy and other skills and to support the regional caribbean center for excellence in teacher training ( c - cett ) that supports education in eight caribbean countries .

security assistance to jamaica has included support to assist jamaica with port and border security measures and to increase the counternarcotics and counterterrorism capabilities of the jamaican security forces and their capability to protect jamaican waters .

funding has also supported training for the jamaica defense force to increase their readiness , interoperability among their services , and professionalism .

in 2008 , the u.s. southern command provided jamaica with four high - speed interceptor boats under a maritime security assistance initiative known as enduring friendship .

in addition to regular bilateral assistance funding , jamaica is also likely to receive some of assistance under the caribbean basin security initiative ( cbsi ) , a program begun in fy2010 as an offshoot of the mérida initiative for mexico and central america aimed at helping caribbean nations reduce illicit trafficking , increase public safety and security , and promote social justice .

congress appropriated $37 million in assistance for the program in fy2010 , and the obama administration has requested $79 million for fy2011 .

according to the state department , cbsi funds will: combat illicit trafficking in drugs and small arms ; develop and strengthen the capacity of regional defense , law enforcement , and justice sector institutions to detect , interdict and prosecute criminal elements in the caribbean ; increase skills and educational opportunities for populations vulnerable to criminal recruitment ; foster community and law enforcement cooperation ; and provide alternatives to at - risk youth .

the united states has had a peace corps program in jamaica dating back to 1962 .

there are currently about 70 volunteers in the country working to help in youth projects , hiv / aids education , water sanitation , and environmental education .

jamaica is the caribbean's largest producer and exporter of marijuana , and is also a drug transit country for south american cocaine destined for the u.s. and other markets .

the government cooperates closely with the united states on counternarcotics efforts , with the united states providing training and material support to elements of the jamaica constabulary force ( jcf ) and jamaica defense force ( jdf ) in order to strengthen their counternarcotics capabilities and promote greater bilateral cooperation .

the u.s .

marshals service has a regional office in jamaica , and provides support to the jamaica fugitive apprehension team ( jfat ) for training , equipment , guidance and operational support .

jamaica has extradited a number of wanted drug traffickers to the united states for prosecution , including 15 in 2009 .

the jdf coast guard participated in joint deployments with the united states in 2009 under the auspices of "operation riptide. .

the state department's march 2010 international narcotics control strategy report ( incsr ) maintained that while cooperation between u.s. and jamaican law enforcement agencies remains strong , delays in proceeding with the extradition request for christopher coke and delays in other extradition requests called into question jamaica's commitment to bilateral law enforcement cooperation .

as noted above , with coke's extradition in late june 2010 , the state department commended the golding government for its action .

in the 2010 incsr , the state department encouraged the jamaican government to enhance its collaboration with the united states and other regional partners , to development a comprehensive gang reduction strategy , and pass legislation to criminalize participation in organized criminal gangs .

the state department also called for the jamaican government to demonstrate its political will to address corruption by investigating , prosecuting , and convicting corrupt officials at all levels of government service .

the incsr maintained that "pervasive public corruption continues to undermine efforts against drug - related and other crimes , and plays a major role in the safe passage of drugs and drug proceeds through jamaica. .

according to the report , the jamaican government's ambitious anti - corruption and ant - crime legislative agenda remained stalled in parliament .

in late may 2010 , the golding government maintained that it would fast - track several anti - crime and anti - gang measures .

the deportation of caribbean citizens from the united states at times has been a thorny issue in u.s. relations with the region , with challenges centered on criminal deportees and social stigma faced by the deportees when returning to jamaica .

current jamaican minister of national security dwight nelson maintains that the return of criminals from britain , canada , and the united states has contributed to gang activities in jamaica .

in recent years , u.s. criminal deportations to jamaica numbered 1,178 in fy2007 , 1,261 in fy2008 , and 1,252 in fy2009 .

 ( it should be noted that canada and britain also have deported a large number of jamaicans. ) .

a 2007 joint un / world bank study concluded that evidence from jamaica and other caribbean countries shows that it is unlikely that the average deportee is committing violent crime , but that a minority may be causing serious problems both by direct involvement in crime and indirectly by providing a negative role model for youth .

some jamaican politicians contend that the deportees have learned their criminal ways in the united states and that many have lived in the united states since they were young children .

in contrast , noted jamaican criminologist bernard headley contends that the majority of criminal deportees in jamaica are not hardened criminals , and that only a minority of deportees were raised in the united states at a young age .

at a june 2007 caricom meeting in washington , dc , then - prime minister portia simpson miller called for international assistance for rehabilitating and reintegrating the deportees into society , and mechanisms for effective monitoring .

the un / world bank study cited above maintained that assisting reintegration efforts in the caribbean for deported offenders could be a cost - effective way for deportee - sending countries to promote development and weaken international criminal networks .

the study recommended improved coordination and information sharing on criminal deportees by sending countries ; research on the link between deportees and crime ; and the financing of deportee reintegration programs , including financial support from sending countries .

in 2008 , the united kingdom began funding a three - year project for returning deportees from the uk after completing prison sentences .

the project is designed to improve the deportees' integration into jamaican society , and includes the renovation of facilities for short and long - term accommodations for deported males and support for the development of a deportee database .

jamaica has been a beneficiary of the caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) , a u.s. preferential trade program for imports from the region since 1984 .

it was designated a beneficiary of the caribbean basin trade partnership act ( cbtpa ) in 2000 , which effectively provides nafta - equivalent tariff treatment , including preferential treatment for qualifying textile and apparel producers .

cbtpa benefits were scheduled to expire at the end of september 2010 , but in may 2010 congress approved an extension of the trade preferences through september 2020 ( p.l .

111-171 ) .

despite jamaica's participation in these preferential trade programs , its manufacturing exports to the united states have not increased significantly , in large part because of competition from such low - cost producers as the dominican republic and honduras as well as competition from asia .

nevertheless , the united states remains jamaica's main trading partner , accounting for about 45% of jamaican imports and 30% of its exports .

moreover , jamaica has taken advantage of cbi tariff preferences for ethanol , which has spurred development of the industry .

because of the global economic downturn , however , jamaican exports to the united states in 2009 , valued at $468 million , reflected a 36% decline from the previous year while imports from the united states , valued at $1.4 billion in 2009 , reflected a decline of almost 46% .

jamaica's top exports to the united states in 2009 were ethanol and aluminum ( oxides and ores ) , which accounted for about 63% of the total , while major imports from the united states included oil , machinery ( home , office , and construction ) , food and other consumer goods , and industrial supplies .

as a member of the 14-member caribbean community ( caricom ) , jamaica participates in the caribbean regional negotiating machinery ( crnm ) , headquartered in kingston , which has coordinated and managed the region's external trade negotiations since 1997 .

while caricom nations had participated in negotiations for the free trade area of the americas , and even held talks in 2006 with u.s. officials exploring the possibility of a free trade agreement between caricom and the united states , a number of caribbean nations have expressed concerns about the impact of such agreements on the region .

many have argued for special and differential treatment for small economies that would include longer phase - in periods for opening their markets to some products , and some type of development component that would help smaller economies meet their needs for human resources , technology , and infrastructure .

according to the u.s. department of commerce , jamaica has a long history of attracting foreign direct investment from the united states .

currently there are more than 80 major u.s. investors in the country , and u.s. direct investment in jamaica on a historical - cost basis was estimated at $901 million in 2008 .

jamaica remains on the u.s. watch list for those countries with problems in the protection of intellectual property rights .

according to the office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) , jamaica's delay in enacting legislation to implement patent protection obligations under the world trade organization trade - related aspects of intellectual property agreement and the u.s. - jamaica bilateral intellectual property agreement remains a u.s. concern .

while the jamaican government increased its enforcement activity and public awareness efforts in 2009 , the united states urges it to reform its patent protection law in accordance with international standards .

appendix .

appendix a .

links to u.s. government reports background note , jamaica date: december 2009 full text: http: / / www.state.gov / r / pa / ei / bgn / 2032.htm congressional budget justification for foreign operations fy2011 , annex: regi onal perspectives ( jamaica , pp .

728-732 of pdf ) date: march 2010 full text : http: / / www.state.gov / documents / organization / 137937.pdf country reports on hum an rights practices 2009 , jamaica date: march 11 , 2010 full text: http: / / www.state.gov / g / drl / rls / hrrpt / 2009 / wha / 136118.htm country reports on terrorism 2008 ( western hemisphere overview ) date: april 30 , 2009 full text : http: / / www.state.gov / s / ct / rls / crt / 2008 / 122435.htm doing business in jamaica: a country commercial guide for u.s. companies date: february 18 , 2010 full text : http: / / www.buyusainfo.net / docs / x_3846719.pdf international relig ious freedom report 2009 , jamaica date: october 26 , 2009 full text: http: / / www.state.gov / g / drl / rls / irf / 2009 / 127396.htm international narcotics control strategy report 20 10 , vol .

i ( jamaica , pp .

388-392 of pdf ) date: march 2010 full text: http: / / www.state.gov / documents / organization / 138548.pdf trafficking in persons report 2009 ( jamaica , pp .

188-190 of pdf link ) date: june 14 , 2010 full text: http: / / www.state.gov / documents / organization / 142979.pd .

