the basic federal guidance for regulating biotechnology products is the coordinated framework for regulation of biotechnology ( 51 federal register 23302 ) , published in 1986 by the white house office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) .

a key regulatory principle is that genetically engineered ( ge ) products should continue to be regulated according to their characteristics and unique features , not their production method — that is , not on the basis of their creation through biotechnology .

the framework provides a regulatory approach intended to ensure the safety of biotechnology research and products , using existing statutory authority and previous agency experience with traditional breeding techniques .

the three lead agencies are u.s. department of agriculture's animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) , the food and drug administration ( fda ) at the department of health and human services , and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

aphis regulates the importation , interstate movement , and field testing of ge plants and organisms that are or might be plant pests under the plant protection act of 2000 ( ppa ; 7 u.s.c .

§§7701 et seq .

 ) .

because the coordinated framework for regulation of biotechnology regulates ge plants under existing authorities , aphis's guiding statutory authority under the ppa became the vehicle by which aphis regulated plants that had been genetically modified to produce novel proteins , such as those conferring herbicide tolerance and pest resistance .

ge plants that are or might be plant pests are considered "regulated articles" under aphis regulations ( 7 c.f.r .

§§340-340.9 ) .

aphis authorization must be obtained prior to import , interstate movement , or environmental release , including field testing .

in the 1986 framework document , usda published proposed rules under the ppa that would allow it to regulate outdoor uses of transgenic plants .

these regulations were finalized in june 1987 in essentially the same form as the proposed rules .

technically , the ppa regulations do not cover all genetically engineered plants .

the regulations cover only those plants engineered to contain dna sequences from certain genera containing species that were considered to be potential plant pests .

the regulations included a broad list of such genera ; and this had the practical effect of causing most transgenic plants to be captured by the regulations .

a "regulated" plant cannot be introduced into the environment unless its developer obtains aphis authorization through either the permit process or the notification process .

permits impose restrictions on movement and planting to prevent escape of plant material that may pose a pest risk .

developers follow aphis guidance on testing and movements to ensure that the plant will not damage agriculture , human health , or the environment , including the human environment .

most ge crops have been developed under the notification option , an expedited procedure that is less rigorous than permitting .

notification can be used in lieu of permitting when the plant species is not considered a noxious weed ( or a weed in the release area ) and other aphis standards are met .

after a ge variety is approved for release into the environment on a trial basis , the developer of the ge seed typically petitions aphis for "deregulated status" of the particular ge "event" that has been initially approved .

this is the last step to full - scale commercialization of the ge plant .

once the ge plant is deregulated , it is no longer subject to aphis regulation under 7 c.f.r .

part 340 .

a significant step in this deregulation process involves an assessment of the plant's environmental impact , including impacts on the human environment .

the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) requires federal agencies to prepare a detailed environmental impact statement ( eis ) for all "major federal actions significantly affecting the quality of the human environment. .

the "human environment" includes socioeconomic impacts that might arise from the major federal action .

if an agency is unsure of the significance of any environmental impacts , it may prepare an environmental assessment ( ea ) , which is a limited review .

based on the conclusions of that review , the agency can decide an eis is needed because of the impacts found , or it may issue a "finding of no significant impact," known as a fonsi .

monsanto corporation , the developer of herbicide - tolerant varieties of ge alfalfa and sugar beet ( marketed under the name of roundup ready alfalfa and roundup ready sugar beet ) , petitioned aphis for deregulation of these items in 2004 ( for ge alfalfa ) and 2005 ( for ge sugar beets ) .

aphis conducted eas of the ge plants to assess the impacts of growing them on a commercial scale .

aphis issued ea - fonsis for ge alfalfa in june 2005 and for ge sugar beets in march 2005 .

both of these ea fonsis were challenged in separate lawsuits .

the courts found that aphis's environmental assessments were inadequate .

these two cases are discussed in detail below ( see " legal challenges of aphis environmental assessments and injunctions " ) .

the cases of ge alfalfa and ge sugar beets highlight the regulatory complexities of such biological innovations , especially as they pertain to commercialization of these ge varieties through the aphis process of deregulation .

while initial deregulation of herbicide - tolerant and pest - resistant ge corn , soybeans , and cotton varieties led to widespread adoption of these plants over the past 15 years , new ge plant innovations are raising new concerns about the adequacy of the aphis biotechnology regulatory regime .

for example , current development of ge varieties of corn that will express industrial chemicals and pharmaceuticals raises concerns about their potential to cross - pollinate with corn meant for human consumption .

both ge alfalfa and ge sugar beets show the potential for such cross - pollination and its attendant environmental impacts .

with development of ge plants that express industrial chemicals , the issue may take on even greater environmental significance .

another environmental concern has arisen as acreage of herbicide - tolerant ge varieties has increased: herbicide - resistant weeds ( mainly glyphosate - tolerant varieties ) have also evolved .

the plant biotechnology industry is responding to such weed resistance with development of new "stacked" ge varieties , ones combining tolerance to several different herbicides within a single seed .

such innovations may raise further concerns about the adequacy of the existing regulatory structure .

in july 2007 , aphis published a draft eis as part of the evaluation of its regulatory structure .

in october 2008 , aphis proposed a revision of its regulations regarding the import , interstate movement , and environmental release of certain ge organisms .

a subsequent issue - focused meeting on the proposed rule changes was held on april 29-30 , 2009 .

the public comment period initially was to end on november 24 , 2008 , but was extended to june 29 , 2009 .

the final rule has not yet been published .

these proposed revisions are the first since the regulations were established in 1987 .

under current regulations , a ge organism is a regulated article if it is a plant pest or there is reason to believe it might become a plant pest .

in the notification of the proposed regulation revisions , aphis stated that technological advances have led to the possibility of developing ge organisms that do not fit within the plant pest definition , but still might cause environmental or other physical harm by the definition of a plant pest under the plant protection act .

according to aphis , the new regulations would subject a ge organism to oversight based on known plant pest and noxious weed risks of the parent organisms , or based on the traits of the ge organism , or based on the possibility of unknown risks as a plant pest or noxious weed when insufficient information is available .

the proposed regulations also include regulating ge seedlings , tubers , cuttings , bulbs , and spores .

aphis further proposes to reorganize the regulations for permit applications and evaluation procedures by discontinuing its notification procedure , while retaining the permitting procedure .

the proposed regulations would also establish a new petition procedure for aphis to approve a new conditional exemption from the permit requirements , which is currently done by amending regulations .

for environmental releases , aphis proposes a permitting system based on two primary risk - related factors: ( 1 ) the ability of the unmodified recipient plant species to persist in the wild , and ( 2 ) the potential of the ge trait to cause harm based on the plant pest and noxious weed definitions .

with respect to the persistence factor , aphis proposes grouping plant species into four risk categories based on the risk of persistence of the plant or its progeny in the environment without human intervention .

four similar risk categories are also proposed for potential harm caused by the ge trait .

other proposed regulatory changes include remediation authorities for failure to comply with regulations , and agency response to low - level presence ( llp ) of regulated plant materials in commercial seeds or grain that may be used for food or feed .

reactions to the proposed revisions were mixed , and were , in part , the reason aphis extended the original comment period and held public meetings on some of the more controversial proposed changes ( eg , scope of the regulatory changes , incorporation of the plant protection act's noxious weed authority into aphis's regulatory authority , revision of the permit process , and environmental release of ge crops that produce pharmaceutical and industrial compounds ) .

in their comments on the proposed rule changes , biotechnology industry representatives and nongovernmental organizations expressed opposition to the expansion of aphis authority to regulate ge organisms if they posed a risk as a plant pest or noxious weed .

the industry representatives also took issue with the proposal to take a voluntary approach to ge regulation , arguing that it could have a significant impact on international trade .

the center for food safety ( cfs ) denounced the proposal , stating that "these proposed regulations may set in motion a process that would put many ge crops completely beyond the bounds of regulation. .

cfs said that its biggest concern is that the proposed rules remove established criteria in determining the very scope of regulation .

in march 2009 , more than 80 advocacy groups signed a letter urging secretary of agriculture tom vilsack to halt approving ge crops until the agency changes its regulatory approach to biotechnology .

congress has generally supported development in plant biotechnology .

an early step by the house agriculture committee indicated the 112 th congress would continue that trend .

at a forum on january 20 , 2011 , convened by the house agriculture committee , members queried secretary vilsack about partial deregulation and indicated their support for full deregulation .

while legislative activity was relatively subdued in the 111 th congress , hearings focused on the relationship between the adoption of various ge varieties and the evolution of herbicide resistance in weeds .

other biotechnology - related legislation in the 111 th congress included the genetically engineered safety act of 2010 ( h.r .

5578 ) , which would have prohibited the open - air cultivation of ge pharmaceutical and industrial crops , and the use of common human food or animal feed as the host plant for a ge pharmaceutical or industrial chemical .

another bill , the genetically engineered technology farmer protection act ( h.r .

5579 ) , would have established various protections for farmers and ranchers that may potentially suffer economic harm from genetically engineered seeds , plants , or animals .

a third bill , the genetically engineered food right to know act ( h.r .

5577 ) , would have amended the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act , the federal meat inspection act , and the poultry products inspection act to require that food that contains a genetically engineered material , or that is produced with a genetically engineered material , be labeled accordingly .

partly in response to the cases of ge alfalfa and sugar beets , congress has made legislative proposals that would streamline aphis review process for ge plants .

provisions to amend aphis's regulatory procedures under the plant protection act were introduced in the 112 th congress in the house farm bill ( h.r .

6083 ) and in the house agriculture appropriations bill ( h.r .

5973 ) .

the latter provision would have required the secretary to grant producers permits to continue planting a ge crop if a regulatory decision was vacated by the court , as happened with ge alfalfa and sugar beets .

the permits would permit growers to continue planting , under conditions set by the secretary , until a final determination on deregulation was made .

no further legislative action was taken on these two bills in the 112 th congress .

in the 113 th congress , the house farm bill ( h.r .

1947 ) omitted the proposed revisions to aphis's deregulation process .

the provision requiring the secretary to grant permits in the event of a vacated regulatory decision was passed as section 735 in h.r .

933 , the fy2013 appropriations bill .

the provision will expire at the end of fy2013 .

