housing counseling organizations provide information on a wide range of housing issues to a variety of populations .

prospective homebuyers , current homeowners , renters , and the homeless are all examples of populations that may seek housing counseling .

in general , the federal government does not provide housing counseling services directly .

rather , the federal government provides some financial support for private housing counseling agencies , primarily through the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .

hud supports housing counseling activities in two main ways .

first , it certifies housing counseling agencies that meet certain criteria and lists the contact information for these hud - approved agencies on the hud website .

second , since the late 1970s congress has usually appropriated funding for housing counseling to hud during the annual appropriations process , and hud has used this funding to provide competitive grants to housing counseling agencies .

only agencies that are certified by hud are eligible to apply for these grants .

however , not all agencies that are certified by hud are guaranteed to receive a grant .

furthermore , hud's housing counseling grants do not cover housing counseling agencies' full costs ; even agencies that receive grants through hud generally get most of their funding from other sources .

the amount of funding appropriated for hud's housing counseling program fluctuates from year to year .

over the last decade , appropriations for housing counseling generally increased , sometimes sharply .

however , congress opted not to provide any funding for hud's housing counseling program in fy2011 .

it again provided funding for the program in fy2012 .

separate from hud's housing counseling program , congress has appropriated additional housing counseling funding specifically for foreclosure mitigation counseling since fy2008 .

congress has appropriated this funding to neighborworks america , a federally chartered nonprofit agency with a nationwide network of affiliated organizations .

neighborworks administers this funding through the national foreclosure mitigation counseling program .

housing counseling can also be considered part of the broader category of financial education .

in addition to hud's housing counseling program and neighborworks , the department of veterans affairs , the department of the treasury , and the department of defense all provide some support for housing counseling , or for broader financial counseling programs that may include housing counseling , that is aimed at specific groups .

while housing counseling is generally a voluntary activity , the federal government and some state , local , and private entities do require housing counseling as a condition for participating in certain programs .

these requirements are another way in which the federal government supports housing counseling , because such requirements both increase the demand for housing counseling and make the provision of counseling a more mainstream activity .

however , the federal government does not always provide additional funds to housing counseling agencies to go along with requirements for counseling , so such conditions could have the effect of requiring agencies to counsel more people while spending less time and money on each individual .

this report provides a broad overview of what housing counseling is , with a specific focus on how the federal government supports housing counseling activities .

it describes how housing counseling organizations become eligible for federal housing counseling funds , particularly through hud , and how those funds are distributed .

it also analyzes which counseling organizations are receiving federal funds and how those funds are used .

this section broadly describes housing counseling .

it discusses what housing counseling is and how it is carried out , the populations that tend to receive housing counseling , and the types of organizations that provide it .

this section is meant to provide a general overview of the housing counseling industry and is not intended to be exhaustive .

while some studies have been done on whether housing counseling affects housing outcomes , most of these studies have been limited in scope .

this section provides a brief review of the existing literature on the effectiveness of housing counseling ; it is not intended to be exhaustive .

a number of studies on the effectiveness of different types of housing counseling programs , and homeownership counseling in particular , were done in the 1970s and early 1980s ; many of these studies were funded by hud .

some of these early studies found some evidence that both pre - purchase and post - purchase counseling could have some positive outcomes , such as reduced default or foreclosure rates .

however , most of the studies done in this time period had a limited focus that made it hard to generalize the results , and the studies defined success in many different ways .

furthermore , a number of these studies had significant methodological problems .

a 2001 review of the literature describes the overall results of these early studies as "highly ambiguous. .

after the early 1980s , there were very few empirical studies on housing counseling effectiveness until the mid - to late 1990s .

since then , a new wave of studies has been done to examine whether housing counseling achieves the desirable outcomes its advocates expect it to produce .

one often - cited study was published in 2001 , when abdighani hirad and peter m. zorn looked at whether housing counseling reduced default rates among homeowners using freddie mac's affordable gold mortgage product .

they found some evidence that pre - purchase housing counseling reduced the likelihood that a borrower would ever become 60 days delinquent on his or her mortgage , and that the method through which the counseling was delivered made a difference in its effectiveness .

in particular , borrowers who underwent face - to - face counseling , either individually or in a classroom setting , experienced delinquency at lower rates than borrowers who were counseled over the phone or through self - study .

a 2011 paper from the research institute for housing america , which is affiliated with the mortgage bankers association , reviews several studies of pre - purchase or post - purchase education and counseling conducted over the last 15 years .

this review notes that some of these studies ( including the hirad and zorn study discussed above ) indicate that positive effects may be associated with both pre - and post - purchase counseling .

however , this paper also stresses that studies of housing counseling are generally not able to be conducted as randomized experiments , making it difficult to definitively attribute any observed positive effects to counseling itself rather than to other factors .

research efforts have also been hampered by a number of additional problems associated with evaluating the effectiveness of housing counseling .

for example , some have pointed out that there is a lack of data , and a lack of capacity for collecting data , that track who receives housing counseling and what kind of outcomes they experience .

others have described ongoing issues with designing studies to evaluate housing counseling , such as difficulties in defining exactly what housing counseling is or identifying the kinds of outcomes that would indicate that counseling is effective .

the lack of a standard curriculum or method for offering housing counseling also presents challenges for generalizing the effectiveness of any particular housing counseling program to other forms of counseling ( see the section on " standardizing training and services " later in this report ) .

overall , although housing counseling has not been definitively linked to positive outcomes , there is some evidence that housing counseling can be effective in achieving desirable outcomes for both borrowers and lenders .

however , that evidence is largely limited to certain programs or groups of homebuyers , or based on limited outcomes .

most advocates and critics of housing counseling agree that more empirical work is needed on housing counseling's effects on housing outcomes .

the federal government primarily supports housing counseling through hud's housing counseling assistance program .

through this program , hud certifies housing counseling agencies that meet certain criteria and provides competitive grants to some of these hud - approved housing counseling agencies .

this section begins with a brief overview of the history of hud's housing counseling program and a description of the different types of housing counseling agencies that hud certifies .

it then explains the criteria housing counseling agencies have to meet to be certified by hud .

finally , it describes the appropriations and funding process for hud's housing counseling program .

this section describes current trends related to the distribution of hud's housing counseling grants .

it looks at the amount of funding the average hud - approved housing counseling agency has tended to receive from hud in recent years , as well as trends in funding for different types of agencies and different types of counseling .

while the federal government primarily provides financial support for housing counseling through appropriations to hud's housing counseling program , it also provides some funding for housing counseling through other sources .

some funding for other hud programs can be used for housing counseling in certain situations .

outside of hud , other sources of federal funds for housing counseling include funding appropriated to neighborworks america , and programs administered through the department of veterans affairs , the department of the treasury , and the department of defense .

over the past two years , neighborworks in particular has taken on a larger role in housing counseling by administering federal funding for foreclosure mitigation counseling through the national foreclosure mitigation counseling program .

securing adequate funding is often an issue for housing counseling agencies .

hud expects that hud - approved housing counseling agencies will have sources of funding other than hud grants .

as mentioned earlier in this report , hud - approved counseling agencies are not guaranteed hud housing counseling funding .

a september 2008 report by abt associates includes information on hud - approved agencies' other sources of funding , based on a survey of such agencies conducted in 2007 .

the abt report found that while hud funding was the largest single source of funding among the hud - approved respondents it surveyed , this only accounted for 13.5% of agencies' total funding .

this does not mean that individual agencies do not rely on hud funding to a larger degree , but among all hud - approved agencies , hud housing counseling funding appears to be a relatively small portion of total funding .

other sources of funding for housing counseling include funding from other federal programs ; state and local governments ; financial institutions ; foundations ; the agency itself or , for subgrantees , from an intermediary ; public housing authorities ; and the government - sponsored enterprises ( fannie mae , freddie mac , and the federal home loan banks ) .

as of july 2007 , the amount of total funding that survey respondents as a whole received from these other sources ranged from under 1.5% ( from the gses ) to nearly 12.5% ( from state governments ) .

figure 5 illustrates the wide variety of sources from which hud - approved housing counseling agencies receive funding .

as was described earlier in this report , funds from hud's two largest block grant programs , the home program and cdbg , can be used for housing counseling in some circumstances .

 ( see the " other hud funding " section earlier in this report. ) .

the abt report separates home and cdbg funding from each other and from other federal sources of housing counseling funding in its analysis of funding sources .

when these additional federal sources are all combined into one category , hud - approved housing counseling agencies in aggregate receive just under 25% of their funding from federal sources other than hud's housing counseling program .

along with the funding that these agencies do receive from hud's housing counseling program , federal sources account for about 37.5% of agencies' funding .

as the abt report shows , fees from clients comprise a small portion of hud - approved agencies' overall funding .

hud - approved counseling agencies were not permitted to charge fees for counseling prior to the issuance of the housing counseling program final rule in 2007 .

in the final rule , hud changed its previous policy and stated that hud - approved housing counseling agencies can charge clients reasonable fees for counseling services as long as the fee does not impose an undue hardship on the client , and as long as nobody is turned away from the agency because of an inability to pay the fee .

the final rule changed hud's policy on housing counseling agencies receiving fees from lenders as well ; now , agencies can receive fees from lenders as long as there is no conflict of interest , and as long as the fact that the agency is receiving funding from a lender is disclosed to the client .

this section briefly describes current issues related to the housing counseling industry as a whole .

many observers and industry participants agree that there is a lack of standardization in the housing counseling industry .

this lack of standardization applies to both training procedures for housing counselors and curricula for the counseling itself .

while hud certifies housing counseling agencies that meet its requirements , it does not currently certify individual housing counselors , and there is no agreement on what standards individual counselors should have to meet if they were to be certified .

in addition , there is no standard curriculum for conducting housing counseling sessions .

there is not even widespread agreement on basic aspects of housing counseling , such as what constitutes housing counseling as opposed to education , or which forms housing counseling should take .

other concerns surrounding the lack of standardization among housing counseling agencies are the possibilities that some counseling agencies could be prone to offering poor advice , may experience conflicts of interest , or could engage in outright fraud .

it is not always clear whether an agency is working on the client's behalf rather than the lender's .

the possibility exists that some organizations that pose as counseling agencies may be illegitimate , or that legitimate counseling agencies may not be working solely in the best interests of the client .

standardizing training and approval processes for both organizations and individual counselors may strengthen the ability of the industry to deter problems such as these .

approval by hud , neighborworks , or another widely acknowledged organization can also help guide people to experienced , vetted housing counseling agencies .

the lack of standardization among housing counseling providers has led to a variety of efforts to develop industry - wide standards .

some of these efforts have been driven by the housing counseling and / or mortgage finance industries themselves , while others have been driven by the federal government .

this section briefly describes some of these efforts .

in 1996 , fannie mae started the american homeowner education and counseling institute ( aheci ) , which brought together various stakeholders in the mortgage lending industry to attempt to develop housing counseling standards .

aheci had five stated goals: ( 1 ) establishing national accreditation standards for housing counseling providers , ( 2 ) developing a core housing counseling curriculum , ( 3 ) researching the costs and benefits associated with housing counseling , ( 4 ) establishing means for self - financing housing counseling , and ( 5 ) establishing a housing counseling "informational clearinghouse. .

despite making some progress on its goals , such as releasing a blueprint for a core housing counseling curriculum , the organization no longer exists today .

to some extent , aheci has been succeeded by neighborworks's center for homeownership education and counseling ( nchec ) , which works to establish standards for housing counseling curricula and the certification of housing counselors .

for example , nchec convened an advisory council to develop the national industry standards for homeownership education and counseling , which were created by , and have been adopted by , a number of prominent housing counseling organizations .

neighborworks is also a leading provider of housing counseling training .

finally , the national association of housing counselors and agencies ( nahca ) is an organization made up of housing counseling agencies that provides training , testing , certification , and technical assistance to housing counselors and counseling agencies nationwide .

on september 2 , 2009 , hud published a final rule specifying requirements for counselors who provide hecm counseling .

the rule established a hecm counselor roster and required that homeowners applying for hecms receive counseling from a counselor on the hecm counselor roster .

in order to be eligible for the hecm counselor roster , a hecm counselor must ( 1 ) be employed by a hud - approved housing counseling agency ( or such an agency's affiliate ) or an shfa , ( 2 ) have passed a standardized hecm counseling exam within the last three years , and ( 3 ) have received hecm - related training within the past two years .

hecm counselors must also have access to technology that allows hud to track counseling results , and they may not be on the general services administration's suspension and debarment list or on hud's limited denial of participation list or credit alert interactive response system .

the secure and fair enforcement for mortgage licensing act of 2008 , or the safe mortgage licensing act , was passed as part of the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-289 ) .

the safe act requires states to set licensing and registration requirements for mortgage originators that meet minimum standards set forth in the law .

the safe act also directs hud to implement a licensing and registration system for mortgage originators in any state that does not meet the minimum requirements of the law .

on july 21 , 2011 , responsibility for the safe act transferred from hud and the federal banking regulators to the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) , which was established by the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ) .

hud issued a proposed rule on the safe act on december 15 , 2009 , and a final rule on june 30 , 2011 , implementing the minimum standards for licensing and registration of mortgage originators in the law and the procedures hud would use in the event that a state is not compliant with the requirements .

some housing counseling agencies submitted comments in response to the proposed rule expressing concern that the rule could be interpreted to cover housing counselors that are involved in pre - purchase or foreclosure mitigation counseling under the requirements of the safe act , thereby requiring them to comply with licensing and registration requirements .

the housing counseling agencies argued that the costs and burden of complying with the requirements of the safe act could result in fewer people receiving housing counseling services or in some housing counseling agencies having to close .

addressing these comments in the preamble to its final rule , hud emphasized that the rule applies to anyone who engages in the business of a loan originator , and that it had no authority to exempt individuals who engaged in the functions of a loan originator , regardless of his or her job title .

however , hud also noted that traditional housing counseling activities would not seem to fall under the definition of originating a loan , although it is possible that certain types of activities that counselors might engage in — such as acting as an intermediary between a borrower and a source of financing , or presenting loan terms to borrowers — could be considered loan origination and require the individuals engaged in such functions to comply with the safe act .

the final rule did exempt employees of state housing finance agencies and government agencies that engage in the business of a loan originator , and employees of bona fide nonprofit organizations who engage in the business of a residential mortgage originator for public or charitable purposes .

it also left it up to the cfpb to decide whether loan modification activities constituted engaging in the business of a loan originator .

in december 2011 , the cfpb published an interim final rule with request for public comment implementing the provisions of the safe act .

the interim final rule is substantially similar to the rules that had been promulgated by hud and the federal banking regulators prior to the authority to implement the safe act transferring to the cfpb .

the rule became effective on december 30 , 2011 , and the comment period closed on february 17 , 2012 .

ever since mortgage delinquency and foreclosure rates began to rise around the middle of 2006 , some policymakers and other observers have focused on housing counseling as a potential way to reduce delinquencies and foreclosures .

several housing counseling agencies have undertaken specific initiatives to address delinquency and foreclosure issues .

one example is neighborworks , which in addition to administering the national foreclosure mitigation counseling program has created a center for foreclosure solutions in response to increasing foreclosure rates .

the center for foreclosure solutions provides counselor training , certification , and research on foreclosure solutions .

another example of a housing counseling agency specifically addressing foreclosure issues is the homeownership preservation foundation , a hud - approved intermediary , which has set up a hotline to assist homeowners facing foreclosure ( the hotline number is 888-995-hope ) .

this hotline was originally associated with the hope now alliance , an organization of mortgage industry participants that formed to address the increase in default and foreclosure rates .

the hotline is now also used to connect homeowners with counselors that can assist them in applying for the administration's flagship foreclosure prevention program , the home affordable modification program ( hamp ) .

housing counseling also plays a role in hamp .

hamp guidelines require that homeowners who receive mortgage modifications through the program and who have total debt - to - income ratios that exceed 55% receive counseling as a condition of the program .

counseling is encouraged , but not required , for other participants in hamp .

given the requirements for certain borrowers to receive counseling , the interest in the program generally , and the increase in the number of people experiencing mortgage trouble who might want to talk to a housing counselor , counseling agencies may be facing increased demand for their services .

the primary source of funding specifically for foreclosure mitigation housing counseling has been the funding provided to neighborworks america for the national foreclosure mitigation counseling program , described earlier in the " national foreclosure mitigation counseling program " section of this report .

no additional funding was appropriated for counseling borrowers participating in hamp , but neighborworks allows grantees to use a portion of nfmcp funds to counsel hamp participants .

 ( hamp participants can also meet the requirement for counseling by receiving counseling from a hud - approved housing counseling agency. ) .

according to neighborworks , between 240,000 and 320,000 hamp participants with high debt - to - income ratios were expected to be referred to counseling , but fewer referrals than expected have been occurring .

neighborworks reports that over 7,000 borrowers in hamp trial modifications had received counseling through the nfmcp through june 30 , 2011 .

the lower - than - expected number of hamp borrowers receiving counseling through the nfmcp may reflect servicers not consistently referring borrowers to counseling , or borrowers not pursuing counseling despite the requirement , rather than because fewer borrowers than anticipated have high debt - to - income ratios .

the average total debt - to - income ratio of participants in the program through february 2012 was over 59% even after a mortgage modification .

in general , securing funding can be an issue among housing counseling agencies .

while congress has often provided increased funding for housing counseling in recent years , both through increased appropriations to hud's housing counseling program and funding for neighborworks's nfmcp , it is unclear whether the increase in funding has kept up with increased demand on housing counseling agencies to provide counseling to borrowers facing default or foreclosure .

the lack of funding for hud's housing counseling program in fy2011 may further increase the burden on housing counseling agencies that are providing such counseling , although congress again provided funding for the program in fy2012 .

the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ) , signed into law by president obama on july 21 , 2010 , includes a number of provisions related to housing counseling .

the dodd - frank act establishes an office of housing counseling within hud , and establishes the position of director of housing counseling to head the office and have primary responsibility within hud for all homeownership and rental housing counseling activities .

according to hud's fy2013 budget justifications , the office of housing counseling is expected to become operational during fy2012 .

the secretary of hud or the director of housing counseling are directed to undertake a variety of activities to expand housing counseling , set counseling standards , or provide outreach to the public .

specifically , the secretary is directed to establish standards for materials and forms to be used in connection with homeownership counseling , and to the extent that funds are made available in advance in appropriations acts , to certify software programs that consumers can use to evaluate mortgage products based on their own circumstances .

furthermore , the secretary is directed to provide advice and technical assistance , including assistance in developing content and materials , to states , localities , and nonprofits to help establish and operate programs to educate consumers on specific types or aspects of mortgages , with a focus on reaching the most vulnerable consumers .

the secretary is also directed to make financial assistance available to hud - approved housing counseling agencies and shfas , and to establish standards and procedures for determining the eligibility of agencies to receive funding .

the legislation also directs the secretary to take any necessary action to inform consumers about the importance and availability of home inspection counseling , and to develop or publish certain materials related to home inspection counseling .

the director of the office of housing counseling is assigned specific functions , and in particular is directed to establish rules related to a number of provisions in current law , as well rules related to collaborating with community - based organizations with expertise in housing counseling and rules related to building capacity for providing housing counseling in underdeveloped areas .

the director of the office of housing counseling is also directed to undertake a public awareness campaign targeted to certain populations that may benefit from housing counseling .

the dodd - frank legislation also requires that only hud - approved housing counseling agencies provide housing counseling associated with hud programs .

finally , as was noted earlier in this report , another section of the dodd - frank act amends the home ownership and equity protection act of 1994 ( hoepa ) , which places certain requirements on mortgages that are deemed to be high - cost due to exceeding certain interest rate and points and fees thresholds .

among other things , the dodd - frank act amends hoepa to prohibit a lender from making a high - cost mortgage available to a borrower until the lender has received certification that the borrower has been counseled by a hud - approved housing counselor on the advisability of the mortgage .

