federal law houses hundreds of offenses punishable by a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment .

although only a handful of these mandatory minimum offenses are prosecuted with any regularity , drug trafficking offenses accounted for over two - thirds of the total .

congress has created three procedures that make punishment for these offenses a little less mandatory .

one , the so - called safety valve ( 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( f ) ) , permits a sentencing court to disregard a statutory minimum sentence for the benefit of a low - level , nonviolent , cooperative defendant with a minimal prior criminal record , convicted under several mandatory minimum controlled substance offenses .

the other two , 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( e ) and rule 35 ( b ) of the federal rules of criminal procedure , afford a sentencing court comparable latitude but only on the motion of the prosecutor , based on the defendant's substantial assistance to the government , and without regard to the offense charged .

in october 2009 , congress instructed the u.s .

sentencing commission to prepare a report on the mandatory minimum sentencing provisions under federal law .

in early 2010 , the commission conducted a survey of federal district court judges regarding their views on mandatory minimum sentencing .

a majority of those responding endorsed amendments to the safety valve and substantial assistance exceptions .

the commission also held a public hearing at which several witnesses urged adjustments in the safety valve and substantial assistance provisions .

the commission subsequently recommended that congress consider expanding the safety valve to cover other offenses and to reach offenders with a slightly more extensive prior criminal record .

the first step act authorized safety - valve relief for convictions under the maritime drug enforcement act and for defendants with slightly more extensive prior criminal records .

three provisions authorize federal courts to reduce a defendant's sentence on the motion of the government for substantial assistance: rule 35 ( b ) of the federal rules of criminal procedure , 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( e ) , and section 5k1.1 of the u.s .

sentencing guidelines .

only section 3553 ( e ) and rule 35 ( b ) authorize sentences below otherwise applicable mandatory minimums .

unlike the safety valve , neither section 3553 ( e ) nor rule 35 ( b ) is limited to mandatory minimums established for controlled substance offenses .

the substantial assistance provision , 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( e ) , passed with little fanfare in the twilight of the 99 th congress as part of the massive anti - drug abuse act of 1986 , legislation that established or increased a number of mandatory minimum sentencing provisions .

the section continues in its original form virtually unchanged: ( e ) limited authority to impose a sentence below a statutory minimum .

 - upon motion of the government , the court shall have the authority to impose a sentence below a level established by statute as a minimum sentence so as to reflect a defendant's substantial assistance in the investigation or prosecution of another person who has committed an offense .

such sentence shall be imposed in accordance with the guidelines and policy statements issued by the sentencing commission pursuant to section 994 of title 28 , united states code .

the section passed between the date authorizing creation of the sentencing guidelines and the date they became effective .

rather than replicate the language of section 3553 ( e ) , the guidelines contain an overlapping section that authorizes a sentencing court to depart from the minimum sentence called for by the guidelines .

as a general rule , a defendant is entitled to a sentence below an otherwise applicable statutory minimum under the provisions of section 3553 ( e ) only if the government and the court agree .

the courts have acknowledged that due process or equal protection or other constitutional guarantees may provide a narrow exception .

"thus , a defendant would be entitled to relief if a prosecutor refused to file a substantial - assistance motion , say , because of the defendant's race or religion. .

a defendant is entitled to relief if the government's refusal constitutes a breach of its plea agreement .

a defendant is also "entitled to relief if the prosecutor's refusal to move was not rationally related to any legitimate government end. .

some courts have suggested that a defendant is entitled to relief if the prosecution refuses to move under circumstances that "shock the conscience of the court," or that demonstrate bad faith , or for reasons unrelated to substantial assistance .

a majority of the judges who answered the sentencing commission's survey agreed that relief under section 3553 ( e ) should be available even in the absence of motion from the prosecutor .

despite their similarities , section 3553 ( e ) and u.s.s.g .

section 5k1.1 are not the same .

a motion under section 3553 ( e ) authorizes a sentence beneath the mandatory minimum , and a motion under u.s.s.g .

section 5k1.1 authorizes a sentence beneath the applicable sentencing guideline range .

thus , a motion under section 5k1.1 will ordinarily not be construed as a motion under section 3553 ( e ) , in order to permit a court sentence below an otherwise applicable mandatory minimum sentencing requirement .

any sentence imposed below the statutory minimum by virtue of section 3553 ( e ) must be based on the extent of the defendant's assistance ; it may not reflect considerations unrelated to such assistance .

it has been suggested , however , that a court may use the section 5k1.1 factors for that determination , that is , " ( 1 ) the court's evaluation of the significance and usefulness of the defendant's assistance , taking into consideration the government's evaluation of the assistance rendered ; ( 2 ) the truthfulness , completeness , and reliability of any information or testimony provided by the defendant ; ( 3 ) the nature and extent of the defendant's assistance ; ( 4 ) any injury suffered , or any danger or risk of injury to the defendant or his family resulting from his assistance ; [and] ( 5 ) the timeliness of the defendant's assistance. .

the substantial assistance exception makes possible convictions that might otherwise be unattainable .

yet , it may also lead to "inverted sentencing," that is , a situation in which "the more serious the defendant's crimes , the lower the sentence — because the greater his wrongs , the more information and assistance he had to offer to a prosecutor" ; while in contrast the exception is of no avail to the peripheral offender who can provide no substantial assistance .

perhaps for this reason , most of the judges who responded to the sentencing commission survey agreed that a sentencing court should not be limited to assistance - related factors and should be allowed to use the generally permissible sentencing factors when calculating a sentence under section 3553 ( e ) .

in the before - and - after sentencing tale of avoiding a statutory mandatory minimum for substantial assistance , rule 35 ( b ) is the after .

it is available only after sentencing .

if the defendant's sentence is vacated on appeal , a section 3553 ( e ) motion rather than a rule 35 ( b ) motion is the appropriate vehicle for relief during resentencing .

the rule features a two - pronged postsentence authorization for sentence reduction at the behest of the government .

first , the government may always file a motion for sentence reduction including reduction below an otherwise applicable mandatory minimum if it does so within a year of sentencing .

second , the government may file a comparable motion a year after sentencing , but only under narrow circumstances that excuse the failure to make a more timely motion .

here , too , a motion by the government is a prerequisite to relief , and the government's decision to refuse to move can be overcome only where the government's silence is unconstitutionally grounded or based on some rationale not reasonably related to a legitimate government end .

a district court , faced with a rule 35 ( b ) motion , must determine whether the defendant in fact rendered substantial assistance and if so what level of reduction , if any , is warranted .

as part of its assessment , the court may , but is not required to , consider the general sentencing factors found in 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( a ) .

there is some authority for the proposition that the defendant has no right to notice and hearing following the submission of a rule 35 ( b ) motion .

moreover , rule 35 ( b ) does not authorize a court to reduce the amount of restitution previously ordered .

