in october 2010 , the social security administration ( ssa ) announced that social security beneficiaries would not receive a cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) in 2011 .

similarly , beneficiaries did not receive a cola in 2010 .

social security colas are based on a measure of inflation reported by the bureau of labor statistics ( the consumer price index ) and a formula specified in the social security act .

consumer prices reached a peak in the third quarter of 2008 but fell in subsequent months .

because the cpi - w did not regain its 2008 peak over subsequent measurement periods used to determine the cola for 2010 and 2011 , there has been no inflation adjustment to benefits for two consecutive years .

beneficiaries of other programs are also affected by the absence of a social security cola .

for example , the social security cola triggers an increase in supplemental security income , veterans' pensions administered by the department of veterans affairs and railroad retirement benefits .

both the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and the social security board of trustees project that a cola will be payable in january 2012 .

in response to the absence of a cola for the second consecutive year , some members of congress and the president are again calling for a one - time payment of $250 in lieu of a cola for social security beneficiaries , veterans , and others .

democratic congressional leaders have stated their intent to bring such legislation to the floor before the close of the 111 th congress .

the proposed one - time payment is viewed by supporters as a way to assist economically vulnerable individuals and as a means to stimulate the economy .

during the 111 th congress , in response to the absence of a social security cola in 2010 and 2011 , a number of bills that would take different approaches have been introduced .

some measures would provide a one - time payment in lieu of a cola ( the amount of the payment would vary depending on the proposal ) , whereas others would provide an ad hoc cola of a specified percentage or require the use of a different measure of inflation to compute the cola .

this report explains how the social security cola is computed under current law and discusses some of the concerns that have been raised about the consumer price index , the measure on which the cola is based , as a true measure of the cost of living , especially for the elderly .

it then provides a brief summary of legislation introduced in the 111 th congress related to the social security cola issue .

the report presents policy considerations regarding a one - time payment in lieu of a cola , including the economic status of older americans , their reliance on social security benefits , and the effectiveness of this type of government spending as an economic stimulus .

drawing from recent experience with the $250 economic recovery payments to social security and other beneficiaries provided under the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) , the report offers points to consider with respect to the design of a one - time payment proposal , such as the scope of the eligible beneficiary population ; administrative issues , including those related to improper payments ; and the budget impact of such payments .

the social security cola is an annual inflation - adjustment to benefits to help them maintain their purchasing power over time .

before 1972 , congress periodically increased benefits on an ad hoc basis .

in 1972 , congress enacted legislation providing for automatic colas beginning in 1975 .

since 1975 , a cola has been paid each year except 2010 and 2011 .

a number of bills introduced in the 111 th congress would provide a one - time payment in lieu of a cola .

these bills vary in terms of the payment amount , who would be included in the pool of eligible beneficiaries , and whether the cost of the one - time payment would be offset by other provisions .

other bills would provide a one - time , ad hoc cola of a specified percentage .

members of congress have also introduced several bills to require that ssa use a different inflation measure to determine the cola , based on arguments that the cpi - w may not accurately reflect the spending patterns of the social security beneficiary population .

for example , h.r .

5987 ( representative pomeroy ) , seniors protection act of 2010 , is likely to be considered before the end of the 111 th congress .

h.r .

5987 would provide a one - time $250 payment to all social security beneficiaries , including children and disabled beneficiaries receiving ssdi , railroad retirees , ssi recipients , and certain veterans in the event that no social security cola is payable in 2011 .

the one - time payment would be disbursed to persons who were entitled to benefits ( in the case of ssi , eligible for benefits ) in any of the three months ending immediately prior to the month in which the bill was enacted and , in the case of social security beneficiaries , were paid a benefit in any of the 12 months ending prior to the month in which the bill was enacted .

only one $250 payment would be made to each individual , regardless of whether he or she was entitled to , or eligible for , benefits under more than one program .

payments would not be made to persons who were prisoners or aliens who were not lawfully present in the united states .

the one - time payment would be disregarded for the purposes of all federal and federally - assisted programs , and would not be considered income for the purposes of taxation .

payments would be made at the earliest practicable date in 2011 prior to april 1 , 2011 , and no payments would be disbursed after december 31 , 2011 .

in october 2010 , speaker of the house nancy pelosi and senate majority leader harry reid announced their support for consideration of a one - time $250 payment to social security and certain other beneficiaries when congress returns after the november elections .

on october 15 , 2010 , the white house press office announced that the president supports efforts to provide a $250 payment to seniors , veterans , and people with disabilities .

other members of congress have questioned the need for such a payment or indicated that they may support a one - time payment only if the legislation includes financing provisions .

this section the report discusses issues that may inform the debate on whether to provide a one - time payment to those directly affected by the social security cola: the economic condition of older americans ; their dependence on social security benefits and their economic vulnerability in recent times ; the effectiveness of this category of government spending as an economic stimulus ; and the option of means testing such payments .

other issues discussed in this section include parity for certain government retirees and residents of u.s. territories , improper economic recovery payments under the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) , and the potential budget impact of a one - time payment .

the announcement that there will be no social security cola in 2011 , for the second year in a row , has prompted some members of congress and president obama to call for legislative action .

besides social security beneficiaries , beneficiaries of several other federal programs are affected by the social security cola including beneficiaries of ssi , veterans' pension benefits and railroad retirement pensions .

cbo and ssa both forecast that a social security cola will next be paid in 2012 .

members of congress have introduced a number of bills in the 111 th congress to address the absence of a social security cola .

the bills take various approaches .

some bills would provide a one - time payment in lieu of a cola .

other bills would require the use of a different measure of inflation to determine the social security cola or would provide a one - time , ad hoc cola of a specified percentage .

democratic congressional leaders have stated their intent to bring legislation to provide a one - time payment to social security and certain other beneficiaries to the floor when congress returns after the november elections .

supporters of a one - time payment view it as a way to stimulate the economy .

supporters also intend the payment to assist seniors who may be vulnerable to rising healthcare costs , particularly older seniors and women .

others argue that a one - time payment is not necessary because most beneficiaries received an unusually high cola of 5.8% in 2009 and were protected against deflation in a subsequent period .

the cpi - w remained below its 2008 peak during the measurement periods used to determine the 2010 and 2011 colas .

opponents also cite the budget cost of providing a one - time payment , which would vary depending on who receives the payment .

in addition , some research suggests that the provision would not be an effective stimulus measure , particularly when compared to other policy options .

in august 2002 , bls introduced a supplemental new index , the chained cpi - u ( c - cpi - u ) , in response to concerns raised by the boskin commission about the methodology underlying the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) .

the goal of the c - cpi - u is to eliminate substitution bias , which affects the cpi - u because the latter index does not accurately capture how consumers change their buying habits in response to price changes .

as a result , the cpi - u and related indices , such as the cpi - w ( used as the base for the social security cola ) , overestimate how much money is needed to maintain a constant standard of living .

bls has issued a c - cpi - u series that begins in december 1999 .

since 1999 , the c - cpi - u has generally increased more slowly than the cpi - u and other bls inflation indices .

between the third quarter of 2000 and the third quarter of 2010 , the c - cpi - u increased by a total of 23.3% , the cpi - u increased 26.1% , the cpi - e increased 26.2% , and the cpi - w increased 27.5% .

from the third quarter of 2008 to the third quarter of 2009 , however , the c - cpi - u rose 0.9 percentage point less than the cpi - u and 0.4 percentage point less than the cpi - w. to date , the c - cpi - u has not been incorporated into any indexing provisions of federal government programs .

one difficulty with using the c - cpi - u is that it is subject to two revisions after its initial release .

depending on the month , the final c - cpi - u is not available for as long as two years after that particular month .

