many users of peer - to - peer ( p2p ) file sharing networks have been subjected to copyright infringement lawsuits regarding the unauthorized uploading and downloading of copyrighted material .

the vast majority of these lawsuits have settled , with the file sharer agreeing to pay compensation to the copyright holders .

several of the cases have resulted in default judgments against the defendants or summary judgment motions in favor of the plaintiffs .

however , a few of these cases have gone to trial , and two cases in particular resulted in substantial jury awards to the plaintiffs .

those jury awards , based on the copyright act's statutory damages provision , were later reduced by federal judges who found the awards to be grossly excessive and unjust , and even a violation of the u.s. constitution's due process clause .

this report provides an overview of this type of copyright infringement , explains the copyright act's statutory damages provision , and reviews the recent p2p file sharing litigation .

copyright is a federal grant of legal protection for certain works of creative expression , including books , movies , photographs , and music .

a copyright holder possesses several exclusive legal entitlements under the copyright act , including the right to control reproduction and distribution of the protected material .

unauthorized use of a copyrighted work by a third party in a manner that implicates one of the copyright holder's exclusive rights constitutes infringement .

the copyright holder may file a lawsuit against an alleged infringer for a violation of any of the exclusive rights conferred by copyright .

the copyright act provides several civil remedies to the copyright holder that is harmed by infringement , including the possibility of obtaining injunctive relief , actual damages suffered by the copyright owner due to the infringement , statutory damages , and costs and attorney fees .

in 2009 and 2010 , federal juries in minnesota and massachusetts returned particularly large verdicts on non - commercial entities undertaking peer - to - peer file sharing of copyrighted sound recordings based upon the statutory damages range for copyright infringement .

however , the judges in these cases subsequently decreased the awards based on common law doctrines and also the u.s. supreme court's punitive damages jurisprudence .

these large damages awards by the juries , and their reduction by the judges , have been the subject of much debate among commentators and also the courts .

these cases will be discussed below .

in a case concerning statutory damages in copyright cases ( although not involving peer - to - peer file sharing ) , the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit emphasized that the u.s. supreme court has never decided whether its recent punitive damages jurisprudence ( bmw and its progeny ) applies to awards of statutory damages .

the appellate court stated that until the supreme court applies bmw to an award of statutory damages , the earlier williams standard is to be used when evaluating the constitutionality of statutory damage awards .

however , this appellate decision from 2007 was not binding on the thomas - rasset or tenenbaum courts , as neither of those courts are within the sixth circuit ( they are within the eighth and first , respectively — the appellate courts of which have not yet directly addressed the issue ) .

some observers have been critical of the legal reasoning of the tenenbaum opinion — in particular , three assumptions that had been made by the judge in reaching her conclusions: 1 .

there is no constitutional difference between punitive damages and statutory damages ; thus , the bmw case is relevant to a case involving an award of statutory damages .

2 .

congress did not intend statutory damages to be imposed on non - commercial infringers whose infringement only caused minimal economic harm on copyright holders .

3 .

three times the minimum statutory damages amount is the constitutional limit in peer - to - peer file sharing cases .

critics of the opinion argue that the tenenbaum decision "significantly erodes congress' power to set the acceptable range of damages in copyright and indeed all civil cases. .

others , however , have praised the tenenbaum decision as one that "helps bring copyright infringement damages awards back down to earth. .

while tenenbaum is on appeal , the lower court's decision may have several immediate consequences for copyright infringement cases .

those that involve statutory damages may well require more time and money of the litigants , as "every copyright infringement defendant can advance a non - frivolous argument that statutory damages in [his / her] case would be unconstitutional. .

also , because the tenenbaum ( and thomas - rasset ) court had ruled that there must be some relationship between actual damages and the amount of statutory damages that is awarded , it may be difficult for some copyright plaintiffs to enforce their rights , as they must make some showing of the actual harm that they have suffered from the infringement — a potentially difficult and expensive task , especially in the context of digital media and file sharing .

thus , some copyright holders may be more reluctant to bring cases against non - commercial file sharers .

another possible impact of tenenbaum is that courts may choose to follow the "three times the statutory minimum damages" formulation as a de facto standard in determining statutory damages in certain copyright cases — perhaps limited only to the context of peer - to - peer file sharing , although some courts may extend this standard to other infringing activity .

as both of these cases await further judicial developments , this area of copyright law promises to continue to be in an unsettled state .

other federal courts of appeal could also directly address the issue , or congress could take action to resolve the matter legislatively — to date , however , no related legislation has been introduced .

