the united states imposes economic sanctions on north korea for activities related to weapons proliferation , particularly its pursuit of nuclear weapons capability and a missile delivery system ; regional disruptions ; narcotics trafficking ; undemocratic governance ; and illicit activities in international markets , including money laundering , counterfeiting of goods and currency , and bulk cash smuggling .

the entirety of north korea is identified by the united states as a "jurisdiction of money laundering concern," which makes dprk - origin or dprk - related transactions to or through the u.s. financial system off limits .

and the government of north korea is designated as a state sponsor of acts of international terrorism , which quashes most u.s. foreign aid , trade , investment , and support in international financial institutions .

united states law has been applied to north korea in the following ways in response to the north korean government's objectionable activities: north korea poses a threat to u.s. national security because of "the current existence and risk of the proliferation of weapons - usable fissile material on the korean peninsula," as declared by president george w. bush on june 26 , 2008 , under the terms of the national emergencies act ( nea ) and the international emergency economic powers act ( ieepa ) ; north korea is cited by the united nations security council for its nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles pursuits , withdrawal from the treaty on the non - proliferation of nuclear weapons , and contribution to regional tensions ; the united states meets the requirements as a member state of the united nations pursuant to the united nations participation act of 1945 to implement sanctions adopted by the u.n. security council ; north korea committed an unprovoked attack that resulted in the sinking of a south korean naval vessel , cheonan ; announced a new nuclear test and missile launches in 2009 ; and engaged in money laundering , counterfeiting of goods and currency , bulk cash smuggling , and narcotics trafficking , all in violation of u.n. security council resolutions , leading president barack obama to expand the national emergency in 2010 , 2011 , 2015 , and 2016 .

president donald trump , in 2017 , cited the "provocative , destabilizing , and repressive actions and policies of the government of north korea" ; its intercontinental ballistic missile launches ; its nuclear tests ; violation of security council resolutions ; and human rights abuses to continue the national emergency and impose additional sanctions .

north korea is a marxist - leninist state , with a communist government , and stated as such in the export - import bank act of 1945 , as amended , and further restricted under the foreign assistance act of 1961 ; north korea has engaged in proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , the state department finds pursuant to the arms export control act ; export administration act of 1979 ; iran , north korea , and syria nonproliferation act of 2000 ; and a national emergency declared by president george h. w. bush relating to the proliferation of such weapons ; north korea is not cooperating fully with u.s. antiterrorism efforts , the state department has determined , under terms of the arms export control act ; north korea has detonated a nuclear explosive device , president george w. bush has determined , pursuant to the arms export control act , the atomic energy act , and the export - import bank act of 1945 ; and north korea engaged in "provocative , destabilizing , and repressive actions and policies," including "destructive , coercive cyber - related actions during november and december 2014," actions in violation of a multitude of u.n. security council resolutions , and commission of serious human rights abuses .

at the president's discretion , north korea also could be subject to economic sanctions provided in three provisions of law addressing human rights conditions: the foreign assistance act of 1961 , the international religious freedom act of 1998 , and the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 .

the united states' concerns about north korea's pursuit of nuclear weapons capability emerged in the 1980s when that country's nuclear weapons program became apparent .

in the 1990s , the two countries negotiated and signed ( in 1994 ) an agreed framework to freeze north korea's plutonium - based nuclear energy program and provide heavy fuel oil until light - water reactors could be brought online , all funded to varying degrees by the european union , japan , south korea , and the united states .

through the late 1990s , the united states and north korea engaged in negotiations , initially to curtail missile tests and expanded to include differences on nuclear weapons and international terrorism .

in october 2002 , it came to light in negotiations between u.s. and north korean government officials that north korea was pursuing a uranium - based nuclear weapons capability .

diplomacy over north korea's nuclear weapons program then entered a new phase ; the agreed framework was abandoned and the united states , north korea , south korea , china , japan , and russia convened a new forum — the six party talks , which held its first negotiations in august 2003 .

despite several steps forward , including the united states ending decades - long sanctions imposed at the outset of the 1950-1953 conflict and its delisting of north korea as a supporter of international terrorism , the six party talks collapsed in late 2008 .

during this period and through 2017 , north korea has engaged in a number of acts that the international community deems provocative .

it has tested short - , mid - , and long - range ballistic missiles since mid - 2006 , with varying degrees of success , abrogating a moratorium it complied with since 1998 .

in early 2009 , north korea began to test satellite launches , contrary to u.n. security council restrictions , and may have succeeded in placing a satellite in orbit in 2012 .

most recently , it has tested missile launches from under the sea .

on october 9 , 2006 , may 25 , 2009 , february 12 , 2013 , january 6 , 2016 , september 9 , 2016 , and again on september 3 , 2017 , north korea reported that it had detonated a nuclear explosive device .

the international community responded to the missile tests and nuclear detonations by taking the issue to the u.n. security council , which adopted resolutions that condemned the weapons tests and called on member states to impose economic sanctions .

on march 26 , 2010 , a south korean navy ship , the cheonan , was struck by a torpedo while sailing in the west sea .

the ship sank and 46 crew members were killed .

the south korean ministry of national defense formed a civilian - military joint investigation group — with participants from five other nations including the united states — which found that the cheonan was torpedoed by a north korean submarine .

north korea denied involvement .

the u.n. security council , in a presidential statement , condemned the attack , and acknowledged both the findings of the investigation group and the disavowal by north korea .

president obama assigned responsibility to north korea for the sinking of the cheonan when , on august 30 , 2010 , he announced he was expanding the scope of the national emergency declared in 2008 , and the united states was taking additional steps to curtail economic activity with north korea: the continued actions and policies of the government of north korea , manifested most recently by its unprovoked attack that resulted in the sinking of the republic of korea navy ship cheonan and the deaths of 46 sailors in march 2010 ; its announced test of a nuclear device and its missile launches in 2009 ; its actions in violation of unscrs 1718 and 1874 , including the procurement of luxury goods ; and its illicit and deceptive activities in international markets through which it obtains financial and other support , including money laundering , the counterfeiting of goods and currency , bulk cash smuggling , and narcotics trafficking , destabilize the korean peninsula and imperil u.s. armed forces , allies , and trading partners in the region , and thereby constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security , foreign policy , and economy of the united states .

president obama's explicit identification of all features of north korea's objectionable behavior constituting the threat is unusual compared to other invocations of his ieepa authorities .

the statute requires only that the president find that a threat to u.s. national security , foreign policy , or economy exists , and that its source is "in whole or substantial part outside the united states. .

the president identified north korea's attack of the cheonan and other acts of regional destabilization , pursuit of weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them , noncompliance with u.n. requirements , money laundering , counterfeiting , smuggling , and narcotics trafficking as compounding the threat .

to this list , the president added , in january 2015 , "cyber - related actions ... and commission of serious human rights abuses," the latter a nod to ground - breaking efforts in december 2014 in the united nations general assembly to refer reports of human rights atrocities in north korea's prison system to both the u.n. security council and the international criminal court .

justifying the declaration of the emergency based on these wide - ranging activities accomplishes a number of goals: it confirms the united states' full support of and participation in implementation of the u.n. security council resolutions .

it provides a clear list of concerns members of the u.s. diplomatic corps might raise and emphasize when speaking with north korea's trading partners and benefactors .

it states indisputable goals for north korea to strive toward , meet , and surpass .

it should be noted , however , that each of these forms of objectionable behavior likely would be grounds , under current law , for restricting trade , aid , arms sales , and access to assets even if the national emergency were to be revoked .

united states economic sanctions imposed on north korea , as a result both of requirements in u.s. law and decisions made in the executive branch to exercise discretionary authorities , have the following impact: trade is limited to food , medicine , and other humanitarian - related goods , all of which require a license .

imports from north korea are prohibited as of june 2011 ; exports to north korea of most u.s. - origin goods , services , or technology are prohibited as of march 2016 .

u.s. persons are further prohibited from engaging in transactions with the government of north korea or the workers' party of korea related to trade in metal , graphite , coal , or software .

trade in luxury goods is banned .

the department of commerce denies export licenses for reasons of nuclear proliferation , missile technology , u.n. security council requirements , and international terrorism .

using a north korea - flagged vessel for any transaction is prohibited .

arms sales and arms transfers are fully denied .

financial transactions are prohibited .

u.s. persons are prohibited from providing financial services for the purpose of evading sanctions , or from providing financial services to a person or entity designated for sanctions .

the president , in september 2017 , authorized the secretary of the treasury to designate for sanctions any foreign financial institution that conducts or facilitates "any significant transaction on behalf of any [designated] person," or "in connection with trade with north korea. .

north korea is designated as a jurisdiction of primary money laundering concern by the department of the treasury's financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) , effective december 9 , 2016 .

fincen had issued advisories and warnings about north korea's deceptive and illicit banking practices as early as 2005 .

this rule is subject to review by the u.s. financial sector and other departments of the u.s. government .

if fincen's recommendations are adopted , u.s. banks will be prohibited from providing u.s. correspondent accounts to third - country banks to process transactions for north korean financial institutions .

u.s. new investment is prohibited , and investment in north korea's transportation , mining , energy , or financial sectors is prohibited .

north korea is also ineligible to participate in any u.s. government program that makes credit , credit guarantees , or investment guarantees available .

u.s. f oreign aid is minimal and mostly limited to refugees fleeing north korea ; broadcasting into the country ; nongovernmental organization programs dedicated to democracy promotion , human rights , and governance ; and emergency food aid .

in past years , aid related to disabling and dismantling the country's nuclear weapons program has been made available .

by law , u.s. representatives in the international financial institutions ( ifi ) are required to vote against any support for north korea due to its nuclear weapons ambitions and international terrorism .

human rights and environmental activities would also likely result in u.s. objections to north korea's participation in the ifi .

u.s. - based assets are blocked for north korean individuals , entities , and vessels designated by the department of the treasury's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) .

u.s. persons are prohibited from entering into trade and transaction with these designees and , most recently , foreign financial institutions could become subject to u.s. sanctions for facilitating transactions for designated persons .

kim jong - un , the korean workers' party , and others — banks , shipping companies , seagoing vessels , state agencies , and other individuals affiliated with the state's security regime — are identified as being among those engaged in illicit and punishable activities , possibly including nuclear or ballistic missile programs , undermining cybersecurity , censorship , and sanctions evasion .

as a result , effective march 15 , 2016 , any of their assets under u.s. jurisdiction are frozen , and u.s. persons and entities are prohibited from entering into trade and transactions with the designees .

u.s. travel requires a special validation passport issued by the state department .

such passports are reserved only for travel in the u.s. national interest and are intended for professional reporters , officials with the american red cross or international committee of the red cross , or those who have a "compelling humanitarian" justification .

the u.s. sanctions are a result of requirements incorporated into u.s. law by congress , decisions made in the executive branch to exercise discretionary authorities , and obligations placed on the united states , as a member state of the united nations , by the u.n. security council .

economic sanctions may restrict or prohibit all manner of bilateral relationships , but broadly can be categorized as impeding aid , trade , travel , and the finances related to these activities .

three executive branch departments — state , commerce , and treasury — together have the lion's share of responsibilities to administer the restrictions affecting these activities .

u.n. security council resolutions — 10 have been adopted between 2006 and september 2017 — that form the requirements of the u.n. member states often incrementally clarify , expand on , enhance , or strengthen the previous u.n. actions .

resolutions , however , are not revoked until the problem at hand is resolved , nor are they amended ( with a few exceptions ) .

u.n. security council resolutions also establish considerable opportunity for member states to appeal to the sanctions committee — established to implement the dprk resolutions with representatives from each of the 15 security council states — for an exception prior to executing a transaction .

overall , the security council has sought to protect dprk's civilian population from the consequences of economic sanctions .

unscr 2371 ( 2017 ) , agreed to in august 2017 , for example , provides the following: [the united nations security council] reaffirms that the measures imposed by resolutions 1718 ( 2006 ) , 1874 ( 2009 ) , 2087 ( 2013 ) , 2094 ( 2013 ) , 2270 ( 2016 ) , 2321 ( 2016 ) , 2356 ( 2017 ) , and this resolution are not intended to have adverse humanitarian consequences for the civilian population of the dprk or to affect negatively or restrict those activities , including economic activities and cooperation , food aid and humanitarian assistance , that are not prohibited by resolutions... , and the work of international and non - governmental organizations carrying out assistance and relief activities in the dprk for the benefit of the civilian population of the dprk and decides that the committee may , on a case - by - case basis , exempt any activity from the measures imposed by these resolutions if the committee determines that such an exemption is necessary to facilitate the work of such organizations in the dprk or for any other purpose consistent with the objectives of these resolutions , and further decides that the measures specified in paragraph 8 ( d ) of resolution 1718 ( 2006 ) shall not apply with respect to financial transactions with the dprk foreign trade bank or the korea national insurance corporation if such transactions are solely for the operation of diplomatic or consular missions in the dprk or humanitarian assistance activities that are undertaken by , or in coordination with , the united nations... .

similar language to exempt humanitarian activities is provided in each resolution , and such exemptions are stated throughout each resolution but tailored to particular kinds of transactions .

the sanctions committee of the security council may designate entities , individuals , vessels , and aircraft to be subject to economic sanctions at any time .

in addition , beginning in 2013 , the security council added annexes to resolutions to name designees , as well as to make the ban on exporting luxury goods to dprk more explicit , and to define goods and services with military applications that are also subject to an export prohibition .

currently , the united nations requires its member states to restrict trade and engagement with north korea as follows: the u.n. sanctions committee , originally established by unsc resolution 1718 ( 2006 ) and comprising representatives of each of the 15 states serving on the security council , to date , has designated 75 north korean entities and 80 individuals for sanctions that target their foreign - based assets , freedom to enter into trade and contracts , and ability to travel , as required in the various resolutions .

designees appear to span a range of activities , including trade and development related to missiles , satellites , aerospace , munitions , energy , mining , space technology , shipping , and electronics .

pursuant to resolution 1874 ( 2009 ) , the u.n. secretary - general established a panel of experts , with a maximum of seven experts , to analyze reports and make recommendations regarding implementation of unsc resolutions against north korea .

the u.s. economic sanctions imposed on north korea exemplify both the independent and intertwined aspects of the relationship between the legislative and executive branches .

congress defers the broadest power to the president , in the national emergencies act and the international emergency economic powers act , to curtail trade and transactions between the united states and north korea .

congress authorizes the president to fine - tune the relationship with north korea for foreign policy and national security reasons with each waiver authority it incorporates into legislation .

at the same time , congress closely influences the president's choices by enacting issue - driven legislation — addressing human rights matters or proliferation concerns , for example — and by adopting north korea - specific statutes — most particularly the north korean human rights act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-333 ) , the north korean human rights reauthorization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-346 ) , the north korea sanctions and policy enhancement act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-122 ) , the korean interdiction and modernization of sanctions act ( title iii of the countering america's adversaries through sanctions act ; p.l .

115-44 ) , and the inclusion of north korea into the iran , north korea , and syria nonproliferation act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-178 ) .

as congress and the president consider proposals to reform foreign aid , streamline export controls , fund defense and international programs , keep proliferation regimes relevant , assess and enter into treaties and international agreements , and participate in multilateral fora , the effectiveness of economic sanctions as a foreign policy and national security tool is likely to be considered .

u.s. policy toward north korea , expressed both unilaterally and in the united states' position in multilateral fora , is further complicated by other considerations — not the least of which include relations with other states in the region , security responsibilities with south korea and japan , trade with china , a determination to keep key stakeholders engaged in nonproliferation efforts in both north korea and elsewhere , and finding the means to balance all u.s. foreign policy and national security interests in a meaningful way .

appendix a .

north korea — economic sanctions currently imposed in furtherance of u.s. foreign policy or national security objectives appendix b. dprk sanctions: comparison of u.n. security council requirements and u.s. sanction .

