the new starts program provides federal funds to public transit agencies on a largely competitive basis for the construction of new fixed - guideway transit systems and the expansion of existing fixed - guideway systems ( 49 u.s.c .

§5309 ) .

new starts has funded the development of bus rapid transit ( brt ) and ferries , as these are eligible under the definition of fixed - guideway , but the vast majority of funding has gone to transit rail systems .

the three main types of transit rail are subway / elevated rail ( heavy rail ) , light rail , and commuter rail .

with federal support , a number of cities , such as charlotte , denver , minneapolis , and salt lake city , have opened entirely new transit rail systems , and many others have added to existing systems .

between 1985 and 2008 , consequently , rail transit route - mileage almost doubled , with light rail mileage more than tripling , commuter rail mileage doubling , and subway mileage growing by 25% .

transit rail systems now provide about 43% of unlinked public transit trips , with most of the rest , about 53% , provided by bus .

public transit , as defined in federal law , does not include transportation by school bus , intercity bus , or intercity passenger rail ( amtrak ) .

the new starts program is one element of the federal transit program that is administered by the federal transit administration ( fta ) within the department of transportation .

the federal transit program is authorized by the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea ) ( p.l .

109-59 ) .

since safetea expired on september 30 , 2009 , the program has operated under a series of authorization extensions .

for example , the program was extended through december 31 , 2010 , under the hiring incentives to restore employment ( hire ) act ( p.l .

111-147 ) .

during the five years of safetea ( fy2005 through fy2009 ) , the new starts program accounted for about 18% of authorized transit funding .

other major funding programs are the urbanized area formula program ( 43% of funding in safetea ) , the fixed - guideway ( rail ) modernization program ( 16% ) , and the bus and bus - related facilities capital program ( 9% ) .

the remaining 15% of funding authorized goes for several other smaller programs , state and metropolitan planning , research , and fta operations .

new starts grants tend to be relatively large , and securing funding through the competitive grant making process often determines whether a project moves forward .

this is a major reason for the great demand nationwide for new starts monies .

moreover , the new starts program , probably more than any other federal transit program , has implications for the future of transit and transit policy .

rail transit systems , more so than buses , are typically very long - lived assets that require major future financial commitments for operation and maintenance .

the new starts program underwent several significant changes in safetea , and a long - term reauthorization of the surface transportation program provides a major opportunity for congress to consider more changes .

this report discuses major issues that congress may consider in a long - term reauthorization .

these include the size of the overall program and how those funds are distributed in terms of project size and the required local match ; the types of transit modes that are eligible and favored within the program ; the new starts approval process , including the way in which projects are evaluated and rated for funding ; and private sector participation in new starts projects .

it concludes with some thoughts on the longer - term relevance of new starts for the future of public transit .

since the enactment of safetea , new starts has been divided into two parts , one for smaller initiatives and one for larger projects .

beginning in fy2007 , safetea reserved $200 million per year of the overall new starts program authorization for smaller projects , those costing $250 million or less in total and seeking $75 million or less in federal funding .

these projects are known as small starts .

the rest of the funding authorized over the five - year life of safetea , about $7.4 billion of the overall $8 billion for fy2005 through fy2009 , was for major new starts projects .

federal funding for major new starts projects is typically committed in a full funding grant agreement ( ffga ) , usually a multi - year agreement between the federal government and a transit agency .

an ffga establishes the terms and conditions for federal financial participation , including the maximum amount of federal funding being committed .

to obtain an ffga , a project must be authorized in law , and a project sponsor must pass through a series of steps that make up the new starts approval process ( figure 1 ) .

according to federal law , the process for obtaining an ffga begins with a regional , multimodal planning process that includes systems planning and alternatives analysis .

systems planning examines the transportation needs of a region .

alternatives analysis examines the benefits and costs of different options , such as light rail or bus rapid transit ( brt ) , in a specific transportation corridor or regional subarea .

one of the alternatives that must be included is the "baseline alternative," which is defined by fta as "the best that can be done to address identified transportation needs in the corridor without a major capital investment in new infrastructure. .

the conclusion of the alternatives analysis is the selection of a locally preferred alternative ( lpa ) , which is submitted by the project sponsor to fta for evaluation and approval for entry into preliminary engineering .

new starts projects must also fulfill the requirements of the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ) because they involve a proposed major federal action significantly affecting the environment .

fta requires a project to have moved beyond the nepa scoping phase before entering preliminary engineering .

nepa scoping involves identifying the alternatives that will be examined in the nepa documents and the significant environmental issues that arise from the proposed project .

preliminary engineering involves the project sponsor refining the project by examining the costs , benefits , and impacts of different design alternatives , and completing an analysis of environmental impacts as required by nepa .

once preliminary engineering is complete , fta may approve the project for final design .

final design includes the preparation of final construction plans and cost estimates , and may also include right - of - way acquisition and utility relocation .

after final design is complete , fta may approve the project for an ffga , at which point the project may move into the construction phase .

fta retains some oversight of a project as it is constructed .

moreover , fta must request the funding that is to be provided under the terms of the ffga for each approved project from congress each fiscal year .

in some cases , fta may assure a project sponsor of its intention to obligate funds for a project through what is known as a letter of intent ( 49 u.s.c .

§5309 ( g ) ( 1 ) ) .

fta may also obligate some of the funding expected to be provided in an ffga through an early systems work agreement ( 49 u.s.c .

§5309 ( g ) ( 3 ) ) .

although not a guarantee of full funding , an early systems work agreement provides funding so that work can begin before an ffga is awarded .

the new starts program , along with the other parts of the capital investment grants program , evolved from section 3 of the urban mass transportation act of 1964 ( p.l .

88-365 ) .

in 1994 , section 3 became section 5309 in a revision without substantive change of title 49 of the united states code .

beginning in the 1970s , as the commitment of , and demand for , federal funding began to grow , the department of transportation issued a series of policy statements on the principles by which it would distribute discretionary money to so - called "new starts. .

these policy statements issued in 1976 , 1978 , 1980 , and 1984 introduced a series of principles that have since been written into federal law , including long - range planning , alternatives analysis incorporating a baseline alternative , cost effectiveness , local financial commitment , multi - year contracts specifying the limits of federal participation , supportive local land use planning , and a ratings system .

congress first enacted many of these principles into law in the surface transportation and uniform relocation assistance act of 1987 ( sturaa ) ( p.l .

100-17 ) .

sturaa established the criteria by which new starts projects would be judged in order to be eligible for federal funding , and also required dot's recommendations for funding in the subsequent fiscal year to be detailed in an annual report to congress .

the criteria enacted in sturaa required a new starts project to be based on an alternatives analysis and preliminary engineering , to be cost - effective , and to be supported by an acceptable amount of local financial commitment that is stable and dependable .

in the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea ) ( p.l .

102-240 ) , congress added to the cost - effectiveness criterion the justifications of mobility improvements , environmental benefits , and operating efficiencies .

istea also added a list of lesser considerations such as congestion relief , energy consumption , transit supportive land use policies and future patterns , and economic development .

a new starts project would still need to be based on alternatives analysis and preliminary engineering and to have an acceptable amount of local financial commitment .

the transportation equity act for the 21 st century ( tea - 21 ) ( p.l .

105-178 ) left the existing law mostly unchanged , but added a few additional considerations such as the costs of sprawl and the technical capacity of a grantee ( usually a transit agency ) to undertake a project .

tea - 21 also required fta to rate projects overall as "highly recommended," "recommended," or "not recommended. .

tea - 21 also made it a requirement that fta formally approve a project to move from preliminary engineering into final design .

fta published its final rule in response to tea - 21 in 2000 , and subsequently published several program guidance documents .

safetea changed the three - point scale , introduced in tea - 21 , to a five - point scale of high , medium - high , medium , medium - low , and low , and elevated the factors economic development effects , and public transportation supportive land use policies and future patterns , from considerations to project justifications .

as noted earlier , safetea also created the small starts program .

prior to the enactment of safetea , fta issued a "dear colleague" letter announcing that a project would not be recommended for funding unless it received a medium rating for cost effectiveness .

the emphasis on cost effectiveness has been a contentious issue since then .

following the passage of safetea , in a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) on august 3 , 2007 , fta proposed that a medium rating be required for fta to recommend a project , and for cost effectiveness to be weighted as 50% of the project justification measure .

the other 50% would consist of land use and economic development combined into one criterion at a weight of 20% , mobility benefits ( 20% ) , environmental benefits ( 5% ) , and benefits to transit - dependent riders ( 5% ) .

this proposal was not well received by the house transportation and infrastructure committee , nor by those responding to the notice .

some of the concerns were that , contravening the intent of safetea , the rule would place too much emphasis on cost effectiveness and would not sufficiently evaluate nor weight the economic development effects of transit projects .

because of these concerns , congress included language in the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) preventing fta from implementing a final rule .

in the safetea - lu technical corrections act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-244 ) , congress amended 49 usc §5309 to require that fta "give comparable , but not necessarily equal , numerical weight to each project justification criteria in calculating the overall project rating. .

fta withdrew the 2007 nprm in february 2009 , and then in july 2009 issued final guidance establishing the use of cost effectiveness that is now in effect .

this was followed in january 2010 with an announcement that fta was withdrawing the policy of only recommending for funding projects that received a medium cost - effectiveness rating or better in favor of recommending projects with an overall rating of medium or better ( although projects must score a medium or better on both project justification and local financial commitment ) .

at the same time fta announced that it intends to issue a new nprm for changes to the evaluation for new starts and small starts projects .

in this regard , fta issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking on june 3 , 2010 , requesting comments on how to improve measurement of cost effectiveness , environmental benefits , and economic development .

differing views on the size and shape of the new starts program to some extent depend on expectations about the future role of public transit over the next few decades .

transit supporters argue that record - breaking ridership over the past few years is an indicator of future growth in demand , the recent recession - related decline notwithstanding .

this growth in ridership they believe will only be stimulated by concerns over the financial and environmental costs of automobiles and highways .

these supporters believe the spike in the price of gasoline to more than $4 a gallon in the summer of 2008 , and the concomitant rise in transit use , is a harbinger of america's transportation future .

climate change , transit advocates argue , is another reason to believe that transit's role in the future will be much more important .

if these factors are taken along with the projection by the census bureau that the u.s. population will grow to 440 million by 2050 ( from 310 million in 2010 ) , with most of the growth occurring in large metropolitan areas , then transit advocates argue that substantially more investment is needed in transit infrastructure , particularly high - capacity and electrified rail transit .

transit skeptics , on the other hand , point out that in the context of population growth , the recent increases in transit ridership are not so dramatic .

transit ridership per capita today , they note , is lower than it was in the 1980s .

this is despite a substantial increase in the supply of transit , much of which has been in the form of rail transit supported by the new starts program .

skeptics also point out that the factors that have caused transit providers to struggle in the post – world war two period are still at work .

these factors include metropolitan population and job decentralization , income growth , and the widespread availability of personal motor vehicles .

moreover , they argue that the financial and environmental costs of automobiles , particularly the costs associated with petroleum , will be mitigated by improvements in fuel efficiency , including the increasing development and use of alternatively fueled vehicles such as the chevy volt and nissan leaf .

in this view , new and expensive transit rail systems are likely to be woefully underused and a burden on current and future taxpayers .

a third perspective is that the future of surface transportation over the next few decades , at least in terms of the share of travel made by automobiles and transit , will not be very much different from today .

in this view , the financial and environmental costs of automobile travel will remain much as they are currently or may slowly decline .

this is because with the introduction of new automotive technologies , such as all - electric vehicles , the debate about some of these costs is likely to move from the transportation sector ( i.e. , cars versus transit , etc. ) .

to the energy generation sector ( i.e. , coal versus nuclear , etc. ) .

the introduction of new technologies over the next few decades , it is thought , will slowly provide choice and flexibility in fuel source that will not dramatically change the patterns of use of personal vehicles and public transit .

population growth , much of which will be concentrated in urban areas , nevertheless , according to this perspective , is likely to require alternatives to personal vehicles in highly congested locations .

in this view , automobiles are likely to remain the dominant mode of transportation , but building new fixed guideway transit systems and expanding existing fixed guideway systems may be appropriate in certain situations .

new , extensive rail systems , accordingly , are likely to remain relatively rare , and buses , moreover , are likely to remain the main form of transit service in most places .

