biopower — the production of electricity from biomass feedstocks — contributes to the u.s. electricity portfolio and has done so for more than a century .

biopower comprised approximately 1.6% of total u.s. electricity generation in 2014 .

by comparison , electricity generated from fossil fuels and nuclear electric power comprised 87% of total u.s. electricity generation in the same year .

when accounting solely for renewable energy sources , biopower constituted close to 12% of u.s. renewable electricity generation in 2014 .

as a renewable energy source , biopower has benefits and challenges .

one of its primary benefits is that it can provide baseload or firm power .

if an electric generation plant operates as a baseload plant , the plant can run continually except for maintenance and unexpected outages .

in contrast , other renewable energy sources — such as wind and solar energy — are generated intermittently and require either a form of power storage , such as batteries , or another power source , such as natural gas turbines , to provide firm power .

additionally , biopower is not limited to a specific biomass feedstock and therefore is relatively flexible in terms of fuel suppliers .

challenges to biopower production involve infrastructure concerns , such as siting a biopower facility in close proximity to the biomass feedstock to reduce feedstock transportation costs .

moreover , it may be difficult to obtain a continuously available feedstock supply .

lastly , there is significant legislative and regulatory uncertainty surrounding incentives for biopower .

congress may view biopower with new interest , especially given recent developments announced by the obama administration and mounting discourse between environmental groups and certain biopower feedstock groups ( eg , the forestry industry ) .

for instance , biopower is likely to play a role in the administration's state - specific rate - based goals for carbon dioxide emissions from the power sector ( i.e. , the clean power plan ) .

additionally , international demand for certain u.s. biomass feedstocks may be a part of any future legislative discussions ( eg , demand for wood pellets by european union [eu] member countries to meet carbon goals using biopower ) .

congress may debate the future role for biopower in the u.s. electricity portfolio , and as such it may consider whether biopower requires new national policies or incentives to further encourage its use or if its use should be diminished .

congress also may explore biopower feedstock availability and accessibility , technological advancements , and new forms of economic support , along with other items such as environmental considerations .

in considering congressional action to broaden or limit legislative authorities for biopower , an understanding of bioenergy , biopower , biomass feedstocks , federal incentives , and challenges to biopower production could be useful to policymakers .

this report provides analyses on the aforementioned topics along with legislative issues .

the report begins with general summaries about bioenergy and biopower — including potential benefits and challenges , feedstocks , and biopower technologies .

the report then delves into federal support available for biopower , followed by legislative concerns .

bioenergy is renewable energy derived from biomass .

it comes in three forms: biopower , biothermal , and biofuels .

essentially , biomass is used to produce electricity ( biopower ) , heat ( biothermal ) , and fuels ( biofuel ) .

biomass also can be used to produce combined heat and power ( chp ) .

using bioenergy has several advantages and several challenges .

one advantage to using bioenergy is its classification as a renewable energy source because it uses biomass feedstocks , which may be replenishable in a short time frame relative to fossil fuels .

bioenergy also has the potential to contribute to rural economic development and to reduce greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions .

the carbon status of most bioenergy types has thus far been treated as neutral or as having a low impact , although this assumption has been questioned .

another benefit is the potential for the production of coproducts at bioenergy facilities , which may be of more value than the bioenergy being produced .

challenges to bioenergy production include limited biomass feedstock availability and , in some cases , limited access to the feedstock .

further , certain biomass feedstocks ( eg , corn stover ) may have to be harvested in a way that the soil and water nutrient value they provide to the landscape is not diminished .

moreover , the feedstock condition and arrangement may make it difficult and costly to transport and process for energy generation .

in some instances , biomass feedstock storage can be an issue , especially during periods of peak demand .

lastly , biomass feedstocks on average have a lower energy content than fossil - fuel feedstocks , often requiring more feedstock to match the energy potential of fossil fuels .

bioenergy is unique among renewable energy sources because it can come in three diverse forms .

each form , thus far , has received a different amount of attention .

however , there are some aspects of all bioenergy forms that could be addressed in tandem .

for example , as biomass is the foundation of any form of bioenergy , the initial stages of the bioenergy pathway — feedstock production , harvest , and transport — all bear the same environmental and sustainability concerns .

although some stakeholders may voice their concerns more strongly for one bioenergy form than for another , often the concerns are transferable to other bioenergy forms ( eg , the impact of land use change on biofuel production ) .

congress , the executive branch , and others have tended to focus on one bioenergy form at a time , at the exclusion of others .

for instance , in the last decade , legislative , research , and industrial attention have focused more on biofuels ( eg , corn - based ethanol ) than on other bioenergy forms .

such focus may occur due to the regulatory requirements necessary for the bioenergy end use as opposed to the bioenergy supply .

one issue for congress is that bioenergy can cross multiple committee jurisdictional boundaries , possibly making it harder to reach a consensus on a more comprehensive approach to bioenergy .

biopower was the third - largest renewable energy source for electricity generation in 2014 , after conventional hydroelectric power and wind .

the top five states to contribute the largest amounts of net electricity generation from biomass year - to - date through december 2014 were california , florida , georgia , virginia , and maine .

the energy information administration ( eia ) projects that electricity generation from biomass will grow through 2030 by an average of 3.1% annually , led by co - firing at existing coal plants through 2030 , and that after 2030 new dedicated biomass power plants will account for most of the growth in biopower .

woody biomass is the primary biomass feedstock used for biopower .

in 2014 , roughly two - thirds of biopower generation used wood and wood - derived fuels as its biomass feedstock .

the remaining one - third came from municipal solid wastes from biogenic sources , landfill gas , and agricultural byproducts , among others .

eia reports that biomass consumed as combustible fuel for electricity generation in 2014 was 723 trillion british thermal units ( btu ) — 430 trillion btu from wood and wood - derived fuels , and 293 trillion btu from other biomass feedstocks .

like other power sources , biopower has its advantages and disadvantages .

the intensity of those advantages and disadvantages varies based on the scenario under consideration .

the sections below discuss some of these potential benefits and challenges .

there are several types of biomass feedstock available as a fuel source for electric power generation ( see table 1 ) .

these sources include land - and water - based vegetation ( eg , trees , algae ) , as well as other organic wastes .

the type , amount , and costs of biomass feedstocks will largely determine whether biopower can thrive as a major renewable energy alternative .

stakeholders differ on what are ideal feedstocks for biopower and what are feasible locations to grow and harvest feedstock .

biomass feedstock plays a critical role in biopower plant feasibility studies , especially feedstock storage and transport and other economic and environmental criteria .

these issues contribute to uncertainty about the biopower market .

comprehensive , national - level data on the current and future biomass feedstock supply is not available .

in the future , the potential inclusion of genetically modified dedicated energy crops or selective breeding for bioenergy purposes may alter the amount of biomass feedstock available for biopower production ( and could impact water quantity and quality , air quality , and land use ) .

biomass is converted to biopower via thermochemical and biochemical conversion processes .

these processes include combustion ( or firing ) , pyrolysis , gasification , and anaerobic digestion ( see box below and figure 1 ) .

essentially , plants use photosynthesis to store energy ( carbon - based molecules ) within cell walls , and that energy is released , or converted , when the biomass undergoes a chemical process ( such as combustion ) or a biological process ( such as anaerobic digestion ) .

the type of conversion technology selected for a specific biomass feedstock results in differing amounts of useful energy recovered and forms for that energy .

the technologies are at varying stages of maturity , with combustion ( eg , co - firing ) being the most established .

one critical factor in determining the potential generation of a biopower plant is determining the supply of biomass feedstock necessary to run the plant .

the amount of feedstock required depends on many things , including the feedstock's energy content — the less the energy value , the more feedstock that is needed .

further , the growing area needed to produce the biomass is contingent not only on the energy value of the feedstock but also on the power plant capacity and efficiency , as well as the feedstock yield .

in general , the higher the yield of the biomass feedstock , the less growing area is required to produce a megawatt of power .

also , less biomass is needed to support power plants with high efficiency rates .

furthermore , the size of the biopower plant can range substantially .

small - scale systems ( or modular units ) may be an optimal choice for rural areas with limited electricity demand .

large - scale systems may be more economically suitable in urbanized areas or near grid connections if feedstocks are ample .

the federal government supports biopower with multiple initiatives including tax incentives , grant programs , research and development efforts , and more .

additionally , there are state initiatives that support biopower .

some of the federal biopower initiatives that have been available to industry are described below .

biopower potentially straddles at least three policy areas: agriculture , energy , and the environment .

articulated perspectives on biopower thus far generally have focused on biopower's s. 1294 impact on one of the aforementioned policy areas .

this section discusses , in general terms , some of the reasons for the support and opposition .

although significant challenges remain regarding any future large - scale development , biopower production could increase in the coming years to satisfy state renewable portfolio standards .

generation of electricity from biopower has some advantages over other renewable sources such as wind and solar .

biopower plants can function as baseload power plants , and multiple biomass feedstocks can be used to generate electricity .

a sustainable supply of biomass feedstocks would be necessary for biopower growth .

some disadvantages of using biomass for electricity generation include the cost to transport the biomass to the biopower plant , less biomass being available for other purposes , and environmental tensions such as whether biomass combustion is carbon neutral .

most biopower technologies , with the exception of combustion and co - firing systems , have yet to reach commercial status .

some have argued that regulatory uncertainty has contributed to the reluctance to develop biopower ( eg , epa's cpp ) .

in addition , there is no federal mandate requiring the production of biopower , although 29 states have implemented state renewable portfolio standards that include biopower .

furthermore , it is not clear how the agricultural and forestry communities would adapt to an increased demand for feedstock to be used at new biopower facilities .

if there is a desire to increase biopower production , questions remain about what would be needed to simultaneously address technological , environmental , and agricultural concerns .

r&d authorizations congress has enacted numerous provisions that authorize the departments of energy ( doe ) and agriculture ( usda ) to conduct biopower research , development , and demonstration projects ( rd&d ) and to support biopower commercial application efforts .

at least eight public laws contain one or more biopower provisions: p.l .

95-620 , powerplants and industrial fuel use act of 1978 p.l .

96-294 , energy security act of 1980 p.l .

106-224 , biomass research and development act of 2000 p.l .

107-171 , farm security and rural investment act of 2002 p.l .

108-148 , healthy forest restoration act of 2003 p.l .

109-58 , energy policy act of 2005 p.l .

110-140 , energy independence and security act of 2007 p.l .

110-246 , food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 p.l .

113-79 , agricultural act of 2014 the public laws discussed in this section are summaries of provisions at the time of enactment to illustrate the evolution of bioenergy policy in chronological order .

some provisions may have been amended since enactment .

a comprehensive legislative history of current law is beyond the scope of this report .

1978-1980: biopower legislative origin both the powerplant and industrial fuel use act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-620 ) and the energy security act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-294 ) introduced the concept of biopower to the legislative arena .

however , the enacted legislation emphasized the use of biomass as a liquid fuel to reduce dependence on imported petroleum and natural gas .

biomass used to generate electricity appears to have received less legislative support compared with biomass use as a liquid fuel , based on the report language and authorizations .

powerplant and industrial fuel use act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-620 ) the legislative origin of the federal biopower definition stems from the powerplant and industrial fuel use act of 1978 .

the act aimed to restrict the use of oil and natural gas as fuel in an attempt to mitigate the oil crisis of the mid - 1970s by encouraging industries and utilities to reduce oil use .

it required new power plants to operate using coal or alternate fuel sources .

otherwise , the act did not provide explicit support for biopower rd&d and commercial application .

§103 ( a ) ( 6 ) — defines alternate fuel , in part , as electricity or any fuel , other than natural gas or petroleum , from sources such as biomass , municipal , industrial or agricultural wastes , wood , and renewable and geothermal energy sources .

energy security act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-294 ) §203 ( 4 ) ( b ) — defines biomass energy , in part , as energy or steam derived from the direct combustion of biomass for the generation of electricity , mechanical power , or industrial process heat .

§203 ( 5 ) ( b ) — defines biomass energy project , in part , as any facility ( or portion of a facility ) located in the united states that is primarily for the combustion of biomass for generating industrial process heat , mechanical power , or electricity , including cogeneration .

§203 ( 19 ) — defines a small - scale biomass energy project as a biomass energy project with an anticipated annual production capacity of not more than 1 million gallons of ethanol per year , or its energy equivalent of other forms of biomass energy .

§211 ( a ) — requires doe and usda to collaborate on a biomass energy production and use plan and on providing financial assistance for biomass energy projects .

§251 ( a ) — indirect reference to biopower ; stipulates the establishment of demonstration biomass energy facilities by the secretary of agriculture to exhibit the most advanced technology available for producing biomass energy .

§252 — indirect reference to biopower ; modifies §1419 of the national agricultural research , extension , and teaching policy act of 1977 ( p.l .

95-113 ) to better address biomass energy for rd&d purposes ; authorizes the secretary of agriculture to award grants for research related to , in part , the development of the most economical and commercially feasible means of producing , collecting , and transporting agricultural crops , wastes , residues , and byproducts for use as feedstocks for the production of alcohol and other forms of biomass energy .

§255 ( a ) — indirect reference to biopower ; adds a biomass energy educational and technical assistance program to subtitle b of p.l .

95-113 to provide technical assistance to producers for efficient use of biomass energy and disseminate research results to producers about biomass energy , among other things .

1981-1999: biopower legislation and technology congress did not significantly address biopower during most of the 1980s and 1990s , partially due to stable conventional energy prices and supplies .

some biopower technologies emerged during this time period with low success rates due to poor design and inadequate management ( eg , anaerobic digestion systems ) .

other reliable biopower technologies were developed during this time period ( eg , biomass co - firing ) , but these could not compete economically with other energy sources .

2000-present: biopower legislative action described below are a variety of biopower provisions contained in public laws since 2000 .

although many of the provisions focus primarily on the use of biomass for liquid transportation fuel , there also has been legislative support for biopower .

both doe and usda have the authority to conduct rd&d and support commercial application efforts for biopower .

however , project summaries and financial allotments indicate the majority of resources in recent years were directed toward liquid fuels for transportation .

biomass research and development act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-224 ) the biomass research and development act established a partnership between usda and doe for rd&d on the production of biobased industrial products .

 ( this act was amended by the energy policy act of 2005 , p.l .

109-58 . ) .

the original provisions included the following: §303 ( 2 ) — defines biobased industrial products to include fuels , chemicals , building materials , or electric power or heat produced from biomass .

§305 — implicit reference to biopower ; establishes the biomass research and development board to coordinate research and development activities relating to biobased industrial products ; board membership includes a representative from doe , usda , department of the interior , the u.s. environmental protection agency , the national science foundation , and the office of science and technology policy .

§306 — implicit reference to biopower ; establishes the biomass research and development technical advisory committee to , in part , advise the biomass research and development board concerning the technical focus and direction of requests for proposals issued under the biomass research and development initiative .

§307 — implicit reference to biopower ; authorizes the secretaries of agriculture and energy to , in part , competitively award grants , contracts , and financial assistance to eligible entities that can perform research on biobased industrial products .

for example , grants may be rendered to an entity conducting research on advanced biomass gasification and combustion to produce electricity ( §307 ( d ) ( 2 ) ( e ) ) ; related research in advanced turbine and stationary fuel cell technology for production of electricity from biomass ( §307 ( d ) ( 2 ) ( f ) ) ; biomass gasification and combustion to produce electricity ( §307 ( d ) ( 3 ) ( a ) ( v ) ) ; and any research and development in technologies or processes determined by the secretaries , acting through their respective points of contact and in consultation with the biomass research and development board ( §307 ( d ) ( 4 ) ) .

farm security and rural investment act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-171 ) §9003 — authorizes the secretary of agriculture to award grants to assist in paying the development and construction costs of biorefineries in order to carry out projects that demonstrate their commercial viability for converting biomass to fuels or chemicals .

§9003 ( b ) ( 2 ) — defines biorefinery as equipment and processes that convert biomass into fuels and chemicals and may produce electricity .

healthy forest restoration act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-148 ) §203 — establishes the biomass commercial utilization grant program ; authorizes the secretary of agriculture to make grants to the owner or operator of a facility that uses biomass as a raw material to produce one or more of several outputs , including electric energy .

energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 ; p.l .

109-58 ) §931 ( f ) — authorizes the secretary of energy , in consultation with the secretary of agriculture , to implement rural demonstration projects that use renewable energy technologies to assist in delivering electricity to rural and remote locations from biomass .

§932 ( b ) ( 1 ) — authorizes the secretary of energy to conduct a program of rd&d and commercial application for bioenergy including biopower energy systems .

§932 ( d ) ( b ) ( iv ) — authorizes the secretary of energy to demonstrate the commercial application of integrated biorefineries from the commercial application of biomass technologies for energy in the form of electricity or useful heat .

§941 ( a ) — amends the definition for biobased product in p.l .

106-224 to mean an industrial product ( including chemicals , materials , and polymers ) produced from biomass , or a commercial or industrial product ( including animal feed and electric power ) derived in connection with the conversion of biomass to fuel .

§941 ( d ) ( 1 ) — modifies membership of the biomass research and development technical advisory committee ( p.l .

106-224 , §306 ) ; replaces an individual affiliated with the biobased industrial products industry with an individual affiliated with the biofuels industry ; adds an individual affiliated with the biobased industrial and commercial products industry ; requires committee members as described in p.l .

106-224 , §306 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( c ) , ( d ) , ( g ) , and ( i ) to have expertise in "fuels and biobased products" whereas previously members were to have expertise in "biobased industrial products. .

§941 ( e ) ( 1 ) — modifies the biomass research and development initiative ( p.l .

106-224 , §307 ( a ) ) to focus on "research on , and development and demonstration of , biobased fuels and biobased products , and the methods , practices and technologies , for their production. .

previously the initiative focus was on "research on biobased industrial products. .

§941 ( e ) ( 2 ) — adds to the biomass research and development initiative ( p.l .

106-224 , §307 ) an objectives section and a technical areas section , in addition to other sections , that specify biobased fuels as a priority .

for example , the initiative is to support "product diversification through technologies relevant to production of a range of biobased products ( including chemicals , animal feeds , and cogenerated power ) that eventually can increase the feasibility of fuel production in a biorefinery. .

energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ; p.l .

110-140 ) §231 ( 1 ) — modifies epact05 §931 ( b ) by adding an authorization of $963 million for fy2010 .

section 931 of epact05 authorizes the secretary of energy to conduct programs of renewable energy rd&d and commercial application .

§231 ( 2 ) — modifies epact05 §931 ( c ) ( 2 ) to increase authorized funding for fy2008 from $251 million to $377 million ; also modifies epact05 §931 ( c ) ( 3 ) to increase authorized funding for fy2009 from $274 million to $398 million .

the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( 2008 farm bill , p.l .

110-246 ) §7526 — reauthorizes the sun grant program , which requires usda to coordinate with doe and land - grant colleges and universities to provide grants to the sun grant centers to enhance the efficiency of bioenergy and biomass research and development programs .

§9001 — defines biorefinery as a facility that converts renewable biomass into biofuels and biobased products and may produce electricity .

§9008 — defines biobased product as an industrial product ( including chemicals , materials , and polymers ) produced from biomass , or a commercial or industrial product ( including animal feed and electric power ) derived in connection with the conversion of biomass to fuel .

§9011 — establishes the biomass crop assistance program , which provides financial assistance to producers or entities that deliver eligible biomass material to designated biomass conversion facilities for use as heat , power , biobased products , or biofuels .

§9012 — authorizes the secretary of agriculture , acting through the forest service , to conduct a competitive r&d program to encourage use of forest biomass for energy .

§9013 ( a ) ( 2 ) — defines a community wood energy system as an energy system that primarily services public facilities owned or operated by state or local governments , including schools , town halls , libraries , and other public buildings ; and uses woody biomass as the primary fuel .

the term includes single facility central heating , district heating , combined heat and energy systems , and other related biomass energy systems .

§9013 ( b ) — establishes the community wood energy program and authorizes the secretary of agriculture , acting through the forest service , to provide grants of up to $50,000 for up to 50% of the cost for communities to plan and install wood energy systems in public buildings .

agricultural act of 2014 ( 2014 farm bill , p.l .

113-79 ) §7526 — reauthorizes the sun grant program , which requires usda to coordinate with other appropriate federal agencies and land - grant colleges and universities to provide grants to the sun grant centers to enhance the efficiency of bioenergy and biomass research and development programs .

§9011 — repeals the forest biomass for energy program .

§11022 — authorizes research and development regarding the use of biomass sorghum grown expressly for the purpose of producing a feedstock for renewable biofuel , renewable electricity , or biobased products .

