market and technological changes are creating challenges to the long - standing business models employed by broadcast television networks and local television stations , but at the same time generating potential opportunities for those networks and stations .

these changes generally are strengthening the position of parties that control popular program content in their negotiations with distributors of that programming .

the changes also may be affecting the three pillars of u.s. government media policy — localism , diversity of voices , and competition — and damping the effectiveness of existing regulations intended to foster them .

as a result , various stakeholders have asked the federal communications commission ( fcc or commission ) to eliminate or modify some of its broadcast media ownership rules and retransmission consent rules .

in particular: the fcc currently is collecting data and comments , and sponsoring research , as part of the statutorily mandated quadrennial review of its broadcast ownership rules .

those rules , among other things , set limitations or prohibitions on the number of national broadcast networks under a single owner , the number of television stations that can be jointly owned in a local market , and the cross - ownership of a television station and a major daily newspaper in a local market .

in its comments in that proceeding , the national association of broadcasters ( nab ) seeks elimination of the cross - ownership restrictions and relaxation of the restrictions on a single entity owning or controlling two television stations in a single local market , claiming these rules prevent efficient combinations required to support the cost of providing local news and emergency journalism .

other commenters claim that such consolidation would harm , rather than foster , diversity of voices , competition , and localism .

for example , the national association of black owned broadcasters claims that consolidation places smaller firms with few stations at a competitive disadvantage , and that "any further relaxation of the commission's multiple ownership rules would exacerbate the already dismal lack of minority ownership in the broadcast industry. .

the fcc is seeking comment on a petition for rulemaking , submitted by a coalition of multichannel video distributors ( cable operators , satellite operators , and telephone companies ) and consumer organizations , requesting that the commission amend its retransmission consent rules to include dispute resolution mechanisms and mandatory interim carriage while disputes are being resolved .

the nab and the associations of the local station affiliates of the four major broadcast networks oppose the petition , claiming that the market is working properly and that fcc intervention is unwarranted and would be harmful .

since the fcc has addressed such issues in response to statutory instructions intended to foster diversity , competition , and localism , congress may choose to provide statutory or informal guidance to the fcc as it moves forward with the proceedings .

two studies of national broadcast television news networks prepared 11 years apart — the state of the news media 2010 study prepared by the pew foundation project for excellence in journalism and a nieman foundation special issue report prepared in 1999 — present very similar portraits of the market forces at play and identify the same market trends and policy implications .

this suggests that many of the market forces that broadcast news networks are contending with today represent long - term structural trends that may be accentuated by , but are not the result of , cyclical economic factors .

it also suggests that while these trends have challenged old business models , the networks have been able to adapt and to survive in the marketplace .

three of the four major national broadcast networks — abc , cbs , and nbc , but not fox — have national news divisions that produce for their local affiliates half - hour evening newscasts , morning news shows ( that range in length from two to four hours and tend to provide softer news than the evening newscasts ) , sunday morning public affairs discussion shows , weekly or periodic news magazine shows ( such as "60 minutes" and "20 / 20" ) that mix investigative news with softer news and entertainment , and unscheduled breaking news reports .

this mix of programming has not changed significantly in the past decade .

although the networks continue to lose audience to cable and internet providers of news and information , they still serve a much larger audience than the cable news networks or internet news services .

interestingly , in the late 1990s the broadcast television networks were losing money on their entertainment and sports programming , for which costs were growing faster than revenues , but were able to earn profits on their news programming , in part by controlling costs .

nbc news , the most watched and the most profitable national broadcast news division , a decade ago created a multiplatform organization that shares the high fixed costs of newsgathering across broadcast , cable , and internet platforms .

nbc news was quite profitable then and remains so .

the other two national news divisions , abc and cbs , do not have cable news networks with which to share costs and have not developed as effective an internet presence .

they earned relatively small profits in 1999 and today they are at best marginally profitable and , in the case of cbs news , may be losing money .

the nieman report and pew study , supplemented by current market data , provide a dynamic portrait of the broadcast network news market: the average nightly audience for the three major broadcast networks' evening newscasts has fallen from more than 50 million viewers in 1980 to 30.4 million in 1998 to 22.3 million in 2009 , a decrease of about 1 million viewers per year ( though the annual decline has been less than that in recent years ) .

the audiences nonetheless remain far larger than the prime time audiences for cable news networks .

the audience for broadcast network morning news shows also has fallen for the past five years .

the prime time news magazine programs continue to attract large audiences , with each of the three networks having at least one successful program .

the audiences for the evening newscasts of the two spanish language broadcast networks — univision and telemundo ( owned by nbc ) — are almost as large as the prime time audiences for the major cable news networks ( fox news , cnn , msnbc , hln , and cnbc ) .

the declining and aging audience for evening and morning newscasts has placed downward pressure on advertising revenues .

this is countered somewhat by the relative affluence of that audience and by the fact that , despite the decline , the audience for the evening newscast at each network continues to be significantly larger than the audience for any other broadcast or cable programming presented at that time of day .

the network newscast audiences therefore continue to command a premium from advertisers .

there has been a shift toward sponsorships of particular segments of network news programs — or even entire newscasts — by a single advertiser .

still , advertising revenues generated by evening and morning network news programming have been falling .

since the 1990s , there have been periodic layoffs in all three network news divisions .

some domestic and foreign bureaus were closed , with the networks relying more heavily on outside sources they could pay as needed rather than on full - time staff and offices .

the broadcast networks have expanded their use of "pooling" — sharing footage from a single camera with other networks , including cable networks .

they have reduced the amount of "breaking news" coverage , increasingly leaving that to 24-hour cable news networks .

these cost - cutting measures continue .

in 2010 , abc announced it would reduce its news division by 300 to 400 employees , out of 1,500 .

cbs news reduced its staff in 2010 by 100 people , or 7% .

nbc news reduced its workforce by more than 10% in 2009 .

although the number of domestic bureaus has stabilized , the three networks continue to trim permanent overseas bureaus and rely more on one - person operations , often sending resources to overseas locations only as events occur .

the broadcast news networks continue to employ a business strategy developed in the 1970s , using news teams to create hybrid news and entertainment programming shown during prime time .

these "newsmagazine" programs tend to be less expensive to produce than scripted entertainment programming for two reasons: many of the underlying costs can be shared with the hard news programming and , even when successful , the correspondents and writers tend not to be able to demand the huge increases in salary and other compensation that the stars and writers of successful entertainment programming can demand .

as a result , even if newsmagazines generally attract smaller audiences than pure entertainment programming , they can be more profitable .

the correspondents and news teams have credibility from their involvement with hard news programming that their counterparts on competing cable networks may lack .

newsmagazines continue to provide the financial backbone of network news organizations .

even with serious cost containment measures in place , the fixed costs associated with maintaining a news network are substantial .

since the late 1990s , the networks have responded by seeking economies of scope by using those news assets to produce revenue - generating programming for multiple platforms .

the 1999 nieman report explained how nbc was already successfully following this business model: here is why this model works so well .

abc and cbs generate nearly all of their income from broadcasting .

nbc takes in additional revenues from cable ( msnbc , cnbc ) , nbc's internet sites , and nbc news channels distributed outside of the united states... .

therefore nbc is better able to shoulder the overall costs involved with newsgathering not just for the "nightly news" and "today," but for its 24-hour cable networks and internet sites as well.... by programming more than 6,000 hours of news a year across its broadcast and cable platforms , the average cost per hour of news at nbc has fallen from about $250,000 to $50,000 during the past five years .

this essence of this quote is echoed in the 2010 pew study , which finds: nbc news is a profit center for nbc universal , but its earning power now comes from its multiplatform structure .

on paper , the news division derives more revenue from cable news channels than from the broadcast .

about two - thirds of news revenues come from msnbc and cnbc .

abc news and cbs news , by contrast , have no such multiplatform systems... .

sooner rather than later , other platforms like the web or video streaming will need to become a more integral part of the networks' distribution and revenue strategy , a strategy nbc has already largely developed and reaped benefits from .

market forces thus appear to be pushing abc and cbs toward partnerships with other news organizations .

the pew study cites speculation in 2010 that abc or cbs were looking to partner with cable news networks , with cbs news and cnn the likeliest partners since cnn correspondents already appear regularly on the cbs program "60 minutes. .

in 2009 , abc reporters began appearing on the bloomberg business cable channel ; the two organizations have jointly hired employees , and bloomberg obtains content from abc's affiliate news service .

it also is possible that the abc or cbs news divisions could seek to form partnerships with non - television newsgathering organizations , such as major newspapers , to share the high fixed costs of newsgathering .

such consolidation might prove the best way to ensure the continued existence of three strong newsgathering organizations supporting broadcasting networks , though at the potential expense of diversity of news sources and competition .

today , just under half of the non - pbs broadcast television stations in the united states produce and air original local news programming , an additional 14% broadcast local news programming produced by another station , and somewhat less than 40% do not broadcast local news at all .

this represents a small decline from 2009 in the number of stations originating news programming , but a slightly larger increase in the number of stations broadcasting news programming produced by others .

unique supply - side and demand - side characteristics of major professional , intercollegiate , and olympic sports programming create market forces that are very different than those for other types of programming , especially news programming .

on the supply side , major sports programming presents unique , time - sensitive events for which there is no close substitute programming .

a competing programmer cannot create copycat programming , the way a popular scripted or unscripted show could spur imitators that potentially could create an even more highly demanded product .

moreover , with major sports programming there is a well - defined entity — a professional sports league , a major intercollegiate conference , or an international olympic committee — that controls access to the events that provide the basis for the programming and that typically retains control of the programming itself .

this is in sharp contrast with news programming , which primarily covers events to which competing programmers have roughly the same access .

as a result of their control over access to the sports events , these sports entities are able to negotiate with programmers and distributors from a position of strength .

on the demand side , there are several distinctive characteristics of the audience for major sports programming .

first , a minority of u.s. households have such a high intensity of demand for the programming that they consider it "must - have" programming .

they are likely to decide whether to rely on free over - the - air broadcast service or to subscribe to a pay multichannel video service — and which such service to subscribe to — based upon which option gives them the most favorable access to the desired sports programming .

the behavior of this small minority of total television households affects the sports programming decisions of pay multichannel video distributors .

at the same time , there is a much larger total audience for major sports programming .

individual households in that mass audience are less likely to base their decisions to subscribe or not subscribe to a pay service on the availability of that programming and are unlikely to be willing to pay specifically for that programming .

both the high - intensity audience and the mass audience include men who watch very limited amounts of other types of programming and therefore represent a unique target for advertisers .

the entity that controls the sports programming will take into account these demand characteristics — mass appeal , high - intensity appeal , and unique appeal — when constructing a profit - maximizing distribution strategy .

program networks and multichannel video providers have long utilized major sports programming to promote their own brand identities , and major sports entities have been able to take advantage of that to generate competitive bidding for the rights to their sports programming: in 1987 , espn obtained rights to offer espn sunday night football , on the condition that it simulcast the games on local broadcast stations in the participating markets .

although espn had carried national basketball association games in 1982-1984 , its acquisition of rights to national football league games was viewed as an important step in attaining credibility as a major distributor of sports programming .

in 1993 , when the fox broadcasting company's network had neither the full schedule of programs nor the geographic reach of the three established broadcast networks ( abc , cbs , and nbc ) , it successfully bid $1.58 billion for four years of programming rights to the national football conference of the nfl .

at the time , the fox network had neither a sports division nor a news division , but by winning the rights and then attracting key on - air talent away from cbs ( which lost the rights ) , it created credibility that allowed it both to purchase additional owned and operated stations for its network and to attract additional affiliates .

more recently , directv has obtained the exclusive rights to the nfl sunday ticket package of "out of market" games and other sports programming as part of a strategy to brand itself as the premier provider of sports programming .

as the proliferation of cable networks led to audience fragmentation , major sports programming that attracted a large audience offered new value to the broadcast or cable network that won the programming rights — a means to market the other programs on the network to the large sports viewing audience .

it became common for the game announcers to market other network programs by identifying the stars of those programs that were in attendance at the sports event being aired .

when the network with the rights to the sports programming is owned by a major programmer with multiple broadcast and / or cable networks , the major sports programming also can be utilized to cross - market the programming aired on those other networks .

as a result , the bids for sports programming rights increased even though the sports programming on its own did not generate enough revenues to directly cover costs .

one reason why bids increased is that , with the successful entry of cable networks , there were more entities able to bid .

by 1998 , the most successful cable networks , such as tbs , tnt , and espn , each had achieved penetration into more than 75 million cable and satellite households ; by 2007 , they were received by more than 95 million households .

although the cable networks generated significantly lower advertising revenues than the broadcast networks , they generated very substantial per subscriber fees .

in 2003 , at a time when broadcast stations were not receiving cash payments from cable operators for retransmission consent rights , espn commanded monthly fees of $2.17 per subscriber , tnt $0.77 , and tbs $0.30 .

snl kagan estimates that in 2010 espn commanded $4.41 ; tnt commanded $0.96 ; and tbs $0.48 .

these popular cable networks all were carried on the cable and satellite tiers reaching the largest number of subscribers .

in 2008 , subscriber license fees represented 54.0% of revenues for advertiser - supported cable networks ; advertising revenues only represented 42.2% of revenues .

in 2009 , advertising revenues fell while subscriber fees grew , so today advertising represents an even smaller share of cable network revenues .

in contrast , advertising continues to represent the preponderance of broadcast network revenues , in the vicinity of 90% .

it is only recently that broadcasters began to collect retransmission consent compensation from multichannel video providers in the form of per subscriber fees .

given that advertising revenues are highly sensitive to the business cycle , and often fall during recessions , broadcast networks rely on a less stable source of revenues than cable networks .

to compensate for this , broadcast networks increasingly are demanding that their local station network affiliates help fund the acquisition of expensive sports ( and other ) programming , either through direct affiliate payments to the network or by requiring the affiliates to share a portion of their retransmission consent revenues with the network .

the bidding for the programming rights to major sports events occurs years before the events , at which time it is not possible to accurately predict economic conditions in the months leading up to the event , when the bulk of the advertising will be sold .

as they bid for rights against cable networks , broadcast networks invariably have less certain projections of the revenues they will have available to support the bid .

thus , in february 2002 news corp. , parent of fox entertainment group , cited the downturn in advertising as the reason why it took a $909 million one - time operating charge for broadcast sports contracts with the national football league , major league baseball , and nascar auto racing .

in 2003 , nbc bid $2.2 billion for the rights to the 2010 and 2012 olympic games ( including $820 million for the 2010 winter olympics ) , a 33% increase over the rights fees for the 2006 and 2008 olympic games , but had to attempt to sell advertising during 2009 and early 2010 , when the advertising market was at its nadir .

nbc has indicated that it lost approximately $200 million on the 2010 olympics .

in comparison , for the 2006 olympics , when general motors was the primary advertiser , nbc was able to generate advertising revenues that exceeded rights payments by about $200 million .

many observers believe the 2010 experience will constrain future bids for the programming rights to the olympics .

despite the negative financial bottom line of the 2010 olympic programming , the strategy employed by nbc is likely to be the model for the future .

nbc fully exploited its wide range of distribution outlets — the usa , msnbc , cnbc , and universal hd cable networks , as well as nbcolympics.com — to provide far more complete coverage of the olympics than ever before .

the nbc broadcast network and its cable networks offered more than 835 hours of sports programming — more than the total number of hours that elapsed between the opening and closing of the olympics .

multiple events occurred simultaneously and thus could not be covered by a single network , but the combination of broadcast and cable networks was able to provide extensive coverage , including significant amounts of live coverage .

the nbc broadcast network did not want to pre - empt so much of its non - olympics programming that it undermined its other programming , but the 835 hours of olympic programming could be borne by a combination of networks with less impact on their program schedules .

there also was coordinated coverage on a website , nbcolympics.com .

the high fixed costs associated with the rights fees and production facilities were spread across the many nbc - universal affiliated distribution outlets , and the total quantity of olympics programming far exceeded that for any previous olympic games .

this strategy of using several outlets to cover a complex sports competition also was used in the recent successful bid by cbs and the turner cable networks for the rights to future national collegiate athletic association basketball tournaments ( march madness ) .

even as the tournament expands to include more teams , and thus encompass more games , the wider reliance on cable networks to supplement the broadcast network will allow all games to be televised .

the fixed costs of production will be shared across more hours of programming .

similarly , the strategy of coordinating television and internet is being adapted to other sports .

a recent gmr marketing survey of consumers in markets where comcast offers cable service found that while television remains the most important medium for national football league fans , "the number of multimedia multi - taskers is growing at a swift pace due to the enormity of fantasy sports," with 76% of the respondents who identified themselves as nfl fans using the internet to follow sports at the same time as they are watching sports on television .

there is a major new development in the sports programming market .

a number of major sports entities with strong brand identities — leagues such as the national football league and the big ten intercollegiate conference , and teams such as the new york yankees and baltimore orioles — have created their own national or regional cable networks and distributed some or all of their sports events exclusively over those networks .

this business strategy allows leagues or teams to leverage their control of a limited amount of seasonal "must - have" programming , which represents only a relatively small number of hours in a network's annual programming schedule , into a package that can command payment year round .

in effect , it ties access to the limited amount of must - have programming to the purchase of lots of less - demanded programming , such as "classic" game re - runs , interviews , pre - and post - game shows , pre - season shows , player drafts , and less popular sports events .

in general , these successfully branded sports entities have insisted that cable and satellite operators place their sports networks on the tier with the largest number of subscribers , in order to generate monthly per subscriber fees from the maximum number of subscribers .

this also allows the sports entity to receive payment for the entire year .

if the must - have programming were placed on a sports tier , fans could sign up just for the season and then drop the tier .

although cable companies initially resisted the requirement that the sports networks be placed on the tier with the largest number of subscribers — preferring that the sports networks be put in a special sports tier — the sports entities have succeeded in their negotiations by using the threat that those subscribers with a high intensity of demand will desert the cable or satellite operator who does not carry the sports channel on a basic tier for an operator who does carry it on a basic tier .

the sports entities have been able to exploit the fact that their events represent must - have programming to a sufficiently large minority of television households to require all households to pay for the programming through the entire year .

this is likely to reinforce the long - standing pattern of sports networks accounting for a much larger percentage of cable and satellite operator programming costs than their percentage of cable and satellite subscriber viewing .

the unique supply and demand characteristics of major sports programming appear to have two significant implications for future broadcast carriage of such programming .

on one hand , the sports entities control access to the sports events and therefore have the ability to command for themselves most of the economic rents generated by the intensely valued sports programming .

broadcasters may have relatively little control over the largest programming cost — the license fee for the right to broadcast the sports events .

on the other hand , broadcast networks are adapting to this by coordinating with other program distributors to compete more effectively when bidding for programming rights and to generate more revenues when they win the rights .

at a minimum , broadcast networks are seeking a share of the fees their affiliates are able to command from cable and satellite operators for the retransmission of intensely demanded network - produced major sports programming .

in addition , broadcast networks are collaborating with affiliated or independent cable and internet outlets to develop multi - platform distribution strategies that generate greater revenues from the programming rights .

these strategies cede a greater portion of sports programming to cable networks than in the past , but allow broadcasters to retain a share of that programming .

given that the entities that control major sports events have much greater control over the production and distribution of major sports programming than do broadcasters , existing regulatory rules that are directed at broadcasters — whether retained or modified — are unlikely to have much impact on broadcast provision of major sports programming .

if congress is concerned about how the public can access major sports programming — for example , if it is concerned that such programming be available over the air without subscription or that cable subscribers not be required to pay for such programming even if they do not view it — then it will need to examine sports entities as well as the broadcast and cable networks .

issues might include the program blackout policies of the sports entities , the antitrust laws as they apply to sports entities , and the fcc's program carriage rules applicable to impasses in negotiations between sports entities that own cable networks and multichannel video programming distributors .

blackouts .

some national football league teams are not selling out tickets to their home games .

they often would prefer to televise those games to hometown fans in order to foster broad - based interest in and support for the team , but league rules impose a blackout on games when tickets are not sold out 72 hours in advance of the game .

the nfl has made the determination that it is beneficial to the league to black out those games , even if the home team and its fans are harmed .

nfl officials are concerned that if a stadium is only half full , it also harms the quality of the televised program because viewers prefer to see the frenzy of a full stadium of fans cheering on their team .

in many cases , the team's stadium was directly or indirectly funded by a governmental entity , and taxpayers may feel deceived if they have borne some of the costs of the stadium but are denied television access to the games .

if blackouts were prohibited and as a result stadium attendance fell because some fans chose to watch the games on television rather than at the stadium , team revenues and local tax revenues from ticket sales and food and parking concessions could fall .

in the extreme case , a team's ability to make lease payments to the stadium owner could be impaired .

in most situations , however , the fall in stadium attendance would be too small for the impact on team revenues and tax revenues to be substantial .

is market intervention justified if a league's joint profit maximizing behavior is harmful to a team and that team's community and , if so , can an intervention be devised that is not itself harmful ? .

bundling .

consider a major sports entity with programming that is so intensely valued by a sufficiently large minority of households ( who would threaten to abandon a multichannel video provider that does not carry that programming ) that the sports entity can insist that all multichannel video providers carry that programming on their tier with the largest subscriber base , even if the multichannel video provider would prefer to carry it on a special sports tier .

this may maximize revenues for the sports entity but at the expense of a majority of multichannel video subscribers who do not watch that programming but must bear some of its cost .

is market intervention justified if it can be shown that there is significant loss in consumer welfare as a result and , if so , can an intervention be devised that is not itself harmful ? .

"free" broadcasts .

with more than 85% of all u.s. households subscribing to a multichannel video provider , and more than 90% of those households purchasing more than just a basic package of programming , is there any public policy basis for market intervention to keep sports programming on "free" broadcast television ? .

if so , can intervention be devised that is not itself harmful ? .

