under the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ; p.l .

110-140 ) , congress mandated the use of a large and rapidly increasing volume of biofuels as part of the u.s. national transportation fuel base .

in particular , the share of cellulosic biofuels is mandated to grow to 16 billion gallons by 2022 — a daunting challenge considering that no commercial production existed as of mid - 2010 .

in addition to the biofuels use mandate , congress also provides federal support in the form of tax credits to fuel blenders and biofuels producers , and an import tariff on foreign - produced ethanol to protect and encourage the development of the u.s. biofuels industry .

despite this strong federal support , many uncertainties remain over whether a large - scale , economically viable cellulosic biofuels system can be successfully developed .

these uncertainties include the following .

which biomass source and processing technology will provide the highest energy yields at the lowest cost ? .

what incentives will encourage biomass producers to cultivate dedicated crops that may take three or more years before they are established and produce marketable output , and for which no market presently exists ? .

how will large volumes of biomass — that must be produced within a narrow temperate - zone harvest window ( eg , march to october ) — be harvested , dried , stored , and ultimately transported to a processing plant that must operate throughout the year ? .

what changes will be needed in the u.s. transportation - fuel infrastructure to facilitate distributing and consuming the mandated rapid , large expansion of cellulosic biofuels ? .

what set of federal policies can best facilitate the development of such a system ? .

will there be regional consequences within the united states from the emergence of such a system ? .

what about potential international consequences ? .

it is still too early to begin to answer many of the broader social welfare questions , such as who will be potential winners and losers in the development of a large - scale biomass - based biofuels system .

however , substantial research has been done in recent years concerning the economics of production , harvest , and energy yield for various biomass sources under different processing technologies .

a review of this research can help to clarify current bottlenecks in the development of a cellulosic biofuels industry and provide some guidance to policymakers looking to extend or modify existing federal policy , or formulate new policy in support of such a biofuels industry .

this report attempts to summarize the current state of knowledge regarding potential biomass feedstocks , production and marketing constraints , processing technologies , and the economics of biomass from field to fuel under current and hypothetical policy circumstances .

as such , it is intended to serve as a reference for policymakers interested in understanding the complexity underlying the development of a large - scale , biomass - based fuel system .

crs has several reports addressing different aspects of the u.s. biofuels sector ( including cellulosic biofuels ) and related federal policy .

this report is different in that it provides a broad overview of the nascent u.s. cellulosic biofuels industry and the many uncertainties associated with its future .

this assessment was conducted by a team of researchers at purdue university's department of agricultural economics .

the report provides a "snapshot" of current technological development , but is both prospective and retrospective because it also examines emerging or advanced technologies that may affect future biofuels development , and looks at evidence from a growing body of research on the economics of biomass production and biofuels processing as guidelines for shaping energy policy .

the report contains five chapters .

the first chapter is an executive summary , which provides an overview of the report's main findings .

the executive summary is followed by the main report , which consists of chapters 2-5 , organized like sections of a typical crs report , together with figures and tables listed in the table of contents .

each chapter can be read independently ; however , chapters 2-4 ( "introduction," "lingocellulosic feedstocks," and "cellulosic biofuel conversion technologies" ) provide the reader with background and context for a more complete understanding of the economic analysis and discussion contained in the final chapter .

crs has written a suite of products on different aspects of u.s. biofuels policy in general , and cellulosic biofuels policy in particular .

these products may be accessed through the crs online "issues in focus / agriculture / agriculture - based biofuels" website , and include the following reports: crs report r41282 , agriculture - based biofuels: overview and emerging issues , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl34738 , cellulosic biofuels: analysis of policy issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report r40529 , biomass: comparison of definitions in legislation through the 111th congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r40155 , renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) : overview and issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r41106 , meeting the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) mandate for cellulosic biofuels: questions and answers , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rs22870 , waiver authority under the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r40110 , biofuels incentives: a summary of federal programs , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl34239 , biofuels provisions in the 2007 energy bill and the 2008 farm bill: a side - by - side comparison , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r41296 , biomass crop assistance program ( bcap ) : status and issues , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r40445 , intermediate - level blends of ethanol in gasoline , and the ethanol "blend wall" , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r40460 , calculation of lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions for the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed .

this technology assessment and report was written by purdue university , department of agricultural economics , under the leadership of wallace e. tyner , together with sarah brechbill and david perkis .

the report's authorship rests with tyner , brechbill , and perkis .

the work was performed under contract to crs , and is part of a multiyear crs project to examine different aspects of u.s. energy policy .

this report was funded , in part , by a grant from the joyce foundation .

[author name scrubbed] served as the crs project coordinator .

the major objective of this paper is to summarize what is and is not known about cellulosic biofuels .

for years cellulose - based biofuels have been touted as the future of bioenergy .

what is the situation today ? .

what do we know about the technical and economic potential of the various feedstocks and conversion processes ? .

what are the likely impacts of the government mandates and incentives related to cellulosic biofuels ? .

this report attempts to answer these questions based on published literature and model simulations .

recent changes in the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) in the united states will require renewable fuels production to more than triple in the next 12 years ( by 2022 ) , and those increases are expected to come largely from cellulosic biofuels , an industry in its infancy and not yet economically viable .

cellulosic feedstocks of interest include agricultural residues from such crops as corn , wheat , rice , and sugarcane , perennial grasses such as switchgrass and miscanthus , short - rotation woody crops such as poplar and willow , and forest residues removed directly from the forest or taken from mills after processing , just to name a few .

current research on feedstocks focuses on maximizing yields , harvesting and collecting efficiently , and testing various supply chains to minimize losses and overall delivered costs ( figure 1 ) .

cellulosic conversion technologies are not the same as for corn ethanol , as this biomass material is much more complicated than starch - based feedstocks .

conversion technologies receiving the most attention include the biochemical and the thermochemical approaches .

these technologies are not completely new , but their previous applications differ greatly from cellulosic biofuels .

with both the supply of feedstocks and conversion technologies still in the early stages of development and neither having yet arrived at a commercial scale , future progress in both areas is uncertain .

it remains to be seen whether the development of one will come to dominate the development of the other , or whether the two can evolve simultaneously while still arriving at a workable outcome to fulfill the advanced biofuels requirements of the rfs .

the primary theme for both feedstocks and conversion technologies is cost reduction in order to make commercialization a reality and to make cellulosic biofuels competitive with other energy sources .

research and development must make cellulosic biofuels production as flexible as possible in order to accommodate future improvements .

governments and universities will play an important role in reducing risk and providing guidance as feedstock producers and biofuels plants break ground on cellulosic biofuels production .

this report focuses on feedstock production , feedstock logistics , and biofuel production ; however , challenges and obstacles to the distribution infrastructure and end use of biofuels in vehicles are also discussed .

the remainder of the report is divided into three sections .

the first section ( " chapter 3: lignocellulosic feedstocks " ) covers the various types of lignocellulosic feedstocks , their respective characteristics , and a brief summary of how each feedstock is established and maintained .

then yields and production costs are outlined from a variety of studies to show the potential market effect of location , input costs , and assumptions .

next is a discussion of supply logistics and the challenges this new type of feedstock presents with respect to storage , quality , and transportation .

the second section of the report ( " chapter 4: cellulosic biofuel conversion technologies " ) considers biochemical and thermochemical conversion technologies .

after a summary of each of the processes , the expected and theoretical energy yields of each technology are outlined .

a summary of current estimates of capital and operating costs for each technology allows for discussion of where potential cost reductions might be made .

finally , a current list of planned and proposed pilot and demonstration plants is presented , with a discussion of how funding from the department of energy has been allocated so far .

the final section of the report ( " chapter 5: economics and policy of cellulosic biofuels " ) discusses the current status of relevant biofuels policy and some of the potential future policy options related to cellulosic biofuels .

it also analyzes the effects of changes in these policies on the economics of cellulosic biofuel production .

in particular , a simulation model is used to compare the market effects of a fixed subsidy ( representative of the current fixed tax credit subsidy ) and a variable subsidy that declines to zero as oil prices rise to a threshold level .

lignocellulosic feedstocks are composed of three main parts: cellulose , hemicellulose , and lignin .

depending on the conversion process used , the concentration of these components in a particular feedstock will affect the efficacy of biofuel production .

cellulose is a sugar polymer chain of glucose , or six carbon sugars .

hemicellulose is a sugar polymer chain of xylose , or five carbon sugars .

lignin forms the hard plant cell walls and cannot be fermented into liquid fuels in a biochemical conversion process , as can cellulose and hemicellulose .

lignin , however , can be utilized in the thermochemical conversion process and serves as a byproduct in the biochemical conversion process useful for providing energy to power the plant and even for generating electricity .

the characteristics of the different parts of biomass and the amount of each present in a particular feedstock play a role in determining the efficacy of conversion technologies .

the remainder of this chapter will discuss the production , yields , costs , and supply of the major lignocellulosic feedstocks in the united states — agricultural residues , perennial grasses , forest residues , and short - rotation woody crops .

biochemical and thermochemical conversion of lignocellulosic feedstocks are currently receiving the most attention as processing methods for cellulosic biofuels .

neither conversion process is ready for commercialization .

much of what is appearing is taking place in laboratories and demonstration and pilot plants that are small in scale .

plans for commercial plants have been announced by several companies .

however , commercialization is likely to be slow to develop absent significant incentives , and cost reductions will be necessary for it to develop .

this chapter will focus on the biochemical and thermochemical conversion processes .

each process is described in some detail , and the likely areas for efficiency improvements and cost reductions are discussed .

energy yields and production costs for each process from recent studies is then presented .

the current state of operational and proposed cellulosic biofuels plants is then outlined , along with a discussion of the funding thus far allocated by the federal government .

finally , there is an overview of some other developing technologies that are receiving attention as research continues to improve the efficiency of conversion processes .

this final chapter of this report will look at some of the main government policies that are likely to impact the progress of cellulosic biofuels .

after a brief review of policy and market developments , there is a discussion of the blend wall , its impact on the growth of biofuels in the united states , and some possible solutions to the challenges of the blend wall .

then , the renewable fuel standard and the biomass crop assistance program ( bcap ) are summarized .

this is followed by a comparative discussion of fixed versus variable biofuels subsidies .

finally , the potential effects of fixed and variable subsides are evaluated using a plant - level cost model with both biochemical and thermochemical conversion processes and stochastic input prices .

the united states has been the world's leading producer of ethanol since 2005 when it surpassed brazil .

the biofuels industry began in the united states with corn - based ethanol in the late 1970s , and grew slowly until the oil price run - up of 2005 accelerated industry investment and growth ( figure 10 ) .

from the beginning , ethanol blending has been subsidized in the form of a tax credit at a rate of between 40 and 60 cents per gallon .

other supportive policies have been added in recent years , but the blending tax credit has been paramount from the beginning .

over the period 1983 to 2003 , the price of oil averaged about $20 per barrel .

when coupled with the blending tax credit and mandates for the use of oxygenates ( including ethanol ) in reformulated gasoline following the 1990 clean air act amendments , $20 oil was enough to promote slow , but steady growth of the u.s. corn ethanol industry .

over this period , the price of ethanol varied but generally was equal to the gasoline price plus the government subsidy ( figure 11 ) .

that is , pricing was on a pure volumetric basis .

ethanol had value both as an oxygenate and for its higher octane level .

then in 2004 the price of oil began its move up , and the combination of a fixed subsidy keyed to $20 oil and much higher oil prices caused a boom in the corn ethanol industry .

with high oil prices and substantial fixed subsidies , the ethanol industry enjoyed large profits and significant investment in new plants through 2007 .

the price relationship between ethanol and gasoline also became much more volatile as the quantity of ethanol on the market increased and other factors ( such as the widespread phase out by may 2006 of mtbe , a major oxygenate competitor ) came into play .

beginning in 2008 the corn ethanol industry faced major economic difficulties as the price of corn surged .

corn is the single largest cost component in ethanol production accounting for nearly 66% of input costs .

over two billion gallons of production capacity was shut down .

then even after corn prices fell , capacity remained down because the industry had reached the effective blend wall by mid - 2009 .

the blend wall refers to the maximum quantity that can be blended given the 10% blending rate ( more on this topic below ) .

with excess supply on the market , the price of ethanol was ultimately forced down to the break - even price with corn .

conditions improved in late 2009 and early 2010 as more ethanol could be blended in winter months .

however , in the spring of 2010 , the industry returned to effectively operating at the blend wall .

so long as the blending wall remains binding , this situation will persist .

the future of cellulosic biofuels and the potential to be profitable will depend a great deal on cost reductions in feedstock production and conversion technology , as discussed in the previous section .

the economic situation and the policies implemented to support cellulosic biofuels will likely play a critical role in determining the path of commercialization just as they did for corn ethanol .

the blend wall is a physical limit on the volume of ethanol that can be blended into the national transportation fuel supply due to the regulatory limit of 10% ethanol in fuel blends for standard vehicles .

as of august 2010 , 10% was the national blending level .

this blending limit was partially modified on october 13 , 2010 ( discussed below ) to allow 15% blends for use in model 2007 and newer light - duty vehicles .

with annual u.s. gasoline consumption of about 140 billion gallons , the maximum amount of ethanol that can be blended to make e10 ( 90% gasoline and 10% ethanol ) is 14 billion gallons .

to achieve 14 billion gallons of ethanol would require that every gallon of gasoline used across the country be blended at a 10% level .

however , it is not possible to blend at that level everywhere .

california has had a lower blending limit .

in the south , blending has not been common in summer months because of higher evaporative emissions .

there are problems with distribution to some regions .

a more realistic estimate of the current blend wall is around 12 billion gallons or 9% of gasoline consumption .

figure 12 shows how u.s. ethanol consumption is converging with the amount of ethanol that would be needed if all gasoline were blended at a rate of 10% .

this chart shows that gasoline use has only increased slightly over the past 15 years , but ethanol consumption has increased dramatically , especially over the past five years .

more ethanol use is possible with an increase in e85 ( 15% gasoline and 85% ethanol ) consumption .

however , e85 pumps are in short supply throughout the country and will likely not increase without strong government intervention .

the number of flexible fuel vehicles ( ffvs ) in the united states capable of running on e85 is estimated at over 8 million as of mid - 2010 , but this accounts for only about 3% of the 240 million cars , vans , and light trucks that make up the nation's vehicle fleet .

furthermore , very few of these are running on e85 even part of the time .

if all 8 million ffvs ran exclusively on e85 , they would consume an additional 4.7 billion gallons of ethanol ( assuming 12,000 miles / vehicle - year and 20 mpg on ethanol ) .

currently , less than 0.5% of total u.s. gasoline consumption is in the form of e85 .

an option for solving the blend wall is to increase the rate at which ethanol is blended with gasoline in conventional vehicles to 15% or 20% to increase the total amount of ethanol that can be used in the gasoline consumed by the conventional vehicle fleet .

doe and epa are conducting tests to see whether higher blends will be compatible with current vehicles that run on conventional gasoline .

there is concern that newer vehicles with warranties may see those warranties voided if higher blends are used .

in 2010 , underwriter's laboratories ( ul ) certified that current gasoline dispensing equipment can handle blends containing up to 15% ethanol .

however , ul also said that e15 would not be suitable because , if one assumes that e10 may have some 15% ethanol , then some e15 will almost certainly have higher than 15% ethanol which may prove harmful to existing distribution infrastructure .

in march 2009 , growth energy , representing ethanol producers , applied for a waiver from the environmental protection agency to increase the blending rate from 10% to 15% .

on october 13 , 2010 , epa issued a partial waiver for gasoline that contains up to a 15% ethanol blend ( e15 ) for use in model year 2007 or newer light - duty motor vehicles ( i.e. , passenger cars , light - duty trucks , and sport utility vehicles ) .

a decision on the use of e15 in model year 2001 to 2006 vehicles will be made after epa receives the results of additional doe testing , possibly as early as november 2010 .

however , epa also announced that no waiver would be granted for e15 use in model year 2001 and older light - duty motor vehicles , as well as in any motorcycles , heavy duty vehicles , or non - road engines .

in addition to the epa waiver announcement , numerous other changes have to occur before gas stations will begin selling e15 including many approvals by states and significant infrastructure changes ( eg , labeling of pumps , storage tanks , etc. ) .

as a result , the vehicle limitation to newer models , coupled with infrastructure issues , are likely to limit rapid expansion of blending rates .

discussions of the blend wall have applied largely to the already established corn ethanol industry .

however , with the eventual onset of commercial cellulosic biofuel production and a renewable fuel standard that will require biofuels made from feedstocks other than corn , the issue of the blend wall and the current 10% blending rate may serve to hinder or even stop the development of the cellulosic biofuels industry before it gets started .

with mandated biofuels amounts higher than what can possibly be blended , the rfs may need to be capped and revised from its legislated levels .

in effect , the blend wall is a constraint on the amount of ethanol that can be absorbed by the market .

the presence of the blend wall serves to make the demand curve vertical , such that the same quantity of ethanol is demanded regardless of the price , once the blend wall quantity is achieved .

the blend wall limits demand of ethanol to an amount that is less than the equilibrium amount ( where ethanol supply equals unconstrained ethanol demand ) .

this creates a market with reduced ethanol demand , excess ethanol supply , and an artificially low ethanol price and explains why some of the u.s. corn - based ethanol capacity was shut down in 2008 and 2009 , and even through 2010 .

figure 13 shows the effect on the ethanol market of a blend wall .

the fixed subsidy is also shown through the shift to the right of the demand curve .

with a subsidy , more ethanol will be demanded at any given price .

in figure 13 , the intersection between the supply curve and the demand curve with the subsidy indicates the quantity and price ( p* ) that would result without the blend wall .

however , when the blend wall is in effect , the demand curve becomes vertical once that quantity ( q bw ) is reached .

this demand curve with the blend wall is the bold line in figure 13 .

the outcome will then be the intersection between the supply curve and the demand curve with the blend wall .

relative to the case where the blend wall is not in effect , the amount of ethanol consumed will decrease to the blend wall ( q bw ) and the ethanol price ( p bw ) will also decrease .

if epa determines to maintain the blend level at 10% , it will not be possible for cellulose ethanol to become established .

corn ethanol will be less expensive under most foreseeable conditions , so there would not be investment in cellulose ethanol even with the cellulose - based rfs .

the perceived uncertainty would be too large to elicit industry investment .

however , cellulosic - based biofuels produced via thermochemical conversion ( eg , bio - butanol ) could be developed because they are not affected by the blend wall .

these synthetic petroleum products can be used by existing petroleum - based distribution and storage infrastructure and the current fleet of u.s. vehicles .

however , even if the blending limit is increased to 15% , there still may not be room for much cellulose ethanol .

from the description of the rfs below , one can see that in 2022 the corn ( or conventional ) component is 15 billion gallons , and the other "advanced biofuels" part is 4 billion .

sugarcane ethanol is included in the other advanced category .

so corn plus sugarcane ethanol could sum to as much as 19 billion gallons .

as noted above , 19 billion gallons is the effective blend wall at 15% blending .

since corn and sugarcane ethanol are likely to always be less expensive to produce than cellulosic ethanol , they could crowd out cellulosic ethanol even at the 15% blending level .

again , synthetic hydrocarbons produced via the thermochemical pathway would not be affected by the blend wall .

the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) was first introduced as a part of the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) .

it required that 4 billion gallons of renewable fuels be used starting in 2006 , increasing to a 7.5-billion - gallon requirement in 2012 .

the original rfs was never binding , meaning that the market always produced a quantity larger than the level of the mandate .

the rfs was increased dramatically in the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ; p.l .

110-140 ) .

in 2008 , 9 billion gallons of renewable fuels were required , and this requirement increases to 36 billion in 2022 .

there are also requirements as to what fraction of the total mandate must come from various types of fuels .

figure 14 outlines the timing and break down of the requirements for the rfs .

the primary feature of the updated rfs is that it limits the amount of biofuels that can be produced from corn and still qualify under the rfs , and requires greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emission reductions relative to emissions from conventional gasoline for rfs - qualifying biofuels .

from 2010 until 2015 , the corn - based biofuels cap only increases slightly under the rfs , and eventually levels off in 2015 at 15 billion gallons .

any production of corn - based biofuels beyond this level will not count towards the mandate .

for any corn - based ethanol from new refineries to count , it must reduce ghg emissions by 20% compared to conventional gasoline .

however , all plants in production or under construction as of december 2007 are grandfathered — and that is most , if not all , of the eventual 15-billion - gallons corn - starch rfs .

in its final rfs ruling in 2010 , epa determined that corn - based ethanol from new plants meets the 20% ghg reduction criterion .

the remaining fuels to meet the mandate must come from advanced biofuels that may be from either cellulosic or non - cellulosic sources .

advanced biofuels must be produced from a feedstock other than corn and achieve a 50% reduction in ghg emissions compared to conventional gasoline .

cellulosic advanced biofuels must be produced from any cellulose , hemicelluloses , or lignin from biomass and achieve a 60% reduction in ghg emissions compared to conventional gasoline .

the emission reduction requirements may be reduced by 10% by the u.s. epa should the initial reduction requirement not be feasible .

however , in its final 2010 ruling , epa determined that all the biofuels it evaluated meet the ghg thresholds .

imported ethanol produced from sugarcane in brazil , which is subject to approximately a $0.59 per gallon tariff ( including a $0.54 most - favored nation duty and a 2.5% value - added tariff ) , may also be used for the other advanced biofuels category .

the rfs can be either non - binding or binding relative to the amount of biofuel that the market would otherwise demand .

however , the two possible rfs scenarios generate very different market effects .

the presence of the rfs will cause some portion of the demand curve to become vertical ( as shown by the bold line in the following figures ) , and the effect of the rfs on the quantity and price will depend on how the rfs quantity compares to the quantity that would otherwise be demanded by the market .

a non - binding rfs ( figure 15 ) will not affect the quantity or price , because the amount required by the rfs is below the market equilibrium .

that is , the market is producing and consuming more ethanol than the rfs requires .

however , a binding rfs ( figure 16 ) will have an effect on the quantity and price .

when the rfs is binding , the market equilibrium quantity will be less than the rfs requires .

therefore , the rfs will cause the quantity of ethanol consumed and the ethanol price to increase .

the government mandate on the use of biofuels creates demand and is intended to encourage investment in improved technology and new plants .

supporters of the rfs contend that the policy helps to reduce investment risk by guaranteeing demand over the years that the rfs is in place , increases energy security , reduces dependence on imported oil , and offers environmental benefits by requiring the use of renewable resources for energy production .

critics of the rfs view the policy as potentially hindering the development of other alternative energy technologies since it strictly promotes renewable fuels , while a technology neutral policy such as a cap - and - trade system or a carbon tax would promote the development of multiple renewable energy technologies .

the rfs as it stands is based on renewable fuel use at specific levels rather than renewable fuel use as a share of overall fuel use .

therefore , improvements in fuel efficiency that have been mandated by the federal government may make meeting the rfs more of a challenge .

with improved fuel efficiency , less fuel is necessary to travel a given distance .

the energy information administration forecasts u.s. motor gasoline consumption to fall from about 138 billion gallons in 2009 to 122 billion in 2022 .

therefore the 36 billion gallon rfs will rise from a 26% share to a 30% share of gasoline consumption on a volumetric basis .

in its final rfs ruling in 2010 , the epa effectively converted the rfs from a volumetric basis to an energy basis .

epa interpreted the rfs as 36 billion gallons of ethanol equivalent by 2022 .

a gallon of bio - gasoline , with 50% more energy than ethanol counts as 1.5 gallons of ethanol equivalent .

the eu 2020 target is energy equivalent as well .

that is , 20% of the energy content of liquid fuels must be renewable .

that approach is technology neutral with respect to renewable liquid transportation fuels in that it leaves it entirely up to the market place to determine the fuels that will be produced ( subject to environmental constraints ) .

the biomass crop assistance program ( bcap ) was established in the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( 2008 farm bill ; p.l .

110-246 ) to encourage biomass production by providing financial assistance with crop establishment , collection , harvest , storage , and transportation costs , as well as annual payments for biomass production , to producers within an economically practical distance from a biomass facility .

as of august 2010 , an estimated total of $243 million has been paid out to bcap participants .

producers who sell biomass to qualified biomass conversion facilities can expect to receive up to 75% of the cost of establishing and planting eligible biomass crops .

matching funds are expected to be available for collection , harvest , storage , and transportation to a biomass conversion facility .

the maximum government payment is $45 / ton .

applications are being accepted for conversion facilities to qualify for the program .

plants that have qualified for the program are from a variety of geographic locations and are using a variety of biomass feedstocks .

the supplemental appropriations act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-212 ) limits mandatory spending on bcap by allowing no more than $552 million in fy2010 and $432 million in fy2011 ; while no limit was placed on fy2012 funding .

federal subsidies in the form of an ethanol tax credit were first introduced in the energy tax act of 1978 .

the tax credit has remained between 40 and 60 cents per gallon since then .

previously , this subsidy was a volumetric ethanol excise tax credit .

in 2004 , it was changed to a blender's tax credit , and is paid to the blender of the biofuel .

the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) extended the blender's tax credit through 2010 but reduced it from $0.51 to $0.45 per gallon effective january 2009 .

in addition to the $0.45 per gallon , there is a small ethanol producer credit of $0.10 per gallon for the first 15 million gallons produced each year by a small producer .

producers eligible for this credit must have an annual production capacity that is less than 60 million gallons .

about 1.6 billion gallons of ethanol applied for the small producer's tax credit in 2008 .

this credit is slated to last until the end of 2010 .

the 2008 farm bill also created a tax credit of $1.01 per gallon for producers of cellulosic biofuels .

cellulosic ethanol that is also eligible for the volumetric ethanol excise tax credit , the small ethanol producer credit , or any other credit will only receive a total credit of $1.01 per gallon .

this credit is set to expire at the end of 2012 .

the rapid increase in u.s. ethanol production ( figure 10 ) since 2005 has led to a concomitant increase in federal costs in the form of foregone revenue via the various tax credits ( i.e. , the fixed subsidies mentioned above ) .

in 2009 the various fixed subsidies for biofuels in the united states cost nearly $5.9 billion , and is projected to reach at least $27 billion by 2022 if all tax credits are extended alongside of the rfs .

the biofuels tax credits have been available even during periods of extreme profitability such as occurred during 2006 and 2007 .

the high federal costs associated with the tax credits , coupled with the outlook for rapid growth in the cost of the fixed subsidy , have generated some interest among economists and federal budget watchdogs in favor of substituting a variable subsidy in place of the fixed subsidy as a means of lowering government costs while maintaining support for the biofuels industry .

unlike a fixed subsidy which remains constant in spite of market conditions , a variable subsidy adjusts its value depending on the current price of a barrel of oil .

at high oil prices , above a certain threshold level , no subsidy is available , but as oil prices fall to the threshold level and then below , the variable subsidy kicks in and increases in value .

therefore , the subsidy amount paid is not constant as it is with a fixed subsidy .

in other words , a variable subsidy is designed to take into consideration the linkage between the ethanol industry's profitability and petroleum prices .

in the absence of a blend wall , profitability of biofuel production will depend largely on the price of gasoline ( which is highly correlated with oil prices ) , the primary commodity with which biofuels will compete .

when oil and gasoline prices are high , biofuels are able to compete and remain profitable , while low oil prices make it difficult for biofuels to compete .

fixed subsidies ignore these differences .

fixed subsidies simply add to a plant's profitability , regardless of whether or not the plant would be profitable without the subsidy .

in contrast , variable subsidies change as oil prices change .

a variable subsidy can reduce overall government costs since large subsidy amounts will not be paid all the time , but only when the oil price warrants in order for biofuels to be competitive .

variable subsidies could be linked to either oil or gasoline prices , but it is expected that the difference between the two would be minimal considering the strong statistical relationship between oil and gasoline prices .

in designing a variable subsidy , an oil price where subsidies start must be chosen .

this is often referred to as a trigger price or a cut off price .

the rate of change must also be determined , such that for every dollar that the oil price falls below the cut off oil price , the subsidy will increase by the rate of change .

variable subsidies can be calculated given the average oil price on a monthly or quarterly basis .

generally , the variable subsidy would provide a safety net for biofuels producers when oil prices are low and allows the market to drive biofuels production without government intervention when oil prices are high .

a recent analysis of the variable subsidy with respect to corn - based ethanol production found that the variable subsidy provides a net present value ( npv ) for the producer that is similar to that with the fixed subsidy , but that the variable subsidy could decrease risk and the probability of a loss on investment .

the remainder of this chapter will evaluate the impacts on ethanol producing firms of a variable versus a fixed tax - credit subsidy .

this comparison is made , not as a policy recommendation , but ( in response to widespread news and media coverage ) strictly as a comparative analysis to aid congress' understanding of the differences between the two policy options .

the price of ethanol can be compared to gasoline on either an energy - equivalent basis or a volumetric basis .

the choice is crucial because the two methods lead to different results due to the lower energy content of ethanol — the energy from a gallon of ethanol ( measured in btu's ) is only about 67% of the energy content of a gallon of gasoline .

thus , on a volumetric basis the price of a gallon of ethanol is deemed equivalent to the price of a gallon of gasoline , but on an energy - equivalent basis the ethanol price equals only about 67% of the gasoline price .

historically , since ethanol has been blended at very low rates ( 2% to 3% ) with gasoline their prices have been linked primarily on a volumetric basis ( figure 11 ) .

in the near term volumetric pricing might work for the low level blends such as e10 or e15 .

however , as the ethanol blending share increases in the future it will likely be linked more on an energy basis .

for example , consider the 85% blending rate implied by e85 .

since e85 is expected to get 22% lower mileage than e10 ( based on energy content ) , presumably consumers would only be willing to pay for e85 about 78% of the price of e10 .

thermochemically - produced biofuels are nearly energy - equivalent to petroleum products ( unlike biochemically - produced biofuels with a 67% - equivalency rate ) .

as a result , the following analysis will consider cases in which biofuels produced by thermochemical methods receive a subsidy 49% greater than ethanol when calculated on an energy - equivalent basis .

the breakeven oil price represents the price for oil at which the plant's net present value ( npv ) is zero .

at higher oil prices the plant operates with a positive npv ( i.e. , the plant operates at a profit ) ; at lower oil prices the plant operates with a negative npv ( i.e. , at a loss ) .

breakeven oil prices are calculated for both volumetric and energy - equivalent biofuels pricing methods ( and with and without fixed subsidies ) for all three processing technologies ( table 20 ) .

when ethanol is priced on a volumetric basis relative to gasoline , grain - based ethanol and biochemical conversion have lower breakeven oil prices than thermochemical conversion , both with and without the fixed subsidy .

when biofuels are priced on an energy - equivalent basis , the price of a gallon of ethanol will be 67% of the price of a gallon of gasoline , rather than equal to the price of gasoline as it is under volumetric pricing .

as a result , on an energy - equivalent pricing basis the breakeven oil prices for grain - based ethanol and biochemical conversion increase , while the breakeven oil price for thermochemical remains unchanged .

thus , thermochemical conversion has a better chance of competing with grain - based and biochemical ethanol under energy - equivalent pricing .

with a fixed subsidy included when calculating the plant npv , the breakeven oil price declines in all cases ( assuming that the subsidy is fully passed on to the biofuel producer , which will not always be the case ) .

ethanol pricing decisions do not affect thermochemical conversion .

however , an energy - equivalent subsidy which takes into account the thermochemical product's higher energy rating in comparison to ethanol would make the thermochemical product competitive with both ethanol options .

the deterministic model is used to evaluate the profitability of biofuels production under both volumetric and energy - equivalent pricing methods but using current market prices for oil rather than the range of high , middle , and low from the previous section ( table 21 ) .

grain and biochemical conversion do best when ethanol is priced on a volumetric basis relative to gasoline ( primarily because they avoid the discount penalty related to lower energy content ) .

however , only grain ethanol shows profitability even under volumetric pricing conditions .

subsidies given for biofuels made from cellulosic biomass are currently done on a volumetric basis .

whether cellulosic biomass is used to produce a gallon of ethanol through biochemical conversion or a gallon of gasoline through thermochemical conversion , both receive a fixed subsidy of $1.01 per gallon .

it is uncertain whether pricing and subsidies will change in the future to an energy - equivalent basis .

stochastic model simulations are adopted to evaluate the variable subsidy whose per - unit value changes as market conditions change .

a variable subsidy functions by providing firms with more support at low oil prices and withdrawing the subsidy at higher oil prices .

the hypothetical variable subsidy evaluated in this analysis is based on a $90 per barrel oil price threshold and a $0.02 per gallon increment in additional subsidy for each dollar that the oil price is below the cut off .

the following table ( table 22 ) shows variable subsidy rates at different oil market prices .

the net effect of replacing a fixed subsidy with a variable subsidy is that , while firms decrease their chances of operating at a loss , and government subsidies are reduced , there can be a slight drop in npv compared to the fixed subsidy because no subsidy is paid out when the price of oil is $90 or higher .

thus , if profits for the various processing technologies are negative under a fixed subsidy across several potential oil price forecasts , then it is likely that the technology will not be profitable with a variable subsidy either .

more research is needed to define a variable subsidy structure that works well for cellulosic biofuels .

to provide a baseline for profitability under stochastic conditions , table 23 , table 24 , and table 25 provide the stochastic means and standard deviations for the net present value ( npv ) , the probability of a loss , and the coefficient of variation with a fixed subsidy for each of the three oil price forecast scenarios: low , medium , and high oil price forecasts , respectively .

because different annual production capacities area assumed for each of the technologies ( 100 mgpy for corn ethanol and 50 mgpy otherwise ) , all npv are expressed in per - gallons - of - annual - capacity to facilitate comparison .

in addition to npv comparisons demonstrating profitability across different scenarios , these three tables include data to facilitate a comparison of the per - gallon - of - capacity subsidy cost ( i.e. , the tax revenue foregone by the tax credit ) , the new tax revenue ( equal to the fuel tax revenue obtained from producing new biofuels ) , and the net government cost ( which equals the subsidy cost minus the tax revenue ) .

each government measure is also expressed as a npv per gallon of annual capacity .

in general , all three of the technologies show positive profits with a high degree of probability when high oil prices are forecast , due primarily to higher oil - induced revenues .

but profitability drops off at lower oil price forecasts , and as energy - equivalent pricing is adopted for biochemical processing and volumetric pricing for thermochemical processing .

note that the fixed subsidy cost shows no variability across the different oil price forecasts since payments are made for each gallon without respect to market conditions .

under a scenario of low forecast oil prices and a fixed subsidy , only grain ethanol with volumetric pricing is profitable ( table 23 ) .

this is perhaps most representative of the biofuels industry's current situation since cash oil prices in the mid - $70s are presently closest to the levels of the low oil price forecast case .

as oil price forecasts increase , ethanol and biofuels priced to compete with oil and gasoline should command more revenue and become more profitable .

the middle oil price forecast scenario confirms this ( table 24 ) .

note however that the standard deviation in npv does not allow for definitively ruling out negative profits in most cases ( i.e. , npv minus its standard deviation < 0 ) , even when npv's are positive .

only grain ethanol priced volumetrically has an npv large enough to ensure profits in most cases ( 99.4% of the time ) .

if oil prices follow the high - level forecast , most alternative biofuel technologies will be profitable with a high probability due to higher oil - induced revenues ( table 25 ) .

stochastic comparison of a fixed versus a variable subsidy given the baseline implied by the previous three tables , it is only meaningful to compare a variable subsidy with a fixed subsidy when a technology shows the potential of being profitable in the fixed subsidy case .

since only grain ethanol was profitable across all oil price forecasts , it is the sole scenario used to compare the different effects of fixed and variable subsidies .

thus , considering only grain ethanol under volumetric pricing , and regardless of the oil price scenario , the standard deviation and the probability of a loss both decrease under a variable subsidy as compared to a fixed subsidy ( table 26 ) suggesting a clear risk - reducing effect .

in addition to reducing the risk of a loss to firms , it is clear that the government's costs are reduced regardless of the oil price outcome , and often to a considerable level ( table 27 ) under a variable subsidy .

in conclusion , when correctly designed , variable subsidies could reduce risk to firms by decreasing the standard deviation of the net present value .

a variable subsidy should also reduce the cost to the government relative to a fixed subsidy , because the government will only subsidize a firm when the oil price is low enough to keep biofuels from being competitive with oil .

fixed subsidies , however , will be paid out regardless of the oil price and whether biofuels could be viable without the subsidy .

when biofuels are priced and subsidized on the basis of energy content , thermochemical conversion could be the least expensive – based on the assumptions in this study .

when volumetric pricing of subsidies is used , the higher energy content of biofuels produced via thermochemical conversion will not be properly valued .

all the numeric conclusions in this section , of course , depend on the cost structures , pricing relationships , and other assumptions used in this study .

all the numbers come from the literature , but there may be proprietary technologies in the wings with lower costs and / or higher conversion rates .

