this report discusses mortgage markets in selected nations and identifies aspects of housing finance that may suggest interesting policy options as congress debates housing finance reform in the united states .

the report describes similarities and differences in a number of countries by comparing homeownership rates and changes in housing prices .

it examines features of each country's primary mortgage market , which homebuyers directly experience when applying for and obtaining a mortgage ; and it discusses the secondary mortgage market connections that link national mortgage markets and international financial markets .

the report concludes by tentatively identifying what may explain why mortgage markets in three of the four countries examined appear to have more differences than similarities , yet have led to similar rates of homeownership .

this report concentrates on the united states , canada , denmark , and australia , occasionally mentioning other nations to provide context .

canada was selected because of its proximity to the united states , similarity of its economy to that of the united stages , and the distinctive attributes of its housing market .

homeownership rates in canada and the united states are similar , but canada has stricter mortgage qualifications ( i.e. , underwriting standards ) .

both nations have experienced home price increases over the past 10 years , but canada has had neither the price level collapse nor the increase in foreclosure rates that the united states has had .

canada funds its mortgages mainly with bank deposits , whereas the united states depends on domestic and international financial markets .

the homeowner in the united states typically has a 30-year fixed - rate mortgage ( frm ) , whereas the canadian homeowner has a five - year adjustable - rate mortgage ( arm ) that is renewed and is designed to be paid in full after 25-30 years .

according to the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , canadian home prices reached a maximum in 2007 that was 60% higher than in 1991 , whereas another index developed by teranet and the national bank of canada shows prices continuing to increase .

u.s. home prices reached a maximum in 2006 that was 61% greater than in 1991 .

denmark is included because it has very strict underwriting standards and has developed a type of covered mortgage bond with specific collateral to guarantee payment if the bond issuer fails .

this is similar to covered bonds throughout much of the european union ( eu ) , including germany .

homeowners in denmark can prepay their mortgages by paying either the unpaid balance ( as in the united states ) , or the market value of the mortgage .

this market value will be less than the unpaid balance when interest rates have increased .

denmark and the united states are the only two nations where 30-year fixed - rate mortgages are common .

danish house prices reached a maximum in 2007 that was 150% greater than the 1991 house price level .

most australian mortgages have adjustable interest rates .

australian homeowners can make extra payments on their mortgages ; these prepayments can be withdrawn , sometimes by a special credit card .

between 1991 and 2009 , home prices in australia increased by 107% .

broadly speaking , homeownership rates are determined by the relative costs of housing tenure options ( renting versus owning ) and the nonfinancial aspects of owning or renting a home .

these factors can vary according to a household's income , savings , age , marital status including number of children , the tax system , anticipated house price changes , government regulations such as land use and zoning , building codes , immigrant status , and availability of desirable rental housing .

some factors including income , age , and family status can affect a person's decision to move out from their parents' home and to form an independent household .

because most homebuyers use a mortgage to finance their purchase , mortgage terms can affect homeownership rates .

homeownership rates vary over time and within a country .

for example , in the united states , the national seasonally adjusted homeownership rate reached a peak of 69.4% in the first quarter of 2005 ; since then , it has trended down with occasional , slight upticks .

as an example of regional variation in homeownership rates within the united states , in the second quarter of 2010 , the midwest had the highest rate ( 70.8% ) of any census region , and the west had the lowest rate ( 61.4% ) .

as shown in table 1 , homeownership rates for selected developed countries in europe , north america , australia , and asia range from approximately 35% to approximately 97% .

the european union ( eu ) reports an average homeownership rate of 66.8% with national rates ranging from a low of 43.2% in germany to a high of 97.0% in lithuania and romania .

germany's relatively low homeownership rate is frequently attributed to a policy emphasis on supplying subsidies to rental housing and the integration with the former german democratic republic ( east germany ) .

outside the eu , switzerland has long had a relatively low homeownership rate ( 34.6% ) that is usually attributed to a high cost of ownership and strong protections for renters , including limits on rent increases .

lithuania and romania , both eu members , had high homeownership rates following privatization initiatives after their transitions from communism in 1989 and presently lack alternative rental housing .

australia reports a homeownership rate of 69.8% , whereas japan's homeownership rate is usually estimated around 60% .

figure 1 displays the homeownership rates , graphically sorted by the rate .

a cautionary note: as a result of differences in the ways that countries collect and report data , international comparisons of homeownership rate statistics can be misleading .

for example , in the united kingdom , units with long - term rental contracts are considered to be owner occupied , and in japan dwellings owned by an occupant's parents are listed as owner occupied .

in many countries , real ( inflation adjusted ) house prices were relatively stable from 1991 until approximately 2000 .

between 2000 and 2008 , prices increased in real terms , peaked , and declined .

in this latter time period , most oecd - member countries experienced at least one year of rapid , real house price increases greater than 10% ; the greatest price increase ( 28% ) occurred in ireland during 1998 .

the united states' maximum annual price increase was 8.2% ( 2005 ) , canada's was 9.8% ( 2006 ) , denmark's was 19.3% ( 2006 ) , and australia's was 16.0% ( 2003 ) .

between 1991 and 2008 , u.s. house prices increased 50% .

house prices in canada increased 60% , denmark 150% , and australia 107% .

nations with the largest house price declines since reaching their maximum were ireland ( - 0.53 ) , the united states ( - 0.16 ) , and iceland ( - 0.13 ) .

real house prices do not always increase .

between 1991 and 2008 , real house prices declined in japan , korea , and switzerland .

figure 2 graphs the price levels for the united states , canada , denmark , australia , japan , ireland , and the united kingdom .

the graph emphasizes the point that many other nations had greater increases in housing prices than the united states did .

this section discusses how the mortgage interest rate paid by a homeowner is determined in the united states , canada , denmark , and australia .

it begins by describing a widely used framework for explaining how mortgage interest rates are determined in the united states and then applies the same framework to the other nations .

the mortgage markets in all four nations — the united states , canada , denmark , and australia — seem to have more differences than features in common .

yet except for denmark , they have similar homeownership rates .

some possible reasons for this similar outcome are as follows: demographic similarities could be more important than institutional details .

some differences in mortgage underwriting , such as minimum downpayment requirements , could delay homeownership on average for relatively short periods of time .

some features , such as the mortgage interest deduction and the treatment of capital gains on owner - occupied homes , could be built into the price of housing , reducing or eliminating the advantages given to homeownership .

green , richard k. and susan m. wachter .

"the american mortgage in historical and international context. .

journal of economic perspectives , vol .

19 , no .

4 ( autumn 2005 ) , pp .

93-114 .

lehnert , andreas .

"overview of us mortgage markets. .

bank for international settlements .

housing finance in the global financial market .

cgfs publications no .

26 ( 2005 ) .

at http: / / www.bis.org / publ / cgfs26cbpapers.htm .

canada mortgage and housing corporation .

the newcomer's guide to canadian housing .

2007 .

at http: / / www.cmhc - schl.gc.ca / en / co / buho / upload / thenewcomersguide_e.pdf .

kiff , john , steve mennill , and graydon paulin .

"how the canadian housing finance system performed through the credit crisis: lessons for other markets. .

journal of structured finance ( fall 2010 ) , pp .

1-21 .

kiff , john .

canadian residential mortgage markets: boring but effective .

international monetary fund , working paper wp / 09 / 130 .

june 2009 .

at http: / / www.imf.org / external / pubs / ft / wp / 2009 / wp09130.pdf .

klyuev , vladimir .

show me the money: access to finance .

international monetary fund , working paper wp / 08 / 22 .

january 2008 .

at http: / / www.imf.org / external / pubs / ft / wp / 2008 / wp0822.pdf .

frankel , allen , jacob gyntelberg , kristian kjeldsen , and mattias persson .

"the danish mortgage market. .

bis quarterly review ( march 2004 ) , pp .

95-109 .

at http: / / www.bis.org / publ / qtrpdf / r_qt0403h.pdf ? noframes=1 .

realkreditradet , the traditional danish mortgage model .

at http: / / www.realkreditraadet.dk / files / filer / engelsk / 2010 / publikation_engelsk.pdf .

ellis , luci , sue black , and liz dixon smith .

housing finance in australia: 2005 .

bank for international settlements .

at http: / / www.bis.org / publ / wgpapers / cgfs26ellis.pdf .

