the term revenue is defined as funds collected from the public that arise from the government's exercise of its sovereign or governmental powers .

federal revenues come from a variety of sources , including individual and corporate income taxes , excise taxes , customs duties , estate and gift taxes , fees and fines , payroll taxes for social insurance programs , and miscellaneous receipts ( such as earnings of the federal reserve system , donations , and bequests ) .

the executive branch often uses the term receipts or governmental receipts in place of the term revenues .

the collection of revenue is a fundamental component of the federal budget process that provides the government with the money necessary to fund agencies and programs .

further , the collection of revenue directly effects individual citizens and businesses and , in some cases , can achieve specific policy outcomes .

the constitution grants congress this considerable power to "lay and collect taxes , duties , imposts , and excises. .

most revenue is collected by the federal government as a result of previously enacted law that continues in effect without any need for congressional action .

however , congress routinely considers revenue legislation that repeals existing provisions , extends expiring provisions , or creates new provisions .

such legislation may ( 1 ) increase revenues , ( 2 ) decrease revenues by lowering taxes or by providing new exemptions , deductions , or credits — often referred to as tax expenditures — or ( 3 ) redistribute the incidence of taxation without significantly changing overall revenue amounts .

revenue legislation may make changes to excise taxes , individual and corporate income taxes , social insurance taxes , or tariffs and duties .

congress may consider such legislation either as a measure dedicated solely to revenues or as a provision in another type of measure .

 ( it should be noted that the phrase "revenue measures" as used throughout this report applies to all measures containing revenue provisions. ) .

as with all legislation considered by congress , revenue measures are subject to general house and senate rules .

in addition , revenue measures are subject to further house and senate rules , as well as constitutional and statutory requirements ( eg , the origination clause , the congressional budget act of 1974 ) .

the purposes of such revenue - specific rules are generally to centralize and coordinate the development and consideration of revenue legislation , to provide members of congress with the information necessary to judge the merits of revenue legislation , and to control the budgetary impact of revenue measures .

such rules significantly affect revenue legislation , in particular by shaping their content and having an impact on their timing .

this report provides an overview and analysis of the most consequential revenue - specific rules that apply during the process of developing and considering revenue legislation , including when they apply and to what legislation .

the requirements related to the origination and referral of revenue measures are derived from the constitution , as well as house and senate rules , and are supplemented by established practice and policies established by the speaker .

the general effect of such rules and practice is to define what constitutes "revenue" in order to allow congress to centralize and coordinate the development and consideration of revenue measures .

house and senate rules have evolved to require specific materials to accompany revenue measures .

the purpose of such rules is to provide members with information on the content of the measure to assist them in considering the merits of the legislation .

revenue legislation is often considered under the budget reconciliation process that is governed by special procedures established in the budget act that serve to limit what may be included in reconciliation legislation , prohibit certain amendments , and encourage its timely completion .

when congress adopts a budget resolution , it is agreeing upon revenue ( and other budgetary ) totals for the upcoming fiscal years .

as described above , if congress attempts to consider legislation that would violate the "revenue floor," the legislation would be subject to a point of order .

in this way the totals in the budget resolution are enforced .

however , in some cases , for these revenue totals to be achieved , congress must pass legislation that alters current direct spending and revenue laws .

in this situation , congress seeks to reconcile existing law with its current priorities .

budget reconciliation is an optional process that assists congress in making these changes .

many of the major tax measures enacted in the past few decades have been considered as reconciliation .

congress has the option of including reconciliation directives in its annual budget resolution .

these directives trigger the reconciliation process , and without their inclusion in a budget resolution , no measure would be eligible to be considered under expedited parliamentary procedures .

when reconciliation directives are included in an annual budget resolution , their purpose is to require committees to develop and report legislation that will allow congress to achieve the budgetary goals set forth in the annual budget resolution .

these directives detail which committee ( s ) should report reconciliation legislation , the date by which the committee ( s ) should report , the dollar amount of budgetary change that should exist within the legislation , and the time period over which the budgetary change should occur .

in this way , the reconciliation process allows the budget committees to assist congress in implementing the budgetary changes outlined in the budget resolution while at the same time protecting legislative committee jurisdiction over direct spending and revenue laws by allowing them to report legislative changes of their choice .

sometimes these directives instruct the house ways and means committee , the senate finance committee , or both to report legislation within their jurisdictions that would change current revenue law .

in the house , the options for consideration of a measure under the reconciliation process do not differ substantially from those for the consideration of other major legislation .

once a specified committee develops and reports legislation to satisfy its directive , the legislation is typically considered either under the terms of a special rule reported from the rules committee or , less frequently , under suspension of the rules .

the only major difference in how the house treats measures considered as reconciliation is in how the legislative language is packaged .

if a single committee is directed in the budget resolution to develop reconciliation legislation , it will likely be instructed to report this language directly to its full chamber .

for example , in 2005 , the ways and means committee was instructed to report to the house a reconciliation bill reducing revenues .

if , however , several committees are directed to develop and report reconciliation legislation , they will typically be directed to submit the language to the house budget committee for packaging , without any substantive change , into an omnibus measure .

for example , in 1990 , the ways and means committee was instructed to report reconciliation language making changes in revenue to the house budget committee to be packaged together with the reconciliation responses of other committees .

in the senate , like the house , if a single committee is directed in the budget resolution to develop reconciliation legislation , it will likely be instructed to report this language directly to its full chamber .

for instance , in 2005 , the finance committee was instructed to report to the senate a reconciliation bill that would reduce revenues .

if , however , several committees are directed to develop and report reconciliation legislation , they will typically be directed to submit the language to the senate budget committee for packaging , without any substantive change , into an omnibus measure .

for example , in 1993 , the finance committee was directed to report to the senate budget committee legislative changes within its jurisdiction that would increase revenues .

once a specified committee develops and reports legislative language to satisfy its directive , the legislation is considered under reconciliation procedures outlined in the budget act .

reconciliation procedures encourage the timely completion of consideration of reconciliation legislation in the senate in two main ways .

first , a motion to proceed to the reconciliation measure is not debatable and , therefore , cannot be filibustered .

second , debate on a budget reconciliation bill — and on all amendments , debatable motions , and appeals — is limited to 20 hours .

reconciliation procedures prohibit certain types of language from being included in reconciliation measures or offered as amendments .

for example , under section 310 ( e ) ( 1 ) , it is not in order to offer non - germane amendments to reconciliation bills .

further , section 313 of the budget act ( often referred so as the byrd rule ) prohibits "extraneous" matter from being included a reconciliation measure .

the byrd rule provides six definitions of what is considered extraneous , but generally they are provisions not related to achieving the goals of the reconciliation instructions .

also , section 310 ( d ) of the budget act prohibits any amendment to a reconciliation bill that would increase the deficit , although an amendment to strike out a provision in the bill is always in order .

lastly , provisions included in reconciliation legislation that would make changes to social security are prohibited .

under current senate practice , only one reconciliation bill dealing with revenue may be considered in response to reconciliation instructions .

section 310 of the budget act recognizes three types of reconciliation legislation that committees may be directed to report: spending , revenue , and debt limit .

the budget act also recognizes that committees may be directed to report a combination of the three , including a direction to achieve deficit reductions , which may result from an unspecified combination of revenue increases and spending decreases .

if a committee is given more than one directive — for instance , to increase revenues and decrease spending — then the committee may respond with separate recommendations .

under current senate practice , however , this provision has been interpreted to mean that no more than one reconciliation measure of each type is permitted .

reconciliation instructions , therefore , may result in the creation of as many as three reconciliation bills that may be considered on the senate floor under expedited procedures but no more than one each for spending , revenue , and the debt limit .

