farmers and scientists have a history of modifying animals to maximize desirable traits .

genetic modification is one of the current approaches for modifying animals to increase their beneficial traits .

in the broadest sense , genetic modification refers to changes in an organism's genetic makeup not occurring in nature , including the production of conventional hybrids .

with the advent of modern biotechnology ( eg , genetic engineering or bioengineering ) , it is now possible to take the gene ( or genes ) for a specific trait either from an organism of the same species or from an entirely different one and transfer it to create an organism having a unique genetic code .

this technique can add both speed and efficiency to the development of new foods and products .

genetically engineered plant varieties , such as herbicide - resistant corn and soybeans , have already been widely adopted by u.s. farmers , and some advocate using similar techniques to produce genetically engineered fish or seafood for the aquaculture industry .

a number of environmental concerns have been raised related to the development of genetically modified ( gm ) fish , including the potential for detrimental competition with wild fish , and possible interbreeding with wild fish so as to allow the modified genetic material to escape into the wild fish population .

sterilization and bioconfinement have been proposed as means of isolating gm fish to minimize the potential for harming wild fish populations .

in the process of congressional oversight of executive agency regulatory action , concerns have been raised about the adequacy of the u.s. food and drug administration's review of applications for approval of gm animals , with respect to the potential for environmental harm .

in response to these concerns , several bills were introduced in the 112 th congress seeking to declare gm fish unsafe or require that gm fish be specifically labeled as such .

no final action was taken on these bills in the 112 th congress .

scientists are seeking ways to genetically engineer fish and other seafood species to introduce or amplify economically valuable traits .

fish are of particular interest to food researchers since many fish produce large quantities of eggs ; those eggs , being external to the animal ( as opposed to mammals that produce a few eggs internally ) , make it relatively simple to insert novel dna .

research on transgenic strains is currently under development for at least 35 species of fish worldwide , as well as for a variety of mollusks , crustaceans , plants , and marine microorganisms .

fish are being modified to improve the production of human food , to produce pharmaceuticals , to test water contamination , and for other uses .

the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) regulates gm fish under the federal food , drug , and cosmetics act ( ffdca ) provisions on new animal drugs ( 21 u.s.c .

§321 ) .

under these provisions , fda must keep all information about a pending drug application confidential , with the exception of information publicly disclosed by the manufacturer .

this approach limits the opportunity for public comment before approval .

some critics are calling for more transparency in this process and for more authority to be given to environmental and wildlife agencies .

one gm fish has been marketed to date .

glofish™ , a genetically altered version of the popular aquaria zebrafish ( danio rerio ) , fluoresce after the insertion of a sea anemone gene into the zebrafish egg .

this fish is currently legal to be sold in all states except california .

since glofish™ are not meant for human consumption , fda determined that the glofish™ was not under its jurisdiction .

another private research company has taken genetic information from chinook salmon and ocean pout ( an eel - like , edible fish ) and inserted this material into atlantic salmon to create a fish that grows to market size twice as fast as its non - gm counterparts .

this company , aquabounty technologies , inc. , is currently seeking regulatory approval from the fda to sell its aquadvantage salmon for human consumption in the united states and received a grant from the u.s. department of agriculture's national institute of food and agriculture for work on transgenic tilapia .

other examples of gm fish that have been developed , but for which regulatory approval has not yet been sought , include fish that would produce a blood - clotting factor to treat individuals with hemophilia and disease - resistant channel catfish .

a national research council study maintains that there is a low to moderate food safety risk from gm seafood .

since genetic engineering can introduce new protein into a food product , there are concerns that this technique could introduce a previously unknown allergen into the food supply or could introduce a known allergen into a "new" food .

within fda , the center for veterinary medicine regulates transgenic animals intended for human consumption under the same authority it uses to regulate new animal drugs .

in addition , gm fish must adhere to the same standards of safety under the ffdca and the fda's center for food safety and applied nutrition that apply to conventionally bred fish .

under the adulteration provisions in section 402 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the ffdca , fda has the power to remove a food from the market or sanction those marketing the food if that food poses a risk to public health .

this crs report does not consider the food safety regulation of gm fish ; for background on food safety regulation , see crs report rs22600 , the federal food safety system: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] .

by early 2010 , aquabounty technologies , inc. , had provided fda with almost all of the data required by the agency to consider approving the company's gm aquadvantage salmon .

the approval debate has focused on whether gm animals should be allowed , and if so , whether they should be labeled as such .

the question of how to label the food derived from the aquadvantage salmon is separate from the decision about whether to approve the new animal drug application .

if the commissioner determines that the new animal drug meets the approval standard , she "shall issue an order approving the application. .

issues related to the question of whether a food from the aquadvantage salmon is misbranded , based on its labeling , are separate .

although fda is not required to address these issues prior to the food being marketed , fda is considering these two issues simultaneously .

the aquadvantage salmon , all sterile females , are proposed to be grown only in isolated contained facilities , not in ocean pens that have a higher risk of escape into the wild .

more specifically , aquabounty has proposed producing eggs on prince edward island , canada , shipping these eggs to panama , growing and processing the fish in panama , and shipping table - ready , processed fish to the united states for retail sale .

if approved , it could take two to three years for the aquadvantage salmon to reach supermarkets .

as a first step in the approval process , fda held public hearings on aquadvantage salmon by its veterinary medicine advisory committee on september 19-21 , 2010 .

although the public comment period on fda approval was open through november 22 , 2010 , there was no deadline for fda's decision on aquabounty's application .

meanwhile , critics claimed the convoluted 16-year fda review process was scientifically unjustified , and threatened to rob society of both environmental and economic benefits .

in an effort to broaden the evaluation of the aquabounty application , a coalition of environmental groups called on fda to prepare an environmental impact statement ( eis ) on this action and to consult with federal agencies about possible threats to endangered wild atlantic salmon .

subsequently , on may 25 , 2011 , these groups filed a formal citizen petition urging fda to withhold approval until an eis has been completed .

some scientists also expressed concern for a broader evaluation , including pointing out that potential price decreases from technological innovation in producing gm fish could promote health benefits from increased consumption .

concern has also increased in canada over the possible effects of producing these gm fish .

on december 20 , 2012 , fda announced the availability for public comment of ( 1 ) a draft environmental assessment of the proposed conditions specified by aquabounty and ( 2 ) fda's preliminary finding of no significant impact ( fonsi ) for aquabounty's conditions .

a 60-day public comment period initially ran through february 25 , 2013 , but was extended through april 26 , 2013 .

if significant new information or challenges arise in the public comments , fda must decide whether or not a full eis is required prior to approval of aquabounty's application .

if fda approves aquabounty's application , fda retains the authority to withdraw its approval should significant concerns arise subsequently .

states have also taken steps to regulate the use and transport of gm fish .

for example , maryland , washington , oregon , minnesota , wisconsin , and california have passed laws banning the release of gm fish in some or all state waters .

in addition , alaska requires gm fish to be labeled .

no federal law specifically addresses gm fish and seafood .

in the 112 th congress , several bills were introduced to address concerns related to gm fish .

s. 229 , h.r .

520 , and h.r .

3553 would have amended the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act to require labeling of genetically engineered fish .

s. 230 and h.r .

521 would have amended the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act to prevent the approval of genetically engineered fish for human consumption .

section 744 of h.r .

2112 , as passed by the house on june 16 , 2011 , would have prohibited the food and drug administration from spending fy2012 funds to approve any application for genetically engineered salmon .

on september 7 , 2011 , the senate committee on appropriations reported h.r .

2112 , without the prohibition on fda related to genetically engineered salmon ( s.rept .

112-73 ) , and this provision was not in the subsequently enacted p.l .

112-55 .

s. 1717 would have prohibited the sale of genetically altered salmon .

on december 15 , 2011 , the senate commerce , science , and transportation subcommittee on oceans , atmosphere , fisheries , and coast guard held an oversight hearing on the environmental risks of genetically engineered fish .

on may 24 , 2012 , s.amdt .

2108 to s. 3187 was defeated , proposing to prohibit approval by fda of genetically engineered fish unless noaa concurred with such approval .

no further action was taken on any of these bills by the 112 th congress .

