members of congress and pentagon officials have placed a growing emphasis on u.s. programs to develop hypersonic weapons as a part of an effort to acquire the capability for the united states to launch attacks against targets around the world in under an hour .

hypersonic weapons can travel faster than mach 5 , or about 1 mile to 5 miles per second .

this interest is driven by both the perceived mission need for conventional prompt strike systems and concerns about falling behind russia and china in the development of these technologies .

the united states is pursuing two key technologies for this purpose: boost - glide systems that place a hypersonic glider atop a ballistic missile booster or shorter range rocket systems , and hypersonic cruise missiles that would use scramjet technologies .

both the air force and the navy have studied the possible deployment of conventional warheads on their long - range ballistic missiles in the past .

the air force briefly studied the penetration capabilities of conventional icbms in the mid - 1990s .

in august 1995 it launched an icbm armed with a "pointy" front end ( and no explosive warhead ) against a granite slab that had characteristics similar to reinforced concrete .

press reports indicate that the warhead entered the target at a 90 degree angle and penetrated to a depth of 30 feet , which is greater than the depth of penetration of any existing u.s. weapon .

the navy also sponsored studies in the 1990s that sought to develop a non - nuclear penetrating warhead for the trident slbm .

these studies also focused on questions about whether a reentry vehicle from a ballistic missile could penetrate a hardened target , using only its speed and angle of reentry , without a nuclear explosion .

both the navy and the air force recognized that , without a nuclear explosion , the reentry vehicle from a ballistic missile would have to be far more accurate than those deployed in the 1990s ( and still deployed today ) to attack and destroy a buried target .

during the george w. bush administration , the air force and the navy both pursued programs that would provide a prompt global strike capability .

however , in fy2008 , congress eliminated funding for the navy and air force programs , creating , instead , a combined , defense - wide conventional prompt global strike program ( cpgs ) that would pursue research and development into technologies that might contribute to the pgs mission .

the program was to fund the design , development , and acquisition of guidance systems , boosters , mission planning capabilities , mission enabling capabilities , reentry systems , and payload delivery vehicles ( pdvs ) .

details on funding for this account are described below .

the original prompt global strike mission requirements were based on the assumption that a future conflict would take place far from existing u.s. bases overseas , and possibly far from ocean areas where the united states had deployed most of its sea - based forces .

it was also assumed that a future conflict could develop quickly , allowing too little time for the united states to move its forces into the region , either by acquiring basing rights on land or by moving sea - based forces closer to the theater of conflict .

further , the concern about hidden or relocatable targets reflected an assumption that targets could appear with little notice and remain vulnerable for a short period of time , factors that placed a premium on the ability to launch quickly and arrive on target quickly .

the requirements also assumed that u.s. forces were likely to face an "anti - access" threat , or air defense capabilities that would impede operations by u.s. aircraft .

many of these characteristics were present in afghanistan in 2001 , when the united states attacked al qaeda training camps and the taliban government after the september 11 terrorist attacks .

the attacks on the united states came without warning , and , although the united states took several weeks to plan its response and acquire the needed intelligence information on target areas , speed was of the essence if the united states hoped to trap and destroy leaders at the training camps in afghanistan .

the united states had no military bases in the region and had to take the time to acquire basing rights in nearby nations and to move u.s. naval forces into the region .

further , the mountainous terrain offered the enemy areas where their leadership could hide and hope to evade attack .

however , these characteristics may not be present in most , or even many , future conflicts .

moreover , with the renewed focus , in the 2018 national security strategy and national defense strategy , on great power conflict , the united states may be less likely to face a sudden , unanticipated conflict , with no time to build up its forces and with the requirement to strike some targets within hours of the start of the conflict .

and , as the threat environment has changed , the rationale for the deployment of prompt long - range strike and hypersonic weapons has also changed .

when the bush administration first began to consider the deployment of long - range ballistic missiles with conventional warheads , some analysts argued that , with improvements in accuracy , conventional warheads could substitute for nuclear warheads in attacking some sites now targeted by nuclear weapons .

this type of "substitution" would have allowed the united states to reduce its reliance on nuclear weapons and to reduce the number of nuclear weapons in its deployed forces .

critics of this rationale , however , noted that conventional weapons could not really substitute for nuclear weapons in u.s. deterrence strategy .

even if they had the accuracy and explosive power needed to destroy some types of targets , they could not threaten the scale of destruction and would not have the psychological effects of nuclear weapons .

most experts agree that these characteristics are necessary for the weapons to deter conflicts with other nuclear - armed nations .

as a result , most of the supporters of the prompt strike mission came to view these weapons as a "niche" capability that would expand u.s. conventional options and reduce the likelihood that the president might need to use a nuclear weapon in the absence of a conventional alternative .

with this rationale , the united states might only need a very small number of these weapons , for use against critical , high - value targets or as the "leading edge" of a broader military campaign .

moreover , the united states could plan for their use independent of its nuclear deterrent .

the programs' advocates noted that , in the absence of such a capability , in a circumstance when the united states believed it needed to strike promptly at long ranges at the beginning of a conflict , the president might have no choice other than to use a missile armed with a nuclear warhead .

the cpgs capability would provide that choice .

in the 2010 nuclear posture review , the obama administration extended this logic to regional deterrence and the assurance of u.s. allies .

if the united states had a wider range of credible conventional weapons that it could turn to when defending its allies and forces overseas , there could be fewer circumstances in which the united states might feel compelled to resort to nuclear weapons for regional deterrence .

this would not only reduce the role of nuclear weapons in regional deterrence , it might also increase the credibility of the u.s. deterrent .

during the latter years of the obama administration and early in the trump administration , the united states expanded the scope of its research and development programs into hypersonic capabilities , and now seems interested in deploying hypersonic glide vehicles on more types of delivery systems .

these changes are consistent with an expanded rationale for long - range conventional strike weapons , in general , and hypersonic weapons , in particular .

as potential adversaries , such as russia and china , have improved and expanded their defensive capabilities in ways that would complicate u.s. efforts to bring forces to bear during a conflict , the united states has sought to counter with prompt , accurate systems that could suppress those defenses by attacking them early in a conflict .

hypersonic weapons , with their speed , precision , and maneuverability , could contribute to this mission .

in this role , prompt strike and hypersonic weapons would no longer serve as a "niche" or "leading edge" capability .

according to michael griffin , the undersecretary of defense for research and engineering , these weapons would serve as tactical , rather than strategic assets , bringing capabilities such as "very quick response , high speed , highly maneuverable , difficult to find and track and kill" to theater conflicts or regional conflicts .

as the cpgs program has evolved in the past 15 years , and as the united states has placed a higher priority on long - range strike and hypersonic weapons in recent years , analysts have questioned the shifting and expanding rationale for the programs .

for example , some questioned whether the president would need more conventional options to avoid the use of nuclear weapons when responding to threats to u.s. or allied security .

the president has never , in the past , been faced with the choice of using a nuclear weapon or no weapon at all .

the president has always had a wide range of conventional options , even if the united states had to wait hours or days for the weapons to arrive on target .

many analysts also argued that the deployment of cpgs might upset strategic stability and increase the likelihood of nuclear war .

although the u.s. president might choose to initiate a conflict or respond to a threat with a conventional attack , it is not clear that the adversary would know that the incoming weapons carried conventional warheads .

moreover , the united states would not be able to control the adversary's reaction or the escalation of the conflict , particularly if the adversary possessed nuclear weapons .

hence , by making the start of the war "easier" the deployment of conventional warheads on long - range ballistic missiles might , in this view , actually make the eventual use of nuclear weapons more likely .

some have also noted that this concern would be amplified if the united states were to deploy hypersonic weapons on a wider range of delivery vehicles and develop plans to use them in theater or regional conflicts .

even if the adversary recognized that the u.s. weapons did not carry nuclear warheads , the shortened time - lines for attacks and responses could be destabilizing .

because the weapons could be launched and reach their targets quickly , they would shorten the amount of time available to an adversary both for detecting and responding to an attack .

but pressure to respond promptly , possibly in response to ambiguous information and before countervailing capabilities were destroyed in an attack , could lead to inadvertent or unnecessary escalation during a crisis .

russian officials have echoed these concerns about u.s. conventional prompt global strike capabilities and their implications for strategic stability .

they have argued that these weapons , even if armed with conventional warheads , could threaten critical targets in russia and even threaten russia's strategic nuclear forces if the united states deployed large numbers of missiles armed with highly accurate reentry vehicles .

this might provide the united states with the capability to undermine russia's nuclear deterrent , without resorting to the first use of nuclear weapons , and might actually increase the likelihood of a u.s. attack against russia .

moreover , even if russia were not the target of an attack with these missiles , it might not know whether the missile carried a nuclear warhead or a conventional warhead , or whether it was headed toward a target in russia .

finally , some russians have argued that the united states might replace the conventional warheads with nuclear warheads to exceed the limits in a treaty .

some members of congress and many analysts outside government have focused much of their criticism of the pgs concept on the potential that other nations might detect the launch of a u.s. cpgs missile and conclude , mistakenly , that the united states had launched an attack with nuclear - armed missiles .

specifically , some argued that , if the united states were to launch these missiles during a conflict , nations with minimal satellite capabilities and launch notification systems ( such as china ) or degraded launch notification systems ( such as russia ) could conclude that they were under attack with nuclear missiles .

further , because many possible targets lie south of russia and china , and the united states has historically planned to launch its ballistic missiles over the north pole , a conventionally armed long - range ballistic missile might fly over these two nations to strike its targets .

for many minutes during their flight patterns , these missiles might appear to be headed toward targets in these nations .

the potential for misunderstanding is compounded by the short time of flight of these missiles , giving these nations little time to evaluate the event , assess the threat , and respond with their own forces .

under such circumstances , critics claim that these nations may conclude they have no other option than to respond with their own nuclear weapons .

as was noted above , congress raised concerns about the potential for misunderstanding in several of its annual debates over the authorization and appropriations of funds for the cpgs mission .

these concerns grew as the department of defense planned to move ahead with the conventional trident modification ( ctm ) .

in response to these concerns , in the fy2007 defense appropriations act ( p.l .

109-289 ) , congress provided $5 million for the national academy of sciences to analyze the mission requirement and recommend alternatives .

the national academies published the report — u.s .

conventional prompt global strike: issues for 2008 and beyond — in august 2008 .

this report recognized concerns about the potential for misunderstanding , but concluded that these concerns should not eliminate pursuit of the program .

the study noted that the united states and russia had monitored and tracked the launches of hundreds of ballistic missiles over the years , and they had demonstrated the capability to "acquire sufficient data to determine their trajectory and hence … their target. .

at the same time , however , the study noted that the risk of misunderstanding could increase if the united states used boost - glide technologies for the cpgs mission , because a nation's ability to predict the target of such a system would be undermined by the fact that these systems could maneuver and change their direction after launch .

moreover , the study noted that the use of new , conventional - only launchers or delivery vehicles would not necessarily mitigate the risks because "there is simply no 'bright line' between nuclear and conventional systems when relatively long - range platforms are being considered. .

the national academies study noted that concerns about the possible misinterpretation of a launch were , at the present time , limited to russia , because no other nuclear weapons state had the ability to detect and track the launch of u.s. ballistic missiles .

as a result , the united states might be able to mitigate the risks of misunderstanding by altering the deployment and operating patterns of systems armed with conventional warheads , and by cooperating with russia to demonstrate that these systems do not carry nuclear warheads .

for example , the air force indicated during its early studies that it could deploy long - range missiles armed with conventional warheads at bases , such as vandenberg air force base on the california coast , that did not house missiles armed with nuclear weapons and "have no nuclear capability or association," as they would lack the facilities and equipment needed to handle or store nuclear weapons .

further , their deployment with a hypersonic reentry body , rather than a standard post boost vehicle and warhead present on a nuclear - armed missile , would reinforce this designation .

the united states and russia could also institute a number of cooperative measures , including military - to - military contacts , high level political consultations , and ongoing discussions to keep russia informed about u.s. plans for these missiles and to make them aware of the observable differences between conventional and nuclear - armed long - range ballistic missiles .

the united states could also provide russia with prior notification of planned launches of ballistic missiles with conventional warheads , or the two nations could set up a dedicated "hot line" for use after a launch .

that way , the united states could inform russia of the launch and assure it that the missile did not carry a nuclear warhead and was not headed for targets in russia .

over time , these measures would not only provide information about the missiles and their missions , but might also build confidence and understanding between the parties .

the increased level of cooperation , and possibly decreased level of suspicion , might then reduce the likelihood of misinterpretation if the united states were to launch ballistic missiles with conventional warheads .

the air force also indicated that the csm , which would have used a conventional booster and a hypersonic payload delivery vehicle , would not follow the same trajectory as a nuclear - armed ballistic missile .

specifically , the air force planned to launch the csm on a "depressed trajectory" that would achieve an altitude of only 500,000 feet .

as a result , its flight would not resemble the trajectories that would be followed by nuclear - armed ballistic missiles on course for targets in russia or china .

dod has indicated that the same would be true of a submarine - launched , intermediate - range boost - glide system .

it would follow a shaped or depressed trajectory , and would not resemble the launch characteristics or trajectory of a nuclear - armed ballistic missile .

moreover , if the missile used a new booster , rather than one that had been deployed as a part of the u.s. nuclear force , the difference would likely be evident to russia's early warning systems .

taken together , these types of measures might help reduce the risks of misunderstandings .

but the accumulation of information during peacetime and frequent communications during crises may not be sufficient to address problems that could come up in an atmosphere of confusion and incomplete information during a conflict .

specifically , the argument in favor of using long - range ballistic missiles for the pgs mission assumes that the united states might have little warning before the start of a conflict and might need to launch its missiles promptly at that time .

this scenario would allow little time for the united states to consult with , or even inform , other nations about its intentions .

if other nations are caught by surprise and fear they might be under nuclear attack , they might also decide to respond promptly , before the united states had the opportunity to convince them that the missiles carried conventional warheads .

even though routine data exchanges and on - site inspections may provide confidence in the absence of nuclear warheads on the missiles on a day - to - day basis in peacetime , they cannot provide assurances that the warheads could not be changed in a relatively short period of time or that the warheads were not actually changed in the days or weeks since the last inspection .

in addition , changing the basing patterns or launch patterns of missiles to draw a sharper distinction between conventional and nuclear - armed missiles assumes both that other nations can observe the differences and that they believe the different appearances indicate different warheads .

finally , these measures would do nothing to alleviate concerns among nations that did not participate in the cooperative programs .

as a result , while the measures described above can reduce the possibility of misunderstandings , they probably cannot eliminate them .

moreover , they cannot address concerns , often expressed by officials in russia and china , that the united states might use these weapons , along with other conventional strike systems and missile defenses , to acquire a the ability to attack strategic or nuclear targets in these nations without resorting to the use of u.s. nuclear weapons .

as the preceding discussion indicates , the united states has considered a number of alternatives for weapons systems that could contribute to the pgs mission .

for a time , the air force csm , armed with a payload delivery vehicle derived from either the darpa / air force htv - 2 vehicle or the army ahw vehicle , appeared to be the main contender for this mission at the present time .

however , because the htv - 2 has not had a successful test flight and the ahw , which has tested successfully , may be better suited to an intermediate - range system , a submarine - launched missile armed with the ahw is now be the leading contender for the conventional prompt strike mission .

but these are not the only options for precision , conventional strike weapons , particularly if a system with shorter range or longer delivery times can meet some of the requirements .

cruise missiles and ballistic missiles with conventional warheads might meet some of the requirements .

moreover , as was noted above , the army , navy , and air force are now working together to develop and deploy hypersonic capabilities by the early 2020s .

long - range land - based ballistic missiles armed with conventional warheads , even if they relied on standard ballistic missile reentry bodies instead of boost - glide technologies , would likely possess many of the operational strengths associated with nuclear - armed ballistic missiles .

they might have extremely high rates of readiness and reliability , allowing military planners to expect more than 90% of the missiles to be available for use at any given time ; they could likely respond promptly after a decision to launch ; and , when armed with a hypersonic payload delivery vehicle , they would likely have a high degree of accuracy allowing for attacks across a wide range of targets .

consequently , these systems would "free the u.s. military from reliance on forward basing and enable it to react promptly and decisively to destabilizing or threatening actions by hostile countries and terrorist organizations. .

these weapons would probably address all the potential circumstances cited in requirements for the pgs mission .

however , as is noted above , many analysts have expressed concerns about the possibility that the launch of these missiles could generate misunderstandings within other nuclear - armed nations and undermine strategic stability because they would follow the same ballistic missile trajectories as u.s. nuclear - armed missiles .

even if the united states based and operated these missiles differently from nuclear - armed missiles and cooperated with other nations to demonstrate that these missiles did not carry nuclear warheads , other nations , such as russia or china , could still question whether the missiles launched during a conflict carried conventional warheads or whether the united states had converted them back to carry nuclear warheads .

medium - or intermediate - range ballistic missiles , possibly deployed outside the united states , could also provide a prompt , long - range strike capability for regional conflicts .

this type of missile could carry either unguided warheads or a hypersonic glide vehicle like the awh .

because an intermediate - range missile would be launched from outside the continental united states , its trajectory would not resemble that of a land - based icbm , and , therefore , could address concerns about the misunderstandings and misperceptions .

if the missiles had a range of less than 5,500 kilometers , they would be inconsistent with the limits in the 1987 intermediate - range nuclear forces treaty .

however , the united states has recently announced that it plans to withdraw from the inf treaty in response to russia's violation of the agreement .

congress has supported the development of a new land - based intermediate - range missile as a part of the u.s. response to russia's violation .

the national defense authorization act for fy2018 ( p.l .

115-91 ) mandates that the dod "establish a program of record to develop a conventional road - mobile ground - launched cruise missile system with a range of between 500 to 5,500 kilometers , including research and development activities with respect to such cruise missile system. .

as noted above , when dod submitted a reprogramming request to congress in july 2018 , it included $65 million to support an accelerated demonstration of a new land - launched hypersonics capability .

it noted in the request that the funding for this program would total $170 million in fy2018 and fy2019 .

as noted above , the united states considered deploying conventional warheads on long - range trident ballistic missiles , carried by its ohio - class submarines .

submarine - launched ballistic missiles armed with conventional warheads could have many of the same benefits as land - based missiles .

as nuclear delivery vehicles , they have been deployed with the command and control systems needed to allow for prompt decisionmaking and prompt launch during a crisis .

they have the range to reach targets around the world and they could have the accuracy , particularly if armed with hypersonic payload delivery vehicles , to attack a wide range of targets on short notice .

slbms armed with conventional warheads , however , would also raise many of the same questions about misunderstandings as land - based ballistic missiles , particularly if these warheads were deployed on the same submarines that currently carry nuclear warheads .

the navy could not employ many of the techniques identified by the air force to convince potential adversaries that the missiles carried conventional warheads .

even if the united states did deploy slbms with conventional warheads on submarines that did not carry nuclear warheads , it would be extremely difficult to demonstrate these differences and assure other nations of the segregated deployments in a submarine that is intended to be hidden and invulnerable when at sea .

further , according to some reports , russia's ability to monitor u.s. slbm launches might be even more degraded than its ability to monitor icbm launches , so it might conclude that it is under nuclear attack if it observed an slbm launch from a u.s. ballistic missile submarine .

on the other hand , because the submarines are mobile and the missiles are long - range , the united states could alter the patrol areas for trident submarines so that , if they were to launch their conventional missiles , they could use trajectories that did not require them to fly over these nations on their way to their intended targets .

alternatively , the submarines could move prior to launching their missiles , to avoid overflight of russia or china , but this presumes that the united states had the time to move its submarines to these new launch points prior to the start of the conflict , a possibility that is inconsistent with the pgs mission's assumption that the united states could need to launch its missiles promptly at the start of an unexpected conflict .

u.s. bombers — b - 52s , b - 2s , and b - 1s — have the range and payload needed to deliver weapons to targets across the globe .

but , initially , they were not considered to be suited to the pgs mission because they could take hours or days to reach targets in remote areas , and they would require tanker support to refuel during their missions .

the long flight time could contribute to crew fatigue , and air defenses could deny the bombers access to some critical target areas .

the long flight time could also provide adversaries with warning of the impending attack .

conventional cruise missiles , like the jaasm - er ( joint air - to - surface standoff missile , extended range ) delivered by b - 52 bombers would allow the aircraft to stay out of the range of some air - defense systems , but they could still take too long to reach their targets to meet the objectives of the pgs mission .

on the other hand , the long flight duration could give the united states time to review and resolve the situation without resorting to military attacks .

moreover , because accurate and timely intelligence reports are critical to the success of long - range strike missions , the united states could use the time during the bombers' flights to acquire and update information on the target of the attack .

the air force could also launch shorter range missiles armed with hypersonic - glide vehicles from its bombers , both to improve the ability to penetrate air defenses and to reduce the amount of time needed to reach a target from a stand - off bomber .

the air force plans to deploy the first of these systems — known as the hypersonic conventional strike weapon ( hcsw / hacksaw ) — by 2022 .

according to the air force , the hcsw is a solid - rocket - powered gps - guided system that would employ a version of the ahw hypersonic glider and launch off a b - 52 bomber .

in april 2019 , the air force awarded a $928 million contract to lockheed martin to design , develop , and test this system .

the air force is also pursuing a program , known as the tactical boost glide ( tbg ) system , employing a glider similar to the cav / htv - 2 and launching on a modified version of the army's tactical missile system ( atacms ) .

moreover , in august 2018 , the air force awarded a second contract to lockheed martin — valued at up to $480 million — to develop a follow - on prototype for this type of hypersonic glider .

this program , known as the air - launched , rapid - response weapon ( arrw ) , would enter the force later in the 2020s .

at the present time , the navy has the capability to attack targets at ranges of around 1,500 nautical miles with sea - based cruise missiles .

these tomahawk missiles have been employed often in the conflicts in the past 20 years , providing the united states with the ability to reach targets without risking aircraft or their crews .

the navy has modified four of its trident ballistic missile submarines so that they can carry cruise missiles .

these submarines are equipped to carry up to 7 tomahawk missiles each in up to 22 ( out of 24 ) of their trident launch tubes , for a total of 154 cruise missiles per submarine .

but these missiles may be limited in their ability to contribute to the pgs mission .

with a maximum speed of about 550 miles per hour and a range of 1,500 nautical miles , they can take two to three hours to reach their targets .

moreover , their reach is limited , even if the ships or submarines carrying the missiles are deployed in the region of the conflict .

consequently , the navy has also explored alternatives that would allow it to reach its potential targets more quickly .

since the mid - 1990s , the navy has explored several options for the development and deployment of an attack missile that could travel at speeds of mach 3 to mach 5 .

these hypersonic missiles would allow the navy to attack targets within 15 minutes from ships or submarines based within 500 to 600 nautical miles of their targets .

hence , they would provide the capability for prompt strikes within the theater of operations , but they would not have the range sought for the pgs mission .

the united states would either need to keep its vessels on station near potential areas of conflict , which it already does in certain areas , or it would need days or weeks to move its ships or submarines into place .

the air force , in collaboration with darpa , nasa , and the navy , is developing scramjet — supersonic combustion ramjet — technologies that may contribute to the long - range strike mission in the future .

in this type of vehicle , the engine gets the oxygen it needs for combustion from the atmosphere passing through the vehicle , instead of from a tank onboard .

this eliminates the need for heavy reservoir oxygen tanks , and makes the vehicle far smaller , lighter , and faster than a conventional rocket .

according to nasa , a scramjet could , theoretically , travel at 15 times the speed of sound .

the scramjet would destroy targets by crashing into them at hypersonic speeds .

however , the air force may also use the technology to create a payload delivery vehicle that might carry conventional munitions and be launched on a long - range missile .

the air force has designed an experimental scramjet , the x - 51 waverider , that it can release from an air force bomber .

it conducted a flight test of this vehicle on may 26 , 2010 .

in this test , the vehicle was released at an altitude of 50,000 feet , from under the wing of a b - 52 bomber .

an army tactical missile solid rocket booster accelerated the x - 51 to a speed of approximately mach 4.8 , the speed required for the engine to ignite .

the air force had intended for the scramjet to fly 300 seconds and reach speeds of 4,500 miles per hour , or six times the speed of sound .

however , the vehicle did not reach either of those thresholds before it began to slow down .

reports indicated that the engine was flying normally when the vehicle started having control problems and was eventually terminated .

the air force conducted three additional tests of the x - 51a waverider .

in the 2011 test , a mechanical problem caused it to end its operations earlier than planned .

in the 2012 test , the system lost control due to a "faulty control fin" seconds after it the rocket booster ignited .

however , in a fourth and final test of the x - 51a in may 2013 , the waverider reached a speed of mach 5.1 and an altitude of 80,000 feet during its 300-second test flight .

darpa and the air force continue to pursue the development of scramjet technologies and air - breathing hypersonic capabilities .

air force research funding has increased from a level of around $80 million in fy2012 to a request for $292 million in fy2018 and $258 million in fy2019 .

the research is focusing on the development of hypersonic cruise missiles that could be launched from fighters and bombers , including a program known as the hypersonic air - breathing weapon concept , and one known as tactical boost glide program .

this technology remains in its early stages , and could not contribute to the pgs mission for several years .

however , because these vehicles would not leave the atmosphere or fly on a ballistic missile trajectory , they may address the nuclear ambiguity issues raised by long - range ballistic missiles in the cpgs program .

in april 2010 , the united states and russia signed a new strategic arms reduction treaty , known as new start .

during the negotiations on new start , russia voiced concerns about u.s. plans to deploy conventional warheads on ballistic missiles that now carry nuclear warheads .

as was noted above , russia believes these weapons would undermine strategic stability and increase the risk of nuclear war .

the obama administration responded to russia's concerns by noting the united states did not plan to target its pgs systems against russia and that the united states would not deploy enough of these weapons to threaten russia's strategic deterrent .

nevertheless , the preamble to the treaty states that the parties are "mindful of the impact of conventionally armed icbms and slbms on strategic stability. .

however , according to the obama administration , neither this statement nor any other provisions in the treaty will "in any way limit or constrain research , development , testing , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) of any strategic concepts or systems , including prompt global strike capabilities. .

during the negotiations on new start , russia initially sought to ban the deployment of conventional warheads on strategic ballistic missiles .

the united states rejected this proposal because it would have interfered with ongoing u.s. plans and programs for the cpgs mission .

as rose gottemoeller , the assistant secretary of state for arms control , verification and compliance , noted when she testified before the senate foreign relations committee , "we were firm during the negotiations that the treaty must allow for strategic missiles [of] conventional configuration. .

at the same time , however , the united states agreed that ballistic missiles armed with conventional warheads that were otherwise consistent with the treaty's definition of strategic ballistic missiles would count against the treaty's limits on deployed delivery vehicles .

the warheads deployed on these missiles would similarly count against the treaty's limits on deployed warheads .

hence , under new start , u.s. land - based ballistic missiles armed with conventional warheads would count under the limits in new start if , according to paragraph 6 of part one of the treaty protocol , the missile "has a ballistic trajectory over most of its flight path" and a range greater than 5,500 kilometers .

submarine - launched ballistic missiles would meet this criteria if they traveled on a ballistic trajectory for most of their flight path and had a range greater than 600 kilometers .

obama administration officials explained that the united states accepted this provision because it would be nearly impossible to distinguish between a missile armed with nuclear warheads and one armed with conventional warheads , and , therefore , extremely difficult to verify compliance with the treaty limits if the missiles with conventional warheads did not count .

moreover , the obama administration insisted that , although the united states might have to reduce its number of nuclear warheads if it deployed conventional warheads on ballistic missiles that met this definition , the treaty's limits were high enough to "accommodate the level of cpgs deployments that is foreseeable over the lifetime of the treaty. .

in response to a question posed by the senate foreign relations committee , secretary of defense gates stated that as envisaged by our military planners , the number of such conventionally armed delivery vehicles and the warheads they carry would be very small when measured against the overall levels of strategic delivery systems and strategic warheads .

should we decide to deploy them , counting this small number of conventional strategic systems and their warheads toward the treaty limits will not prevent the united states from maintaining a robust nuclear deterrent .

according to obama administration officials , the new start treaty , would , therefore , count the warheads deployed on cpgs systems , like the navy's conventional trident modification , that delivered reentry vehicles along a ballistic missile trajectory .

it would not , however , capture warheads deployed on boost - glide systems , like the air force's conventional strike missile , that launched along a depressed trajectory and used a hypersonic glide vehicle to deliver weapons to targets .

in testimony before the senate foreign relations committee , principal deputy under secretary of defense for policy james miller stated that because boost - glide systems fly on a non - ballistic trajectory , "we are confident that such non - nuclear systems," which do not otherwise meet the definitions for the new start treaty , "would not be accountable as new kinds of strategic offensive arms for the purposes of the treaty. .

under the definitions in new start , these types of systems would qualify as new kinds of strategic offensive arms .

article v of the treaty indicates that , "when a party believes that a new kind of strategic offensive arm is emerging , that party shall have the right to raise the question of such a strategic offensive arm for consideration in the bilateral consultative commission. .

as a result , russia would have the opportunity to question the united states on whether the boost - glide systems should count under the treaty .

but the united states would not have to delay the development , testing , and deployment of these systems while the discussions proceeded and it would not have to defer their deployment if russia did not agree with the u.s. conclusion that these systems did not count under new start .

in the article - by - article analysis submitted with the new start treaty , the state department indicated that "the deploying party would be obligated to attempt to resolve the issue within the framework of the bcc [emphasis added]. .

but , according to the state department , "there is no requirement in the treaty for the deploying party to delay deployment of the new system pending such resolution. .

the new start treaty would not affect either the navy's conventional prompt strike concept or the air force plans to deploy missile - launched hypersonic gliders on heavy bombers .

the navy program currently envisions deployed the hypersonic glider on an intermediate - range missile , and the air force program would use a booster and glider that had never carried nuclear warheads or been associated with treaty - accountable nuclear delivery vehicles .

moreover , under new start , the bombers count against the treaty limits as both one delivery vehicle and one warhead , regardless of the number or type of weapons on board .

there is growing concern in the pentagon , congress , and among some in the defense community about the efforts by potential u.s. adversaries , including russia and china , to develop hypersonic boost - glide systems and , in some cases , hypersonic cruise missiles .

the strategic forces subcommittee of the house armed services committee addressed these programs in a hearing in late 2015 .

further , a study published by the national academy of sciences in late 2016 highlighted the complexities that such programs create for u.s. defensive programs and the "gaps and seams" that exist in u.s. efforts to address the threat .

the summary to the study stated that high - speed maneuvering weapons , such as hypersonic cruise missiles or boost - glide vehicles , "can combine speed and maneuverability between the air and space regimes to produce significant new offensive capability that could pose a complex defensive challenge. .

according to michael griffin , the undersecretary of defense for research and engineering , the growing gap between u.s. and chinese hypersonic weapons can create instability , because , without its own hypersonic weapons , the only response the united states would have if "the chinese started throwing hypersonic missiles at american bases in the pacific and sinking carrier strike groups," would be "to let them have their way or go nuclear. .

in testimony before congress , he noted that "we , today , do not have systems which can hold them at risk in a corresponding manner , and we don't have defenses against those systems. .

he also noted that this would place the united states at a disadvantage , and stated that "it is among my very highest priorities to erase that disadvantage , creating our own systems to hold them at risk and to provide defense. .

members of congress and pentagon officials have also highlighted that the united states does not have the capability to defend against these missiles .

section 1687 of the defense authorization bill for fiscal year 2017 ( p.l .

114-328 ) designates the director of the missile defense agency as dod's executive agent for the development of a u.s. capability "to counter hypersonic boost - glide vehicle capabilities and conventional prompt strike capabilities that may be employed against" the united states , its allies , and its forces overseas .

it mandates that the director develop "architectures for a hypersonic defense capability" and develop a program of record for this capability by september 30 , 2017 .

general hyten has also noted that the pentagon's fy2019 budget includes $42 million for the air force and the missile defense agency to work on a prototype for space - based sensors that could track hypersonic missiles after launch and assist in the defense against them .

concerns about russian hypersonic weapons escalated in late december 2018 , when russia tested its new avangard hypersonic glider .

according to press reports , this nuclear - capable glider was launched from a site in southwestern russia and flew 3,500 miles to a target on the kamchatka peninsula .

the glider was launched on older russian ss - 19 ballistic missile , which routinely carries up to six nuclear reentry vehicles , but may be able to carry three hypersonic gliders .

russian sources noted , and u.s. press reports confirmed , that this new maneuverable delivery vehicle "is impossible to intercept with existing anti - missile defenses" because it does not follow a predictable trajectory .

experts have noted , however , that the avangard does not create a new threat to the united states or new issues for nuclear deterrence simply because it can maneuver past missile defenses .

the united states does not yet have , and is not developing , missile defenses that could intercept existing russian long - range ballistic missiles .

experts note that russia began to develop the avangard in the late 1980s , after the reagan administration announced that the united states would pursue the development of an expansive missile defense system , but this system , known as the strategic defense initiative , was scaled back and eventually abandoned after the demise of the soviet union .

russia seems to have revived and accelerated the program in the 2000s , after the united states withdrew from the 1972 anti - ballistic missile ( abm ) treaty ) , again anticipating the u.s. development of wide - spread missile defenses .

but most existing u.s. missile defense interceptors are designed to counter medium - and intermediate - range ballistic missiles launched by adversaries in asia or the middle east and lack the capability to intercept russia's long - range ballistic missiles .

while the united states has deployed a few dozen interceptors that can target long - range missiles in alaska and california , these lack both the technical sophistication and the overall numbers needed to intercept hundreds of sophisticated russian missiles .

some have also questioned the view that , without its own hypersonic capabilities , the united states might have to escalate to nuclear weapons in response chinese attacks with hypersonic weapons .

this argument is similar to the argument made in support of the cpgs program in its early years — that without a prompt , global conventional capability , a u.s. president might be faced with the choice of launching a nuclear attack or no attack at all early in a conflict .

but , as noted above , the united states deploys a number of different long - range strike capabilities , and a president would have a range of options , even if some lacked the promptness offered by ballistic missiles and hypersonic glide vehicles .

moreover , the pentagon has justified the development of u.s. hypersonic weapons as a response to the need for prompt attack against a range of adversarial air defense and access denial capabilities .

they are not seen as a response to an adversary's hypersonic weapons .

thus , the pentagon has identified a requirement for these weapons that is independent of an adversary's possession of hypersonic weapons , and would have a range of capabilities available if it had to respond to an adversary's use of such weapons .

moreover , although michael griffin highlighted his concerns about the potential gap between u.s. and chinese hypersonic programs in testimony early in 2018 , he also noted , in a press interview in july 2018 , that the united states has "been [and] will remain the world leader in this research area. .

to maintain that edge , he noted that he united states would increase its investments in the research and prototyping for hypersonic weapons , so that it can mature its capabilities over the next decade .

hence , although discussions about the threats from russian and chinese hypersonic weapons are often interpreted as a pending arms race in the deployment of these new technologies , they may be more appropriately understood as a competition in the development of new technologies .

the bush administration and the obama administration both supported the deployment of systems that employ long - range booster rockets and hypersonic payload delivery systems to fulfill the requirements of the prompt global strike mission .

both administrations have argued that these systems can provide the united states with the ability to attack anywhere in the world on short notice , in support of regional or national security goals .

they have both noted that , by strengthening the u.s. ability to attack at long ranges with conventional weapons , these systems could help reduce the number of circumstances when the united states might have to consider using nuclear weapons to defend its interests .

the trump administration continues to support the development and deployment of these systems , although it has not linked them to efforts to reduce u.s. reliance on nuclear weapons .

critics , however , have argued that these weapons might provide the united states with more capability than it needs under most circumstances , while , at the same time , raising the possibility that their use might be misinterpreted — either as the launch of nuclear weapons or as the use of conventional weapons against nuclear targets .

moreover , as would be true for any weapon seeking to achieve this mission , the ability to attack targets across the globe on short notice depends on the u.s. ability to acquire precise information about the locations of potential targets and to translate that information into useful targeting data .

if it takes longer for the united states to acquire and use that information than it would take for it to launch and deliver a ballistic missile , or , as has often been the case , if such precise information is unavailable , then the united states may not be able to benefit from the unique characteristics of long - range ballistic missiles .

bombers would take longer to reach their targets , but this added time might provide the united states with the opportunity to acquire the needed intelligence .

a 2008 report by the government accountability office ( gao ) identified this particular problem , noting that many of the ongoing studies into global strike and prompt global strike have not addressed the need for critical enabling capabilities along with the weapons systems that would be used in the attacks .

moreover , during the cold war , most analysts recognized that prompt , global attack capabilities could prove destabilizing in a crisis , when nations might have incomplete information about the nature of an attack and too little time to gather more information and plan an appropriate response .

faced with these circumstances , a nation who was not an intended target , such as russia , might choose to respond quickly , rather than to wait for more information .

the same could be true for the adversaries who are the intended targets of u.s. conventional prompt strike weapons .

if the united states hoped to degrade or destroy an adversary's capabilities at the start of a conflict , before they could be used to degrade u.s. capabilities or attack u.s. forces , the other nation might choose to use these weapons even more quickly during a crisis , before it lost them to the u.s. attack .

some have argued that the possible crisis instabilities associated with long - range ballistic missiles should not eliminate them from consideration for the conventional prompt strike mission because the united states can work with russia , china , and other nations to reduce the risks ; also because no other weapons , at least in the short term , provide the united states with the ability to attack promptly anywhere on the globe at the start of an unexpected conflict .

yet the question of whether the united states should accept the risks associated with the potential for misunderstandings and crisis instabilities can be viewed with a broader perspective .

how likely is the united states to face the need to attack quickly at great distances at the start of an unexpected conflict ? .

how much would the united states lose if it had to wait a few hours or days to move its forces into the region ( or to await the intelligence reports and precise targeting data needed for an attack ) ? .

if the risks of waiting for bombers or sea - based weapons to arrive in the theater are high , then long - range ballistic missiles may be the preferred response , even with the risk that other nations might misunderstand u.s. intentions .

on the other hand , if the risks of waiting for other forces to arrive in theater are deemed to be manageable , and the risks of potential misunderstandings and crisis instabilities associated with the launch of long - range ballistic missiles are thought to be high , then the united states can consider a broader range of alternative weapons systems to meet the needs of the pgs mission .

this consideration may be part of the rationale for the recent interest in deploying hypersonic weapons on bombers and intermediate - range land - based missiles .

these options would provide a prompt , precision response while lowering the risk of ambiguity or misperception that might exist with long - range missiles .

however , even shorter - range prompt strike weapons can raise concerns about crisis stability , particularly if they can maneuver to avoid defenses and change direction to conceal their intended targets .

a nation facing an attack with such weapons may believe it has to respond promptly , or even preemptively , during a crisis .

if u.s. forces faced the same calculation , both parties could face the risk of a crisis escalating to conflict with little notice .

