the dominican republic is situated on the eastern two - thirds of the caribbean island of hispaniola , which it shares with haiti ( see figure 1 ) .

a population of about 10.3 million occupies an area about the size of new hampshire and vermont combined .

between 900,000 and 1.2 million of the people currently living in the dominican republic are undocumented ; many of them are haitians or descended from haitians .

with a per capita gross domestic product ( gdp ) of roughly $5,770 ( 2013 ) , the dominican republic is classified by the world bank as an upper middle - income country .

this stands in sharp contrast to neighboring haiti , a low - income country with a per capita gdp of just $810 ( 2013 ) that was struggling economically even before a devastating earthquake hit the country in january 2010 .

the two countries had similar gdp per capita levels in 1960 , but while growth in haiti has stagnated and its per capita gdp has shrunk by half since that time , the dominican republic has posted one of the fastest growth rates in latin america , and its per capita gdp has quadrupled .

after fighting to achieve its independence from spain in 1821 and then from haiti in 1844 , the dominican republic embarked upon a bumpy road toward its current democratic form of government characterized by frequent coups , dictatorships , and u.s. interventions ( including 1916-1924 and 1965-1966 ) .

rafael trujillo ruled the country as a dictator from 1930 to 1961 , often employing violent tactics to quell political opposition .

despite his brutality , trujillo's strong anticommunist stance earned him tacit support from the united states .

his acolyte , joaquín balaguer , then served as president from 1960-1962 , 1966-1978 , and 1986-1996 .

as a result of the dominance of these caudillo ( strongman ) leaders , the dominican republic did not develop into a modern democracy until the 1990s .

in 1994 , an agreement commonly referred to as the "pact for democracy" removed the aging balaguer from power and paved the way for the country's first truly free and fair elections to be held in 1996 .

since the mid - 1990s , the dominican republic has , for the most part , continued to post solid economic growth ( see figure 2 below ) and developed democratic institutions , albeit with very high levels of corruption .

in 1996 , leonel fernández of the center - left dominican liberation party ( pld ) succeeded joaquín balaguer as president and presided over a period of strong economic growth fueled by expansion in tourism and free trade zones .

in the 2000 presidential elections , after top pld officials were charged with misusing public funds , hipólito mejía ( 2000-2004 ) , an agrarian engineer of the populist dominican revolutionary party ( prd ) , defeated the pld candidate , danilo medina .

he lost support , however , by spending excessively and deciding to bail out all deposit holders after three massive bank failures in 2003 .

leonel fernández defeated mejía easily in 2004 to garner a second four - year term .

the dominican republic enjoys a strong relationship with the united states , evidenced by extensive economic , political , and cultural ties .

there are more than 1.5 million dominicans residing in the united states , making the dominican republic one of the top ten countries of origin for the u.s. foreign - born population .

the dominican republic is one of the most important countries in the caribbean for u.s. policy because of its large size , diversified economy , and close proximity to the united states .

the united states has been a strong supporter of the democratic and economic development of the country and is currently supporting the dominican government's efforts to strengthen governance , improve the provision of social services , boost competitiveness , and address citizen security .

the ongoing implementation of the caribbean basin security initiative ( cbsi ) and of a new bilateral extradition treaty are likely to ensure close security cooperation in the years to come , just as cafta - dr is likely to ensure the continuation of close economic relations .

upon president medina's election , president obama said that he looked forward to working with him on bilateral and regional issues of shared concern .

vice president biden reiterated that message and the importance of u.s. - dominican relations during a june 2014 visit to the country ; his visit marked the first by any vice president since 1980 .

nevertheless , obama administration officials have expressed "deep concern" about the aforementioned tribunal ruling's potential impact on the status of people of haitian descent born in the dominican republic .

in june 2014 , vice president biden praised president medina for passing a naturalization law to help improve the condition of haitians and their descendants born in the dominican republic but said that "implementation [of that law] will be equally as important. .

the dominican republic continues to experience relative political stability and steady economic growth .

with high approval ratings and a large congressional majority , most analysts predict that president medina will be able to pass reforms rather easily through 2016 .

over the next few months , the government's ability to finish implementing a regularization program that will comply with the constitutional tribunal's ruling on nationality but also assuage concerns about the rights of haitians and dominicans of haitian descent could prove difficult .

if the medina administration is able to address the nationality issue while also addressing poverty , energy shortages , and corruption , then the pld should have a good chance of securing another presidential term in may 2016 .

medina is barred from seeking consecutive reelection but could decide to run again in 2020 .

relations with the united states are likely to remain strong due to the deep cultural , geographical , and economic ties between the two countries .

dominican - u.s. relations could become strained , however , due to u.s. concerns about human rights and labor issues .

