congressional inaction on climate change has led various entities to pursue climate change measures off capitol hill .

either in hopes of making direct gains or to pressure congress to act , such entities have looked to international forums , treaty negotiations , environmental protection agency ( epa ) action under the clean air act ( caa ) , state and regional efforts , and — the topic here — common law suits .

the principal focus of such suits has been to establish greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions and climate change impacts as a nuisance .

for reasons discussed in this report , the prospects of this common law litigation are limited .

recently , the outlook for at least those cases based on the federal common law of nuisance and seeking injunctive relief has particularly dimmed .

in 2007 , the supreme court held in massachusetts v. epa that the caa gives epa authority to regulate ghg emissions from new motor vehicles ( and , by implication , other ghg sources ) .

epa responded by beginning to erect a regulatory edifice under that act for ghg emissions .

on june 20 , 2011 , the supreme court then delivered federal common law of nuisance suits a major blow .

in american electric power co. , inc. v. connecticut , it held that in light of epa's authority over ghg emissions as clarified in massachusetts , federal common law in the climate change area is "displaced. .

that is , federal courts may not use federal common law to add their own judge - made ghg emission standards , whether or not epa exercises its authority .

thus , the potential of federal common - law climate change lawsuits seeking to have courts develop emission standards now seems poor .

even before american electric power , many argued that courts should be unreceptive to dealing with a global problem as complex as climate change through individual common law suits , as opposed to a specifically tailored statute .

each suit , after all , brings before the court only a handful of defendants representing a tiny fraction of the problem .

as well , nuisance law offers no clear standards to apply .

questions of causation are also substantial: even if the court accepts that man - made ghg emissions contribute to climate change , how can a plaintiff show that a particular adverse impact was caused by climate change , and further was caused by ghg emissions of the defendants ? .

and should the defendants' contribution to worldwide ghg emissions be viewed as de minimis — too small for a court to bother with ? .

questions of remedy are likely to be particularly intractable: what amount of emission reduction , or monetary compensation , should be required of a defendant given the likely miniscule fraction of worldwide ghg emissions contributed by that defendant ? .

nonetheless , the use of nuisance lawsuits to attack climate change has its defenders .

they argue with some merit that even though nuisance law has never been used to deal with a problem as complex as climate change , many harms attributed to climate change — ecosystem and weather modifications , increased flooding , and harm to human health — are of a type traditionally covered by nuisance doctrine .

and the supreme court has recognized that "public nuisance law , like common law generally , adapts to changing factual and scientific circumstances. .

by way of background , a nuisance may be either a private nuisance or a public nuisance .

an activity constitutes a private nuisance if it is a substantial and unreasonable invasion of another's interest in the private use and enjoyment of land , without involving trespass .

private nuisance actions are brought by the aggrieved landowner .

an activity is a public nuisance if it creates an "unreasonable" interference with a right common to the general public .

unreasonableness may rest on the activity significantly interfering with , among other things , public health and safety .

public nuisance cases are usually brought by the government rather than private entities , but may be brought by the latter if they suffer special injury .

most of the common - law nuisance actions based on climate change have involved public nuisance .

part ii of this report notes the recurring threshold issues raised in nuisance litigation involving ghg emissions and climate change: "displacement" of federal common law , standing , and political question doctrine .

by upholding the displacement barrier to suit , american electric power seems to have reduced the importance of the other two threshold issues .

part iii describes the american electric power decision and speculates as to its likely aftermath and impact on climate change litigation generally .

part iv summarizes the other common law nuisance cases based on climate change , of which two remain active .

part v reviews the public trust doctrine suits , a recently filed group of cases that add a new common law theory to the litigation dealing with climate change .

as the court decisions in parts iii and iv show , the use of a nuisance action to address ghg emissions presents the plaintiff with daunting threshold hurdles — that is , issues that must be resolved at the outset of the litigation .

in light of american electric power , however , one of these threshold issues — whether the federal common law of nuisance has been displaced — will likely prove the key one in future efforts to use federal common law to address climate change .

thus , the role of the two other threshold issues , standing and political question doctrine , has been reduced .

three climate change cases invoking the common law of nuisance are currently active .

one is american electric power co , , described above .

the others are village of kivalina v. exxonmobil corp. and comer v. murphy oil usa , discussed here .

none of these pending cases , nor the finally resolved cases discussed afterward , have seen anything approaching a decision on the merits — all have been preoccupied exclusively with threshold issues .

thus we do not yet know whether ghg emissions can constitute a nuisance .

in village of kivalina , an inupiat eskimo village on the northwest alaska coast sued 24 oil and energy companies , claiming that the large quantities of ghgs they emit contribute to climate change .

climate change , the village contends , is destroying the village by melting arctic sea ice that formerly protected it from winter storms , leading to massive coastal erosion that will require relocating the village's inhabitants at a cost of $95 million to $400 million .

plaintiffs invoke the federal common law of public nuisance , and state statutory or common law of private and public nuisance .

they further press a civil conspiracy claim , asserting that some of the defendants have engaged in agreements to participate in the intentional creation or maintenance of a public nuisance — that is , global warming — by misleading the public as to the science of global warming .

the suit seeks monetary damages .

in 2009 , the district court held that the federal nuisance claim was barred by political question doctrine and lack of standing .

the village appealed to the ninth circuit , which stayed the case pending the supreme court decision in american electric power .

the reactivation of this case is the first judicial development following that decision .

counsel for plaintiffs reportedly are arguing that american electric power applies only to injunctive - relief cases , not , as here , where a monetary remedy is sought .

note also in the preceding paragraph that there are claims in this case other than those based on federal common law .

as an aside , the liability insurer of one of the kivalina defendants has filed suit seeking a declaratory judgment that should the defendant be found liable for damages in kivalina , the insurer's general liability policies with the defendant will not apply .

comer v. murphy oil usa litigation has been reactivated after a seeming demise .

owners of gulf coast property damaged by hurricane katrina sued certain oil , coal , and chemical companies under state law .

they alleged a multistep chain of causation — that the ghgs emitted by the defendant companies , by contributing to global warming with consequent sea level rise and warmer sea water , caused hurricane katrina to intensify and increased the harm to plaintiffs' property .

on this basis , plaintiffs asserted state - law tort claims , including negligence , nuisance ( public and private ) , and trespass , and sought compensatory damages .

they also requested punitive damages for gross negligence .

further , they claimed conspiracy to commit fraudulent misrepresentation , alleging , as in village of kivalina , that the oil and coal companies disseminated misinformation about global warming .

finally , plaintiffs made claims against their home insurance companies ( eg , breach of fiduciary duty claim for misrepresenting policy coverage , and violation of a state consumer - protection act ) and their mortgage companies ( arguing that they may not claim sums owed by plaintiffs for the value of the mortgaged property that was uninsured ) .

the federal district court dismissed the action for lack of plaintiff standing , and also found the claims precluded by the political question doctrine .

then , in 2009 , the fifth circuit reversed .

relying on the supreme court's approval of standing in massachusetts v. epa , the panel ruled that the comer plaintiffs similarly had article iii standing as to their tort claims .

plaintiffs , however , were held to lack standing as to their other claims .

on the other major issue in the case , the circuit court held , contrary to the district court , that the tort claims were not barred by the political question doctrine .

at this point , however , events took an odd turn .

in 2010 , after taking the case en banc , the fifth circuit announced it lacked a quorum , so the appeal had to be dismissed .

indeed , the court concluded it could not even reinstate the vacated panel decision .

the effect was to deny appeal of the original district court dismissal , which the fifth circuit effectively reinstated .

however , on may 27 , 2011 , the plaintiffs refiled the case ( with minor modifications ) , creating a second opportunity for a ruling on whether american electric power applies to cases seeking damages .

the two no - longer - active cases deserve but brief mention .

in california v. general motors corp. , that state sued auto manufacturers based on the alleged contributions of their vehicles , through ghg emissions , to climate change impacts in the state .

the suit asserted that these impacts constitute a public nuisance under federal common law , and sought damages .

in 2007 , the district court dismissed on a political question rationale .

california appealed to the ninth circuit , but in 2009 motioned for voluntary dismissal , which the circuit granted .

dismissal was sought as part of an agreement between the state , the obama administration , and the automobile manufacturers .

finally , korsinsky v. u.s. epa was a pro se action apparently alleging that ghg emissions , by contributing to climate change , threatened plaintiff's health due to his enhanced vulnerability as an older person with sinus problems .

he appeared to have requested an injunction ordering epa to require less pollution and ordering polluters to use his invention for reducing co 2 emissions .

the district court dismissed for lack of standing , and the second circuit affirmed on the same ground in 2006 .

since may 2011 , the nuisance lawsuits above have been joined by a coordinated campaign of lawsuits and rulemaking petitions seeking to attack climate change by an entirely different common law theory: public trust doctrine .

the claim is that the states and the federal government have a public trust responsibility to protect the atmosphere , and have failed to exercise that responsibility to deal with the threat of climate change .

many of the plaintiffs and petitioners are children and teenagers , represented by their guardians ad litem .

the lawsuits and petitions are being coordinated by our children's trust , an oregon nonprofit .

as background , the public trust doctrine is an ancient common law principle with origins in roman law and the magna carta .

it asserts that certain natural resources are held by the sovereign in special status .

key aspects of that special status are that government may neither alienate public trust resources nor , more pertinent here , permit their injury by private parties .

rather , government has an affirmative duty to safeguard these resources for the benefit of the general public .

the doctrine is generally a principle of state law , though there is limited recognition of a federal counterpart .

after tidelands and the beds of navigable waterways , fish and wildlife are the natural resources most traditionally associated with the public trust doctrine ; courts do not appear to have applied the doctrine to the atmosphere yet , as the suits and petitions here are seeking .

as for the lawsuits , each one reportedly asks the court for declaratory relief proclaiming that the atmosphere is a public trust resource and that the government in question has a fiduciary duty as trustee to protect it .

twelve suits have been filed — against the united states , alaska , arizona , california , colorado , iowa , minnesota , montana , new mexico , oregon , texas , and washington .

the montana suit is unique in alleging a basis for extending the public trust to the atmosphere under the state constitution and state statute .

some of the suits ask for injunctive relief as well .

for example , the suit against the united states asserts that the federal government has violated its trustee duties by allowing unsafe amounts of ghgs into the atmosphere and asks for an injunction requiring it to take action "consistent with the united states government's equitable share of the global effort. .

none of the suits seek monetary damages .

the rulemaking petitions cover each state where no lawsuit was filed .

each one , crs is informed , cites the public trust doctrine and asks the appropriate state agency to regulate ghg emissions based thereon .

at this writing , a few of the petitions have been dismissed .

