electric power generation in the united states is currently dominated by the use of fossil fuels .

coal is the major fuel used to produce electricity from steam turbine - generators employing basic principles in use since the industrial revolution .

however , burning coal results in environmental costs as emissions of nitrogen and sulfur oxides contribute to formation of smog and acid rain .

today , carbon dioxide emissions from the burning of coal and other fossil fuels are also widely believed to be contributing to global climate change and its potentially damaging effects .

renewable energy has been used since long before the industrial revolution , but not on the scale of steam power generation .

renewable energy technologies use the power of the sun , wind , water , and heat from the earth , offering the possibility of producing electricity on a large scale without many of the environmental and climate consequences of electric power generation using fossil fuels .

if harnessed by the right technologies , renewable energy offers the possibility for achieving inexpensive , almost limitless electricity with minimal adverse environmental impacts .

much of the modern impetus for renewable energy development in the united states came from the arab oil embargo of the 1970s , and the resulting energy crisis .

a focus on national security and energy independence emerged with a goal of reducing dependence on foreign supplies of oil .

while petroleum is not a major fuel source for electric power generation , the importance of energy to the national economy was underscored .

energy security and independence concerns , combined with growing reliability and environmental concerns led to the development of the renewable energy research and development programs at the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) .

today , added concerns over the global impacts of anthropogenic climate change and a desire for a lasting recovery from the recent recession have increased calls for a comprehensive national strategy making renewable energy a cornerstone of a policy for continuing u.s. economic development and jobs growth .

congress is currently considering legislation to address these concerns .

this report discusses current ideas for a federal renewable electricity ( or energy ) standard ( res ) and a broader clean energy standard ( ces ) .

the res concept would require certain retail electric providers to obtain a minimum percentage of the power they sell from renewable energy sources or energy efficiency .

the ces concept would extend the eligible technologies meeting the requirement to include advanced coal and nuclear energy , while also targeting retirement of existing polluting fossil generation .

this report refers generally to both concepts as an res unless otherwise stated .

the goal of this report is to explore how such policies could potentially increase the amounts of renewable electricity generated in the united states , discussing other related public policy goals and rationales for renewable energy development , and the challenges / drawbacks of res policy .

many states are essentially picking up where federal research and development dollars left off , using a renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) to create a market for renewable energy via mandatory requirements or voluntary goals .

through august 2010 , rps requirements or goals have been established in 29 states plus the district of columbia .

rps requirements generally oblige electric utilities to provide electricity from renewable energy sources in increasing amounts over a specified period of years .

the requirement can be for a portion of the electricity provider's installed capacity , but most states specify a percentage of sales .

nineteen states and the district of columbia have mandatory renewable energy requirements .

six states have renewable goals without financial penalties , and virginia has incentives for utilities to meet renewable energy goals , and three power authorities have renewable energy goals .

it should be noted that rps and related policies in these states were designed to address various state objectives .

eia expects most states to meet existing rps goals for renewable energy deployment .

but as is illustrated in figure 3 , about 12 states have existing provisions expiring by 2015 , and approximately 14 states and the district of columbia have existing rps or related provisions scheduled to expire by 2020 .

the minimum amounts of renewable energy required in these rps programs varies considerably , as does the timeframe for implementation and the eligible technologies .

the united states has traditionally relied on market forces and tax incentives to encourage the development and deployment of new technologies .

this strategy is the "business as usual" model .

however , several other forces are in play that call into question the "business as usual" model for innovation and deployment of renewable energy technologies .

for example , investment dollars are relatively scarce at this time , as the nation struggles to emerge from a recession .

also , certain other nations , including germany and china , have employed a different approach .

they have aggressively used governmental policies to channel government resources into renewable energy programs that have permitted them to establish renewable energy industries whose products and productivity often exceed those of the united states .

the need for wide deployment of renewable energy technologies on a national scale is at the heart of policy discussion for a res .

advocates of a federal res say it offers an opportunity to drive renewable energy market growth by creating a compliance requirement nationally , bridging the gap of expiring or lesser state rps standards into future years .

legislation can impact energy markets by mandating change directly , i.e. , through specific compliance requirements , or through incentives to encourage change .

such policy initiatives can be described as "market drivers" since they can cause changes affecting decisions regarding energy supply and demand .

many believe that the united states' existing ( mostly non - renewable ) low - cost energy system limits market opportunities in the short term , despite potential opportunities in the longer term both domestically and abroad .

some believe that energy policies based on temporary tax incentives are not true drivers of markets , since their effects may not last much past the expiration date of the incentive .

tax credits and other tax incentives can thus be seen as enablers of projects because they can add to a decision to go forward on a project .

however , power projects still go forward without tax incentives if there is a market demand .

recent policies shifting certain renewable energy tax credits to cash grants have helped many new energy projects to be deployed , but how long these taxpayer - subsidized facilities will continue to operate absent continued support over the long term remains to be seen .

even with generous tax incentives and resource growth potential , non - hydro renewable electricity constituted approximately 4% of u.s. electric power industry production as of 2009 .

if renewable electricity is to play a larger role in the electricity future of the united states , many maintain that federal action may be necessary .

as a result , some observers have argued for governmental action to bolster and accelerate u.s. activities relating to renewable energy .

renewable energy sources are seen as contributing to u.s. goals for energy security and energy independence by reducing dependence on petroleum imports with renewable electricity providing energy for electric vehicles .

in addition , renewable biofuels can be used to generate electricity directly or power fuel cells used in electric or hydrogen - powered vehicles .

renewable energy sources can also improve the reliability of electric power systems by increasing the diversity of electricity generation resources , and can potentially lower electricity prices by replacing more volatile fossil fuels .

opponents of a national res base their arguments largely on cost .

electric power generation decisions in the past have largely been based upon the cost of generating electricity ( excluding externalities — environmental costs to society not considered in energy prices ) .

the cheapest fuel for many years has been coal , when economies of scale are considered .

coal currently accounts for almost 45% of net electricity generation in the united states , and replacing even a portion of that generation with renewable energy would not be a small undertaking .

renewable energy sources are naturally occurring but variable , and harnessing the forces of nature is not easy or very efficient given the current state of technologies .

most of the best large - scale hydropower resources have already been developed , and the best areas for wind power and solar energy are often far from population centers where the electricity produced would be consumed .

even if energy efficiency and energy conservation measures were to lessen the need for building future power generation , replacing large centralized power stations with renewable energy would be a massive task .

deployment of wind power ( the fastest growing u.s. renewable energy segment ) on a large scale would likely require considerable investments to upgrade electric transmission line capacity and install back - up power due to the intermittency of wind .

much of that back - up capacity would likely come from natural gas - fired combustion turbines , a fossil fuel with half the carbon intensity of coal but that comes with a history of price volatility .

the following paragraphs discuss both major and ancillary issues related to the implementation of a national res policy on states , regions , and customers' income levels .

several bills were introduced in the 111 th congress to establish a requirement for electric utilities to provide a fixed percentage of the electricity they sell to customers from renewable or clean energy sources .

two stand - alone proposals for a renewable electricity standard ( res ) and the similar proposal for a clean energy standard ( ces ) are summarized in the following sections .

crs analysis of previous res provisions in legislation pending before the 111 th congress is contained in the appendix .

s. 3813 , the renewable electricity promotion act of 2010 , would amend purpa , adding a federal res based on integrated renewable electricity and energy efficiency requirements .

under s. 3813 , each retail electric supplier with annual sales to electric consumers of 4 million megawatt - hours ( mwh ) or more would be required to earn or acquire renewable electricity or energy efficiency credits ( recs ) for a portion of its annual retail sales .

electric utility companies in hawaii would be exempt from the res .

renewable energy from facilities on indian lands would be eligible to receive double recs .

renewable energy from small distributed generation ( less than 1 mw ) and energy from algae would be eligible to receive triple recs .

doe would be required to establish a federal rec trading program to certify utility compliance with the res .

a rec could be traded , or held ( carried forward ) for up to three years from the date it was issued .

one rec would be issued for each associated kwh of renewable energy or energy efficiency , and could be used only once for res compliance .

doe could delegate its authority for the rec market function to a "market - making entity. .

renewable energy technologies qualifying under the res included solar , wind , geothermal , ocean energy , biomass , landfill gas , qualified hydropower , marine and hydrokinetic energy , incremental geothermal production , "coal - mined methane" , qualified waste - to - energy , or other innovative renewable energy sources .

s. 3813 excludes from the base qualification calculation ( i.e. , the amount of annual electricity supply that the renewable energy and energy efficiency percentages would be applied to ) the annual retail electricity sales power generation from hydroelectric facilities , nuclear power , and fossil electric power generation proportional to its ghg emissions captured and geologically sequestered .

the minimum required total annual renewable electricity and energy efficiency percentages for the specified calendar year are: energy efficiency would be limited to account for no more than 26.67% of the annual compliance requirement .

qualifying energy efficiency improvements would include customer facility energy savings , distribution system electricity savings , and incremental electric output from new combined heat and power systems compared to output from separate electric and thermal components .

doe would be required to issue regulations for measurement and verification of electricity savings .

compliance with other energy efficiency standards ( whether federal , state or local ) would not count toward the res requirements .

an "alternative compliance payment" ( acp ) of 2.1 cents per kwh ( adjusted for inflation ) would be allowed to meet res requirements , with 75% of acp being paid into individual state funds for a renewable energy escrow account .

these funds would be designed to help states develop new renewable energy resources , energy efficiency , or promote the development , deployment , and use of electric vehicles and their batteries .

states may also use the funds to offset increases in customer bills caused by the res .

a civil penalty for non - compliance with res requirements would apply , and would be calculated as the product of the number of kwhs sold to electric consumers in violation of requirements , multiplied by 200% of the acp .

utilities may petition doe annually to waive compliance with res requirements ( in whole or part ) for reasons of "rate payer protection" to limit the rate impact of the incremental cost of compliance "to not more than 4% per retail customer" in any year .

states may also petition doe to seek a variance from compliance for "one or more years" due to "transmission constraints preventing delivery of service. .

states may require higher renewable energy or energy efficiency levels , but all states must comply with res requirements at a minimum .

doe would be required to facilitate cooperation between federal and state renewable energy and energy efficiency programs to the maximum extent practicable .

doe may make loans to electric utilities for qualifying projects to facilitate res compliance , or reduce the impact of res requirements on customer electricity rates .

beginning in 2017 , and every five years thereafter , doe would review and report to congress on whether the program established by s. 3813 contributes to an "economically harmful" increase in electric rates in regions of the united states , analyze whether the program has resulted in "net economic benefits for the united states," and analyze whether new technologies and clean renewable sources would "advance the purposes of the section. .

doe is to make recommendations on whether the percentages of energy efficiency and renewable electricity required should be increased or decreased , and whether the definition of renewable energy should be expanded to reflect changes in technology or whether previously unavailable resources of clean or renewable electricity should be increased or decreased .

the definition of biomass would be modified and renewable energy would be defined for purposes of the federal renewable energy purchase requirement .

sustainability would also be added as a focus for biomass harvesting , with a mandatory interagency ( i.e. , department of agriculture , department of the interior , and environmental protection agency ) report to congress that assesses the impacts of biomass harvesting for energy production .

for the base qualification calculation of annual retail electricity sales power generation , s. 3813 would exclude fossil electric power generation in proportion to the ghg emissions captured and geologically sequestered .

however , it is possible that captured ghg emissions may find other market - worthy applications if , for example , captured carbon dioxide can be economically converted to fuels or other useful products .

the bill does not address whether captured , non - sequestered but usefully applied ghgs may also be eligible for the same exemption .

many municipal utilities and electric cooperatives fall below the threshold of 4 million mwh electricity sales .

these entities would not have to comply with the res .

energy from algae would be eligible to receive triple recs .

the res is focused on producing electrical energy .

while most current algal biomass research seems to be leading to biofuels development , the opportunity to make a biofuel for producing electricity may exist ( for example , to produce a "synthetic" natural gas or fuel for combustion turbines ) .

transmission access could be a key issue in future renewable energy development .

under s. 3813 , states may also petition doe to seek a variance from compliance for "one or more years" due to "transmission constraints preventing delivery of service. .

there is no mention of how such a transmission constraint would be determined .

for example , it does not specify whether the ferc would be involved in making the determination .

"clean" energy is mentioned in the title of the legislation and with regard to future technologies eligible for the res .

clean energy is differentiated from renewable energy in the bill as clean or renewable energy , but is not defined in the legislation .

nuclear and advanced coal technology projects are eligible as beneficiaries of acp funds set up by states .

s. 1462 , the american clean energy leadership act of 2009 ( acela ) , proposed an res provision which served as the model for the provisions in s. 3813 .

differences between the two proposals include: the base quantity of electricity in acela would exclude electricity from incinerated municipal solid waste ( msw ) owned by an electric utility or sold to an electric utility under a contract or rate order to meet the needs of its retail customers .

in s. 3813 , msw qualifies only as a renewable energy resource under "qualified waste - to - energy. .

acela returns all of the acp to the state in which the electric utility is located , as opposed to s. 3813 in which 75% of the acp is returned .

s. 3813 does not specify whether amounts from civil penalties for non - compliance also go to state acp funds .

the start date for res minimum targets for annual renewable electricity or energy efficiency in s. 3813 would be 2012 instead of 2011 .

required annual percentages of sale to be met by renewable energy or energy efficiency are the same .

the stated goal of the ces in the clean energy standard act of 2010 in s. 20 is to support and expand the use of clean energy and energy efficiency , reduce ghg emissions , and reduce dependence on foreign oil .

the bill would amend purpa by adding requirements for a federal ces .

in s. 20 , the base qualification of retail sales to electricity consumers excludes power produced from existing electric utility - owned hydroelectric facilities , and power generated from incineration of municipal solid waste facilities owned by electric utilities .

clean energy has a broad definition in s. 20 .

in addition to the renewable energy technologies qualifying in s. 3813 , several additional "clean energy" technologies would qualify for the ces including qualified nuclear energy , advanced coal generation , eligible retired fossil fuel generation , or other innovative clean energy sources as determined by the doe secretary in rulemaking .

clean energy credits in s. 20 would be issued for compliance with ces requirements , and could be banked for use in any future year or traded in a trading program to be established by doe , with generally one credit being issued per kwh of associated clean energy generation or energy efficiency .

in s. 20 , power from "eligible retired fossil fuel generation" is included in the clean energy definition as a mechanism to encourage the retirement of these facilities .

eligible fossil fuel power generation can be derived from any fossil fuel .

the bill considers the quantity of electricity generated in the three years prior to retirement with average carbon dioxide emissions in excess of 2,250 pounds per mwh .

once a plan is in place to permanently retire the power plants by 2015 , these facilities would be eligible for clean energy credits .

such credits would be issued at a rate of 0.25 credits per kwh for the three - year period beginning on the date of retirement of the facility , and the credit calculation would be based on the average annual quantity of electricity generated during in the three - year period prior to retirement .

advanced coal generation in s. 20 would be eligible for clean energy credits based on kilowatt - hours net generation exported to the grid in the prior year multiplied by the ratio of carbon dioxide captured and sequestered compared to the total carbon dioxide captured , sequestered , and emitted .

double credits would go to the first five advanced coal plants geologically sequestering at least one million tons per year of carbon dioxide .

coal plants "retrofitted" with advanced coal technology could also receive double credits for geologically sequestering the flue gas emissions equivalent to 200 mw of electric power generation .

carbon dioxide captured and used for enhanced oil recovery would receive credits reduced by a factor of 25% .

the definition of eligible biomass in s. 20 differs from s. 3813 , which uses the definition from §203 ( b ) ( 1 ) of the energy policy act of 2005 .

the ces in s. 20 more closely follows the definition in the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 and would include biomass removed from the national forest system and other public lands under specific conditions generally considered to aid healthy forests or reduce the risk of forest fires .

combined heat and power facilities are rewarded in s. 20 with additional clean energy credits for higher efficiencies .

one additional credit per kwh would be provided for systems that exceed a 50% efficiency improvement .

systems achieving a 90% improvement would qualify for 1.5 credits per kwh .

the minimum required annual clean energy or energy efficiency percentages in s. 20 for the specified calendar year are: energy efficiency would be allowed to count for no more than 25% of the annual compliance requirement in the ces .

potential electricity savings would be expanded to include savings from incremental nuclear and incremental fossil fuel production .

alternative compliance payments in s. 20 are allowed to meet ces requirements at a rate of 3.5 cents per kwh , with all of the payment going to the state or states in which the electric utility operates in proportion to the base quantity of retail electricity in each state .

there is no amendment to federal purchase requirements in the ces .

the ces in s. 20 is more "aggressive" than the res in s. 3813 in terms of applicable technologies ( extending the program to cover certain base load electric generation technologies ) , with higher ces annual target percentage requirements ( rising to 50% of an electric utility's annual retail sales ) , and overall length of the period of compliance ( to 2050 ) .

embedded is a strategy to address retiring older , inefficient fossil energy plants .

the desired balance in the ces between renewable electricity deployment and deployment of other clean energy technologies is not specified as is , for example , the divide between renewable electricity and energy efficiency projects .

it is not clear how the goal for advanced coal retrofits ( i.e. , 200 mw of "equivalent" flue gas emissions ) considers the power production capacity of the plant prior to the retrofit .

s. 1462 ( american clean energy leadership act of 2009 ) and h.r .

2454 ( american clean energy and security act of 2009 ) sec .

132 of s. 1462 would establish a federal renewable electricity standard ( res ) for electric utilities that sell electricity to consumers ( for purposes other than resale ) .

such utilities must obtain a percentage of their annual electricity supply from renewable energy sources or energy efficiency , starting at 3% in 2011 and rising incrementally to 15% by 2021 .

eligible renewable sources are defined as wind , solar , geothermal , and ocean energy ; biomass , landfill gas , qualified hydropower ( i.e. , incremental additions since 1992 ) , marine and hydrokinetic energy , coal - bed methane , and qualified waste - to - energy .

other types of renewable energy resulting from innovative technologies may be qualified by the secretary of energy via a rulemaking .

under s. 1462 , res requirements are to be met by the annual submission of federal renewable energy credits ( recs ) , but up to 26.67% of the requirement may be met by energy - efficiency credits ( eecs ) in any one year ( following a petition by a state's governor ) .

alternative compliance payments ( acps ) of 2.1 cents per kilowatt - hour are permitted in lieu of meeting the renewable electricity standard , with these payments going directly to the state in which the electric utility is located .

trading of recs is permitted , and banking of recs is allowed for up to three years ; recs are retired when submitted for compliance .

eecs are awarded for electricity savings verifiably achieved by the electric utility's actions .

the secretary of energy will provide guidelines and regulations for measurements and baseline definitions in the award of eecs .

no eecs will be awarded for compliance with conservation or energy - efficiency standard programs .

comparison to similar provisions in h.r .

2454 , american clean energy and security act of 2009 the structure and definitions of the renewable electricity and energy efficiency provisions in h.r .

2454 and s. 1462 are essentially the same with regard to eligible renewable energy technologies .

incremental hydropower added after 1992 can be considered renewable energy under the senate version , as opposed to after 1988 in the house version .

s. 1462 requires compliance with its renewable electricity standard to begin in 2011 , one year earlier than the house version .

the state of hawaii is exempted from compliance in the senate bill .

the senate requirement advances to a maximum of 15% renewable electricity ( of which energy efficiency may constitute as much as 26.67% ) ; the house requirement has a maximum of 20% renewable electricity , of which up to 25% may come from energy efficiency .

the implementing agency is designated as doe in the senate bill , while the house version has ferc implementing the provision .

retail electric suppliers may receive recs for complying with a state res by generating or buying renewable electricity under the senate bill , but not in the house bill .

the senate energy bill has no parallel provision to the house bill's recognition of renewable energy programs implemented by states which centrally purchase renewable energy .

the alternative compliance payment is 2.1 cents per kilowatt - hour ( kwh ) in the senate energy bill , compared with 2.5 cents per kwh in the house version .

acp funds can be used for non - renewable energy deployment or energy efficiency under the senate energy bill , with generation from nuclear , coal with carbon sequestration and storage , and electric vehicle deployment being eligible .

direct grants to customers to offset higher costs from the res are also allowed by the senate bill from acp funds .

the house does not allow for a waiver of res requirements , while the senate energy bill allows for deferral due to extremes of weather or nature , to avoid utility rate incremental impacts of more than 4% in any year , or because of transmission constraints preventing delivery of service .

there is no provision in the house bill for loans to help electric utilities comply with the res .

the house bill increases the federal renewable energy purchase requirement beginning in 2012 to 6% , raising it to 20% by 2020 , where it would remain through 2039 .

the senate energy bill version stays with the lesser requirements in the energy policy act 2005 .

the house bill defines one renewable energy credit as representing one megawatt - hour of renewable electricity ; a similar definition appears to be implicit ( but is not specified ) in the senate energy version .

both renewable energy and energy - efficiency credits can be traded under the senate bill , while only renewable electricity credits can be traded under the house legislation .

triple credits are granted when electricity is provided through distributed generation ( dg ) .

definitions of distributed generation eligible for triple recs differ between the two bills .

the senate energy bill defines dg systems as being at or near a customer site , providing electric energy to one or more customers for purposes other than resale to a utility through a net metering arrangement .

the house version defines dg as a facility that generates renewable electricity , primarily serving one or more electric consumers at or near the facility site , which is no larger than 2 mw at the time of enactment ( or 4 mw after enactment ) , generating electricity without combustion .

this rules out biomass or municipal solid waste combustion as eligible sources of dg .

both provisions require electricity generation , thus ruling out thermal applications ( for example , hot water or steam systems ) .

while not specifying a size limit on dg systems , the senate only gives triple recs to dg systems smaller than 1 mw , while the house gives triple recs to all eligible dg systems .

the two bills differ in the exclusions that would be allowed from the calculation of a utility's total annual electricity supply , called the "base quantity of electricity. .

this is the amount of annual electricity supply that the renewable energy and efficiency percentages would be applied to .

by reducing the annual base quantity , the exclusions would also reduce the total amount of renewable energy and efficiency that would be required .

both bills exclude existing hydro ( except qualified hydro ) , nuclear capacity placed in service after the date of enactment , and the quantity of electricity in a ccs facility proportional to the amount of greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) sequestered .

the senate energy bill additionally excludes capacity of a municipal solid waste facility owned by , or sold under contract / rate order to , an electric utility , and nuclear power plant efficiency improvements and capacity additions made after the date of enactment .

s. 1462 ( american clean energy leadership act of 2009 ) and s. 3464 ( practical energy and climate plan act of 2010 ) s. 3464 would create a federal diverse energy standard ( des ) for electric utilities selling power to end - use customers .

utilities must obtain minimum annual percentages of the electricity they sell from energy efficiency , renewable energy or other [clean] energy sources of: these diverse energy sources can include advanced coal generation , biomass , coal mine methane , end - user energy efficiency , efficiency savings in power generation , geothermal energy , landfill and biogas , marine and hydrokinetic energy , qualified hydropower ( incremental capacity or efficiency improvements made up to three years prior to enactment ) , qualified nuclear ( placed in service on or after date of enactment ) , solar , waste - to - energy , wind , and any other energy source that results in at least an 80% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions compared to average emissions in the prior year from "freely emitting sources. .

s. 1462 would establish a federal renewable electricity standard for electric utilities selling power to end - use customers .

these utilities must obtain an annual percentage of their supplies from renewable energy sources or energy efficiency ranging from 3% in 2011 to 15% by 2021 .

renewable sources are defined as wind , solar , geothermal , and ocean energy ; biomass ; landfill gas ; qualified hydropower ( i.e. , incremental additions since 1992 ) ; marine and hydrokinetic energy ; coal - bed methane ; and qualified waste - to - energy .

federal clean energy standards s. 1462 would establish an res for electric utilities selling power to end - use customers , requiring energy efficiency measures or renewable energy sources to start at 3% in 2011 , rising to 15% of all resources by 2021 .

s. 3464 would create a des for electric utilities selling electricity to end - use customers , requiring energy efficiency or clean energy sources to start at 15% by 2015 , rising to 50% of all sources by 2050 .

other renewable or clean energy provisions s. 1462 excludes from the base quantity ( to which res requirements apply ) electricity generated by electric utility - owned hydropower , incineration of municipal solid waste , and electricity from fossil fuel units proportional to greenhouse gas emissions captured and geologically sequestered .

s. 3464 only excludes hydropower from the base quantity for the des .

s. 1462 would modify the requirement established in the energy policy act of 2005 that federal agencies purchase and / or produce and use renewable electricity .

the bill also promotes renewable energy development on federal lands and requires the establishment of renewable energy permit coordination offices in field offices of the bureau of land management in a pilot project to coordinate federal permits for renewable energy and electricity transmission .

only incremental hydropower , efficiency improvements or powering of non - hydroelectric dams is allowed for the definition of "qualified hydropower" in s. 1462 .

the definition in s. 3464 also allows for new hydroelectric dams to be included .

alternative compliance payments for the des would be set at a minimum 5 cents per kilowatt - hour , which would be higher than the 2.1 cents per kwh set in s. 1462 .

neither s. 1462 nor s. 3464 clearly defines the basis for issuance or award of a federal renewable energy credit or a diverse energy credit ( dec ) .

while a rec appears to be issued for each megawatt - hour of renewable electricity in s. 1462 , both bills associate such credits with a kwh of electricity "used only once" for compliance purposes .

des alternative compliance payments also associate each dec with a "megawatt hour of demonstrated total annual electricity savings. .

