inland waterways are a significant component of the nation's marine transportation system .

these waterways carry approximately one - sixth of the national volume of intercity cargo on 25,000 miles of commercially active inland and intracoastal waterways .

included in this total are approximately 12,000 miles of fuel - taxed federal waterways known as the inland waterway system ( iws ) , which are managed by the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) .

these waterways cover 38 states and handle approximately half of all inland waterway freight ( or one - twelfth of all national freight ) .

the corps develops , operates , and maintains the infrastructure of these commercial waterways ( eg , navigation channels , harbors , locks , and dams ) , and also maintains and regulates the channel depths through dredging and water management .

costs for maintenance and construction on inland waterways are funded by the corps ( through appropriations ) and the commercial user industry ( through user fees paid to the federal government ) .

the corps pays for 100% of the cost for studies and for operations and maintenance on the iws , while the cost for new construction or major rehabilitation ( currently defined as any upgrade in excess of $8 million ) is shared equally between the corps and the commercial industry .

congress is faced with competing proposals relating to future financing for inland waterway system investments , including who will finance what investments , and at what level .

the current revenue source , a set tax on fuel agreed to in the mid - 1980s , is insufficient to cover the nonfederal costs of major capital expenditures on inland waterways .

this has in some years resulted in federal taxpayers covering more than half of these costs .

the ongoing shortfall is currently limiting the number of new and ongoing inland waterway construction projects , and is expected to continue to do so unless changes to the financing system are enacted by congress .

recent proposals highlight a number of issues associated with inland waterways .

on multiple prior occasions , the executive branch has proposed to phase out the fuel tax in favor of lock usage fees , but these efforts have been rejected by congress .

more recently , the user industry proposed and continues to favor a plan that includes increases to the existing fuel tax in combination with an increase in the overall federal share for inland waterway costs .

between 1986 and 2011 , the iwtf balance has varied considerably .

beginning in 1992 , balances increased , reaching their highest level , $413 million , in 2002 .

on multiple occasions , the executive branch ( through the clinton administration in 1996 and the bush administration in 2004 ) proposed to further increase fees on the user industry and require the iwtf to also fund some portion of operations and maintenance expenditures ( in addition to the construction and major rehabilitation requirements ) .

these proposals were not enacted by congress .

beginning in fy2005 , appropriations from the iwtf increased significantly as the bush administration requested and congress appropriated greater investments in iwtf - funded projects .

these increasing expenditures significantly exceeded annual fuel tax collections going into the iwtf and interest on the iwtf balance .

 ( see figure 3 . ) .

additionally , some projects significantly exceeded their original cost estimates , further stressing the trust fund .

as a result , balances fell sharply from 2005 to 2010 .

in an effort to reduce stress on the iwtf and prevent the balance from falling to unsustainable levels , congress has taken a number of "stopgap" measures in previous years .

for instance , congress exempted major rehabilitation projects from their usual cost - sharing requirements in the continuing resolution for fy2009 ( p.l .

110-329 ) and limited the projects with access to the iwtf in regular appropriations for fy2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) .

congress also provided inland waterway projects with more than $400 million in construction funding under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) , and exempted this funding from iwtf cost - share requirements .

these measures limited the costs to the iwtf for ongoing projects , while also allowing for the completion of these projects .

more recently , congress prohibited the corps from entering into new contracts requiring iwtf funding since fy2009 , and has limited enacted appropriations from the iwtf to expected fuel tax revenues for the coming year .

due in part to these stopgap measures , the trust fund balance appears to have stabilized .

a summary of these trends is provided in figure 3 .

without changes to iwtf financing , funding for new projects is expected to be extremely limited in the foreseeable future , with most of the funding expected to go to one project , olmsted locks and dam on the ohio river .

such a scenario would likely increase the current project backlog for corps inland waterways projects .

long - term options and proposals to address this situation are discussed in the section below , " inland waterway financing proposals . .

concerns related to the solvency of the iwtf and the equity of the financing system for fuel - taxed inland waterways have led to a number of recent proposals , first by the bush administration in 2008 , then by the obama administration in 2009 and 2010 .

while these proposals were rejected by congress , the administration has recently presented congress with a new recommendation that would raise revenues for the iwtf .

the user industry , represented by the iwub , recently adopted its own proposal , which differs significantly from the administration's proposal .

the user proposal would implement an increase to the current fuel tax , while also requiring an increased federal share for some inland waterway investments ( eg , dams ) .

the proposals discussed above differ in important ways and bring up a number of issues for congress .

each proposal claims to resolve ongoing issues associated with the iwtf by proposing new investment levels and revenue sources that would fundamentally alter the current financing system for inland waterways .

an overarching question for congress is what level of new and ongoing investment is warranted ( or desired ) for the inland waterway system .

other questions include whether to change the current fuel tax ( either in the form of an increase or decrease of the fuel tax , or incorporating a new fee ) and whether to alter the cost - share arrangements for inland waterways projects .

changes to inland waterways financing have been enacted in the 113th congress .

specifically , the water resources reform and development act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-121 ) made limited changes to inland waterways .

it authorized the project delivery recommendations of the iwub proposal , made the federal government responsible for paying all rehabilitation costs less than $20 million out of the general revenue fund ( previously the general fund only covered costs less than $8 million ) , and reduced the cost - sharing requirement for the olmsted locks and dam project from 50% from the iwtf to 15% from the iwtf ( thereby increasing the proportion of project funding from the general fund , and theoretically freeing up iwtf monies for other projects ) .

it did not alter the inland waterways fuel tax .

the bill also authorized efforts to provide more information about inland waterways policy options , including a study of the efficiency of revenue collection on the inland waterways system , a study on the potential use of bonds and / or new fees to finance the iwtf , and the convening of a stakeholder roundtable to review and evaluate alternatives related to the future of inland waterways .

the house and senate have also included changes related to inland waterways in recent appropriations bills .

in its recommendation for fy2015 , the house appropriations committee funded the olmsted project under the newly enacted wrrda cost - sharing requirement of 15% ( rather than 50% ) from the iwtf .

the reduced cost - sharing requirements for the olmsted project allowed the house to provide significant funding for other inland waterways construction projects ( at the traditional 50 / 50 cost - share level ) for the first time in five years .

most observers agree that the changes enacted in wrrda will be insufficient to finance all of the needed waterway upgrades in the long - term .

therefore , some continue to support enactment of part or all of the aforementioned user proposals to address the long - term solvency of the iwtf .

stand - alone legislation of this type has been proposed in the 113 th congress , including: h.r .

1149 ( the waterways are vital for the economy , energy , efficiency , and environment act of 2013 , also known as the wave4 act ) , would authorize the primary recommendations of the iwub proposal , including its project delivery recommendations and a $0.06 per gallon increase to the fuel tax .

the bill would also authorize alterations to iwtf cost - sharing that would make the federal government responsible for 100% of dam construction and any rehabilitation expenditure less than $100 million .

s. 407 , the reinvesting in vital economic rivers and waterways act of 2013 ( river act ) would , similar to h.r .

1149 , authorize the primary recommendations of the iwub proposal , except the fuel tax increase would be $0.09 per gallon .

under this bill , the federal government would be responsible for 100% of dam construction and any rehabilitation expenditure less than $50 million .

some of the issues for congress posed by these and other inland waterways proposals that could be considered by congress are discussed below .

a central issue for congress is the level and urgency of infrastructure investments on federal waterways .

commercial users , including shippers and some agricultural interests , have argued that additional investment is justified because of aging infrastructure , the need for expanded capacity , and positive environmental externalities associated with inland waterway shipping compared to other forms of shipping .

these users argue that the benefits of inland waterways are widespread .

their claims are countered by a number of other groups , including taxpayer and environmental advocacy groups , who argue against increased federal funding for inland waterways .

these groups contend that the shipping industry often misrepresents or overstates the benefits of these investments and that major funding increases for inland waterway projects are not warranted .

despite these disagreements , most entities agree that the current system of financing inland waterways is inadequate to address future needs ( regardless of the precise level of those needs ) .

as a result of the recent funding drawdown , the corps is expected to have appropriations for just one ongoing lock replacement project ( olmstead lock on the ohio river ) through at least fy2016 under its current baseline for iwtf revenues .

barring a new source of revenue or supplemental federal appropriations by congress , new or ongoing iwtf construction projects may be put on hold by the corps , regardless of their urgency .

the condition of corps inland waterway facilities has been a primary driver behind the call for increased investment on inland waterways .

the institute for water resources ( part of the corps of engineers ) notes that the majority of locks in the united states are now past their intended design age of 50 years .

the corps has connected this aging infrastructure to an overall decline in the efficiency of its assets on inland waterways , noting that overall lock unavailability ( both scheduled and unscheduled ) has increased in recent years .

in some cases , the user industry favors new lock construction and expanded capacity over ongoing maintenance for a number of reasons .

other groups argue against significant new investments for inland waterway projects .

in arguing against new locks on the upper mississippi river , a coalition of environmental groups noted that while the design life of new investments is usually only 50 years , regular maintenance can extend the life of existing locks for an additional 50 years at a considerably lesser cost than that for new construction .

these groups generally argue that the costs of new lock construction greatly exceed the benefits of reduced waiting time and lock unavailability , and point out that issues associated with most aging inland waterways infrastructure can be overcome by improved small - scale and nonstructural improvements .

the corps has in the past noted that the justification for most new navigation alternatives depends greatly on traffic forecasts from future trade scenarios , which can themselves be difficult to predict .

these forecasts often depend on a number of interrelated variables , such as commodity prices , the overall price sensitivity of shippers , and outside factors such as increases or decreases in the efficiency of other modes of freight transit .

the corps has noted that total domestic freight traffic is expected to increase by approximately 70% by 2020 , but recently has avoided projections specific to inland waterway freight traffic .

the department of transportation projects that the majority of this increase in freight traffic will be on freight rail and highway traffic , with annual waterway traffic projected to increase 2% per year between 2010 and 2035 .

shipping interests point out that an overall increase in the efficiency of inland waterways could lessen anticipated pressure on highway and rail shipments , or at least maintain viability of inland waterways compared to these other forms of freight shipping .

future lock upgrades or new construction would likely increase demand for inland waterways .

however , the extent to which these upgrades would have an effect on demand would likely also depend on a number of other external factors .

some groups have countered industry requests for new lock construction based on traffic projections by noting that traffic has been flat or decreasing at some individual locks on high - traffic portions of the inland waterway system .

observers , including former corps employees , have also criticized previous projections of traffic increases by the corps and as overly optimistic .

to date , the corps has avoided use of projected future traffic increases as a basis for changes to the overall level of investments on inland waterways .

shipping interests also argue for increased investment in inland waterways because of the overall value of inland waterways compared to other modes of shipping .

they point to studies that have concluded that barge shipping in particular constitutes a transportation alternative that is more efficient and environmentally friendly than other forms of shipping , such as highway and rail .

for example , previous industry studies have calculated that railroads are 28.3% less fuel - efficient than inland waterways .

additionally , they argue that inland waterways contribute significantly fewer greenhouse gas emissions per mile than other forms of freight transportation .

studies have also noted other benefits , including reduced highway congestion and noise reduction .

taxpayer and environmental groups have questioned studies citing environmental benefits as a basis for new investments in barge shipping .

for instance , groups have disagreed with industry fuel - efficiency calculations , noting that many industry studies have not taken into account technical factors such as the directional constraints of river flow , or "circuity. .

they argue that the use of a conversion factor to account for circuity creates a more accurate picture of fuel efficiency among various modes .

they have also noted that using the fuel efficiency for "unit grain trains" instead of an average for all rail shipping would allow for a more accurate comparison of fuel efficiency between barge and rail shipping .

environmental groups also note that inland waterway projects can negatively affect riparian habitat and species by altering natural flows .

structural changes to rivers such as locks and dams ( which can create sedimentation , increase turbidity , and lead to other reservoir - like effects ) and levees ( which separate rivers from flood plains ) affect the natural state of these bodies of water .

additionally , waterway traffic may also cause bank erosion through wave action .

thus , increased construction and expansion of inland waterways can have negative environmental effects .

in addition to deciding whether additional investment is needed , congress may also consider changes to the system that finances these investments , including options for additional revenue that were recently proposed to congress .

these options are the iwub's proposal ( an increase to the fuel tax ) , the white house's proposal to the joint committee on deficit reduction ( new annual fees in addition to the current fuel tax ) , or other options such as a lock usage fee or some kind of toll system .

the iwub - proposed increase to the existing fuel tax would be somewhat in keeping with the current system for user fees and revenue collection .

combined with increased federal responsibility for some inland waterway costs , the iwub argues , this proposal would rebuild the trust fund balance and also fund new investments .

while the tax would generate additional revenue , some taxpayer and environmental groups argue that the associated increases to federal cost share responsibilities tied to this proposal are unacceptable .

the user industry has not indicated whether it would accept increases to the fuel tax without the proposed changes to cost - sharing arrangements .

the user fees proposed by the obama administration in 2011 would address the issue of inadequate revenues by raising new fees from commercial users operating on the inland waterway system .

under the proposed new system of fees , all commercial users would continue to pay costs to utilize the inland waterway system in the form of fuel taxes and new fees for non - lock users , while lock users would also continue to pay the fuel tax , but would pay an even greater fee .

the administration also proposes to add new waterway segments to the list of fuel - taxed waterways on the inland waterway system , further raising revenues .

the administration argues that since commercial shippers are the primary beneficiary of waterway investments , they should continue to pay the costs for new capital investments .

furthermore , since lock users benefit the most , they should pay the most .

the iwub and congress have previously rejected lock usage fees and similar proposals as posing unfair burdens on a subset of waterway users , and have opposed the new administration proposal .

the iwub argues that targeting users of individual segments runs counter to the idea of the inland waterways as a whole "system" whose interconnectivity benefits the nation .

additionally , users note that major fee increases will significantly affect shippers operating within the system .

finally , the user industry has also argued against the proposed new fee because it delegates the authority to set fees to the secretary of the army , with certain restrictions .

previously , other means to raise revenue have also been considered by congress .

early forms of the inland waterways revenue act of 1978 proposed a lock usage fee in lieu of the fuel tax included in the final bill , and other fees have subsequently been proposed as replacements or supplements to the fuel tax .

in addition to lock usage fees , options such as annual licensing fees , systemwide and segment - specific tolls , ton - mile charges , and lock charges for the most congested portions of the system have previously been discussed as a potential means to raise revenues on inland waterways .

theoretically , some of these items could also be combined with the current fuel tax or other proposals .

a separate financing concept , known as "capital recovery," was represented in the original 1978 legislation but was not enacted in the final bill .

under this framework , user fees would automatically adjust to recover capital investments by the government .

for instance , user fees might increase when the iwtf balance drops below a certain level .

alternatively , annualized or per - use fees could be structured to recover capital costs at individual facilities over time .

such a fee could render less likely future shortfalls in the trust fund .

it might also force users to narrow those projects pursued to only the most vital authorizations .

the concept appears to be represented in the obama administration proposal , in which user fees would be tied to trust fund balances after fy2022 .

users have previously argued against capital recovery , noting that it is difficult to plan for a tax that is constantly changing , and that such an increase could create an "upward spiral" of cost increases in which a shrinking user base is responsible for more and more costs .

congress could also consider additional means to increase the reliability of the revenue stream for inland waterways .

an automatic adjustment for inflation has previously been discussed and could be incorporated into either a fuel tax increase or a new lockage fee .

an inflation adjustment could provide additional future revenues and increase the real purchasing power of iwtf funds , which has decreased substantially since 1994 .

some argue that such an automatic adjustment amounts to hidden ( and therefore unacceptable ) tax increases in the future .

 ( see box above. ) .

if no long - term solution is enacted to address the iwtf revenue shortfall , congress may again be forced to take measures to ensure the solvency of the trust fund .

previously , some of these options have included capping iwtf withdrawals at the level of current year fuel tax revenues or putting a temporary hold on all new contracts and focusing on ongoing work .

both of these options would curtail investments on the inland waterway system to some extent .

congress might also stipulate that some or all of the subset of iwtf investments be exempted from wrda 1986 cost - sharing requirements ( similar to the exemption provided by congress in fy2009 enacted appropriations ) .

however , an exemption such as this would have an additional cost to taxpayers in the form of funds from the general revenue account .

a related question before congress is whether the current cost - share arrangement for inland waterway projects is adequately balanced .

as previously mentioned , wrda 1986 established cost - sharing requirements for construction and major lock rehabilitation projects .

under wrda 1986 , construction and major rehabilitation were cost - shared , while "routine" operations and maintenance was a 100% federal cost .

several years later , wrda 1992 ( p.l .

102-580 ) established that "major rehabilitation" should be defined as any upgrade requiring more than $8 million in total funding ( among other requirements ) .

the iwub proposal would significantly modify current cost - sharing arrangements .

as previously mentioned , it would change the existing cost - share arrangement to exclude dams and minor rehabilitation from cost - share requirements , shifting funding for these types of projects to 100% federal funding from the general revenue stream .

notably , the iwub reasons that costs for dams should be a federal responsibility because significant segments of the u.s. population benefit from these structures .

the iwub also proposes a new threshold for what it considers to be major lock rehabilitation , specifying $100 million as the new cut - off between routine operations and maintenance and major rehabilitation .

in short , the iwub proposes to redefine the $8 million threshold established for projects in wrda 1992 , and replace it with a threshold of $100 million .

this would in effect greatly increase the number of maintenance and rehabilitation projects that are federally funded .

additionally , the report proposes to make all cost overruns for iwtf construction projects a 100% federal responsibility .

while some note that this provides project managers within the corps an added incentive to keep projects within budget , critics note that the change represents an additional hidden cost to the federal government that is not reflected in the iwub report's estimates .

the overall effect of the iwub's proposed changes would be to shift the overall costs for inland waterway projects toward the federal government .

assuming the proposed project list in the iwub report , crs calculates that the cost - share arrangement for iwtf construction projects would shift from the current 50 / 50 arrangement to approximately 68% federal , 32% non - federal .

while commercial waterway users and the iwub favor this shift in order to distribute the cost - share burden , taxpayer and environmental groups note that the iwtf already benefits from significant federal support in the form of 100% federal funding for investigations ( studies ) and operations and maintenance .

in recent years , this support has represented an additional $500 million - $650 million annually of federal expenses with no cost - sharing requirements .

assuming existing funding trends for other corps work supporting inland waterways ( eg , operations & maintenance and investigations ) , crs calculates that federal costs for inland waterways under the proposal could rise to more than 90% of the total costs for the system .

currently , the federal government is responsible for about 80% - 85% of these costs annually , with some variation .

as noted above , the obama administration's proposals have all recommended alteration of the type and amount of user fees levied but not the overall cost - share between the federal and nonfederal expenditures .

thus , although these proposals would require new revenues from users , appropriations from the iwtf would still need to be matched with funds from the general revenue fund , and the cost - share structure for the iwtf system would remain at 50 / 50 .

as previously noted , some have argued in favor of shifting cost shares away from the federal government and increasing user responsibility not only for construction , but also for operations and maintenance of inland waterways .

these groups , including some of the aforementioned environmental and taxpayer interest groups , have argued that waterway users should not only pay for 50% of construction and major rehabilitation costs , but also pay for some or all operations and maintenance costs , which are currently fully funded by the general treasury revenues .

while congress has in the past rejected these proposals , they may once again be considered in the context of overall government cost - cutting efforts .

the iwub has also asked congress to weigh in to provide reforms to corps iwtf planning processes .

among other things , the iwub proposed a number of reforms to increase its involvement and improve project prioritization .

industry users argue that many of these reforms will decrease the likelihood of cost overruns , which have in the past been a problem for iwtf projects .

a previous study by the corps concluded that in several cases , a number of factors contributed to cost overruns , including inaccurate construction schedules and costs , general cost escalation , and non - optimal funding .

however , the degree of involvement by a non - federal entity in the planning and decision - making process could raise concerns related to conflicts of interest .

a related item that may receive congressional attention is the corps' method for prioritization of all inland waterway projects .

as noted in the iwub report , iwtf investments to date have usually been considered in isolation ; that is , there is no formal set of criteria used to make decisions among investments competing for iwtf funds .

instead , these decisions are largely left to the corps and the administration ( in the annual budget formulation process ) and congress ( in the appropriations process ) .

the iwub proposes to alter this practice by adopting a priority ranking system , which is described in detail in the iwub report .

significantly , the iwub report recommends that this system be promulgated as a regulation .

this could fundamentally affect the role of congress in the project selection and funding process .

currently , congress decides on project - specific authorizations and appropriations for corps inland waterway projects .

if a system for prioritizing investments , such as that recommended in the iwub report , is promulgated as a regulation , the corps would utilize these criteria to select projects for funding , and the role of congress could be limited to providing project authorizations and overall funding levels .

such a role would be a departure from congress's previous role in directing corps projects , although some might argue that it is consistent with the federal approach to project allocations for other agency programs , such as the environmental protection agency's state revolving fund programs for drinking water and wastewater .

