beginning with the early colonial settlements of america , the nation has provided benefits in varying degrees to those who have worn the uniform and suffered physical disabilities in service to the nation — sacrifices that are inherent to the profession of arms .

in 1718 , for instance , the colony of rhode island enacted legislation that provided benefits not only to every officer , soldier , or sailor who served in the colony's armed services , but also to the wives , children , parents , and other relations who had been dependent upon a slain servicemember .

"the physically disabled were to have their wounds carefully tended and healed at the colony's expense , while at the same time an annual pension was provided to him out of the general treasury sufficient for the maintenance of himself and family , or other dependent relatives. .

these benefits were continued by the continental congress , which passed a resolution on august 26 , 1776 , providing for disabled veterans to receive half of their monthly pay for life or for as long as their disability existed .

from the revolutionary war to the current conflicts in afghanistan , iraq , and elsewhere , as the nature of the nation's wars has evolved , and as the needs of each generation of veterans who fought those wars have changed , congress has debated , legislated , and revised benefits provided to veterans .

in general , veterans are eligible for disability compensation if it can be demonstrated that the disabling condition or illness is linked to military service .

veterans could meet the burden of proving that their disabilities were service - connected through their military records , which may clearly describe and document the circumstances and medical treatment for an injury or an illness incurred while in service as well as any resulting disability .

however , where the manifestation of the disabling disease or condition is remote from the veteran's service and any relation between the disability and service is not readily apparent , the burden of proving service connection can be a challenge .

in such circumstances , congress and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) have relied on presumptions to ease the burden placed on the veteran .

since the early 1920s , almost every congress has examined the issue of whether one may presume that a veteran's disability is service - connected when there is no clear evidence to establish an illness or disability is caused or aggravated by a veteran's military service .

more recently , congress and the va have relied on scientific evidence to establish presumptions .

however , when the scientific evidence is incomplete and there is uncertainty on the question of causation or if other factors such as natural aging could also contribute to disease causation , congress and the va are faced with the challenge of instituting a transparent and equitable process to establish presumptions to compensate veterans for service - connected conditions .

in the early 1990's at the request of the then chairman of the senate committee on veterans' affairs , the va prepared an analysis tracing the historical development of presumptions of service connection .

more recently , at the request of the veterans' disability benefits commission , the institute of medicine ( iom ) of the national academy of sciences ( nas ) did a comprehensive study evaluating the presumptive disability decision - making process , which was released in 2008 .

much of the interest with presumptions has focused on vietnam veterans' exposure to agent orange and its contaminant dioxin .

the veterans' disability benefits commission , in its task assignment to iom , raised some potential issues with the current process of making presumptions: certain studies ( not even necessarily involving veterans ) , for example , showing that those exposed to [agent orange] dioxin have slightly higher rates of diabetes or prostate cancer , have resulted in an inexorable push to compensate all veterans with diabetes / prostate cancer even if it is likely that [agent orange] dioxin exposure is a determinative factor in only a small percentage of cases .

since it is impossible to know what role dioxin played in any particular case , all vietnam veterans with diabetes and prostate cancer have been and are being granted presumptive service connection .

is this presumption fully supported by medical evidence ? .

what amount of increase in occurrence rate is enough to warrant compensation ? .

what approaches could be considered to alleviate this costly result ? .

the purpose of disability compensation is to assist currently disabled veterans whose injuries are connected to military service although a veteran may have been ill or sustained an injury while in service , the mere fact that this occurred is not compensable .

it should also be noted that not all persons who served in the military are considered veterans for purposes of veterans benefits .

currently , there are five ways to establish that a disability is service - connected: 1 .

through direct service connection — that is , the facts , shown by evidence , establish that a particular injury or disease resulting in a disability was incurred while in service in the armed forces ; 2 .

through aggravation during service — that is , a preexisting injury or disease will be considered to have been aggravated while in service in the armed forces ; 3 .

through proximity — that is , a disability , which is proximately due to , or the result of a service - connected disease or injury which is itself considered to be service - connected .

an example would be a veteran developing cardiovascular disease due to a service - connected amputation of a lower limb .

4 .

through a finding that the disability was caused by medical care or vocational rehabilitation provided by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) — disabilities caused by va provided medical care or vocational rehabilitation are treated as if they are service - connected .

5 .

through the application of statutory presumptions — that is , certain diseases as established by law or regulation are considered to have been incurred in or aggravated by service in the armed forces even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service .

va has the authority to provide disability compensation to veterans by bypassing the first four criteria .

the next section discusses what a presumption is , and provides a brief legislative history of establishing presumptive service connection .

nearly 40 years after the american military presence in vietnam ended , the controversy surrounding agent orange and its possible association with various illnesses of vietnam veterans and their offspring continues unabated .

in general , no other presumption of service connection has had so many congressional hearings , or has been so extensively studied and debated as has establishment of presumption of service connection for diseases associated with exposure to agent orange .

therefore , this section provides a brief legislative history leading up to the passage of the agent orange act in 1991 ( p.l .

102-4 ) .

it is followed by a discussion of the agent orange act of 1991 .

the current process for establishing presumptive disability decisions involves four major entities: congress , the va , the institute of medicine ( iom ) , and other stakeholders , which include — among others — veterans service organizations ( vsos ) ( see figure 1 ) .

as discussed earlier , from time - to - time , congress has exercised its power to create presumptive disability decisions through legislation but has also delegated authority to the secretary of the va to establish presumptions in certain instances .

some presumptive decisions have been challenged in court , leading to a revision of the statutes governing the administration of disability compensation by the va. for example , in the veterans' dioxin and radiation exposure compensation standards act of 1984 ( "dioxin act" ) , congress authorized the secretary of the va to determine which diseases warranted a presumption of service connection relating to agent orange exposure during the vietnam war .

pursuant to the dioxin act , the secretary promulgated a regulation , which provided ( 1 ) a presumption of agent orange exposure for any veteran who served in vietnam and ( 2 ) a presumption that a single disorder — chloracne — would be considered service connected and thus , eligible for disability compensation .

because the secretary determined that there was no "cause and effect" relationship between agent orange exposure and two other diseases , the secretary declined to provide any other disease ( besides chloracne ) with a presumption of service connection .

as stated previously , in 1989 , a federal district court invalidated this regulation because "…although congress [pursuant to dioxin act] intended the va to predicate service connection upon a finding of a significant statistical association between dioxin exposure and various diseases , the va had erroneously required proof that a causal relationship existed. .

a presumption established through legislation usually follows a process through which individual constituents seeking redress from a denial of disability benefits from the va bring their issues to the attention of congress .

vsos representing a contingent of veterans or , on rare occasions , executive branch agencies have also lobbied congress to consider certain presumptions .

through a 1921 amendment to the war risk insurance act ( p.l .

63-193 ) , congress also granted the secretary of the va authority to establish regulatory presumptions ( p.l .

67-47 ) .

as previously noted , the agent orange act of 1991 established a new process for evaluating the health effects of exposure to herbicides containing dioxin and for establishing presumptions of service connection for diseases associated with such exposure .

p.l .

102-4 directed the secretary to enter into an agreement with the national academy of sciences to review and summarize available scientific evidence regarding an association between diseases and exposure to herbicides used in vietnam .

this agreement , in turn , led to a model by which additional studies could be conducted , a model which is still used today .

the institute of medicine , established in the 1970s as the health arm of the national academy of sciences , provides va with reports that describe the strength of evidence with respect to linkage of agents and specific health concerns .

va uses this evidence and other information in internal decision making to decide whether a presumption will be made .

congress requires the va to respond after receiving an iom report with a determination as to whether va will make a service connection for particular health outcomes on a presumptive basis .

the national academies convenes panels of its own members and other experts to conduct studies using a systematic process involving open public meetings , the submission of information by outside parties , reviews of the literature , and investigations of committee members and staff .

committee deliberations are closed to the public as well as to study sponsors .

report drafts are subject to an external peer review process overseen by the national academies .

with respect to studies pertaining to possible presumptions , a new iom committee is convened .

as of 2009 , the iom had completed eight full , biennial veterans and agent orange reviews and three focused agent orange reviews .

each review examines and characterizes the strength of evidence , such as epidemiologic and toxicological studies , in terms of its association to health outcomes .

the first iom veterans and agent orange committee characterized the strength of evidence into the following four categories: 1. sufficient evidence of an association ; 2. limited / suggestive evidence of an association ; 3. inadequate / insufficient evidence to determine whether an association exists ; and 4. limited / suggestive evidence of no association .

the va has followed a general internal review process for evaluating the study findings from iom and making recommendations to the secretary of the va on whether a specific condition ( s ) should be granted presumptive status .

this process includes an initial review by a working group , a subsequent review by a high - level task force , and a final review by the va secretary .

following the submission of the study findings from iom , a working group is convened , consisting of representatives from several different parts of the va. based on the iom study findings , review of other relevant academic literature , and possible input from various stakeholders , the working group determines whether there is sufficient scientific evidence to support giving any disease ( s ) special consideration with respect to disability presumptions .

following deliberations , the working group generates a report , which makes recommendations to an internal va task force based on pre - established legal standards by which the va secretary's final decision is bound .

the va internal review task force typically consists of high - level officials who report directly to the secretary .

the task force reviews the findings of the working group and may provide a separate , but similar , report to the va secretary based on the working group's recommendations .

if the task force recommends that a new disability presumption be established , and the secretary concurs , the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) will submit a cost estimate and draft regulations for the presumption ( s ) to the office of management and budget ( omb ) for review .

if approved by omb , the proposed rule is then published in the federal register .

after the allotted period for public comment , the vba will then prepare a final rule to be submitted to the federal register .

a more detailed discussion of va's review of iom's findings is provided in appendix b .

as part of its 2008 study of the current presumptive disability decision making process , iom conducted several open meetings to solicit input from stakeholders on their experience with the presumption process .

a general concern expressed by some stakeholders was that the iom is not charged with giving guidance on non - military exposures or alternate causes of certain diseases .

as noted in the 2008 iom study on the presumptive disability decision making process studying the evidence base relevant to establishing service connection face the following challenges: few directly applicable epidemiologic studies ; no contemporaneous exposure measurements ; uncertainty about which veterans were exposed to which agents ; multiple , possibly synergistic exposures ; possible long latency for health effects from some agents ; and significant confounders .

the practice of categorizing the strength of evidence is intended to assist the va in making evidence - based decisions .

however , limitations in evidence inhibits the ability of iom committees to establish causal relationships between military exposures and long - term health effects .

iom therefore has made recommendations to dod and va intended to improve the evidence on exposures and health status of veterans .

the narrowed scope of iom research also presents a dilemma for va policy makers whose interpretation of study results are used to help determine which condition ( s ) , if any , are given presumptive status in evaluating disability benefits .

for example , past iom committees have not been asked to evaluate the effects that certain exposures – common in nonmilitary settings – may have on the health of veterans .

additionally , potential exposures may vary for individual veterans depending upon where the veteran was deployed in proximity to hazardous conditions .

va does not collect data on the exposure risk of individual veterans ; therefore , iom specifically reports that the va is "…hindered by not having exposure data for individuals. .

the combination of these factors makes it difficult to establish a direct cause - and - effect relationship between military exposures and the specific health condition ( s ) .

indeed , based on current statute , the va is not required to consider evidence on exposure magnitude or duration and all exposures are given equal weight when determining health effects .

this section briefly discusses two major policy options for the current process to establish presumptions related to exposure to agent orange: ( 1 ) retain the process ; or ( 2 ) revise the process .

any change to the current process , which is authorized in statute , would require legislation .

if the current process were retained , the likelihood increases that conditions that are associated with age and lifestyle — as opposed to chemical exposure — may become presumptive .

in addition , continuing the current system may also place veterans of more recent conflicts including gulf war i , operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) and operation enduring freedom ( oef ) in a less favorable position for presumptive conditions than vietnam veterans .

unlike the situation with vietnam veterans , in which the iom is able to evaluate a substantial body of scientific literature on the possible association between various diseases of interest and specific type of exposure ( i.e. , herbicides ) , the plight of veterans who served in the gulf region is far more challenging .

not only are there concerns about dozens of different and unrelated environmental hazards ( some not under the control of u.s. armed forces ) , but many of the gulf war era veterans have complex multi - symptomatic conditions that have not been fully diagnosed: the va has had difficulty applying the [iom] findings to gulf war veterans because nearly all of the reviewed gulf war - related hazards represent common , well - characterized occupational exposures that are experienced by virtually all americans .

it may come as a surprise to learn that military environmental exposures generally closely mirror the environmental exposures experienced by all americans .

refinement of the current disability presumptions process would require establishing criteria that convert the current va process to a more formalized and transparent method of determining what service - connected conditions will be given presumptive status .

specific improvements might include ( 1 ) the creation of panels , independent of the va , to review illnesses to be considered for presumptions and make recommendations the va secretary ; ( 2 ) using causation , rather than a positive association as the standard for establishing presumptions ; and ( 3 ) imposing time limits on veterans' presumption claims .

the use of independent advisory panels prior to conducting iom - commissioned studies and during deliberations to determine which condition ( s ) will be recommended for presumption to the va secretary has been proposed as one option to increase transparency in the presumptive disability process .

currently , the va secretary initiates deliberations for presumptive disabilities based primarily on issues raised by vsos , congress , or other stakeholders representing veterans in the presumption process .

to ensure transparency in how the decision to study certain condition ( s ) is developed , an advisory committee consisting of an independent panel of experts could convene annually to review proposed conditions and nominate condition ( s ) for further study based on available scientific evidence that illustrates a connection between a certain exposure and a specific health outcome .

public input could also be incorporated into the deliberation process .

the advisory committee , rather than the va , could then charge iom , or another independent research - based entity , with conducting a study of the condition ( s ) that have been fully vetted .

following the conclusion of iom - commissioned studies , the va follows a general internal review process that includes an initial review by a working group consisting of va representatives and needed technical experts .

a report from the working group is then forwarded to a high - level task force which makes recommendations directly to the va secretary .

the duties for reviewing the results of iom studies and making recommendations to the va secretary could also be delegated to an independent panel , with deliberations open to the public .

the agent orange act of 1991 ( p.l .

102-4 ) established the threshold for determining a presumption based only on a positive association between herbicide exposure and a health outcome as opposed to using causation as the basis .

as a result , iom agent orange committees have used a framework based on association ( sufficient , limited / suggestive , inadequate / insufficient , and no association ) between herbicide exposure and specific health outcomes rather than identifying direct causal mechanisms .

under current law , a positive association ( between dioxin or other compounds in herbicides and a specific condition ) exists if the "credible" evidence for an association is equal to or outweighs the "credible" evidence against an association .

also , under law , if a positive association exists , the secretary is required to issue regulations making the condition presumptive .

as an alternative , following the conclusion of any iom - commissioned studies and post - study reviews , the va secretary could be statutorily restricted to only implementing presumptions for conditions that have a clear and / or direct causal link to military service based on scientific evidence .

conditions where evidence of a service connection does not meet the causal threshold , should automatically trigger further research before the secretary is required to make the condition presumptive .

a supplemental study examining the prevalence of the condition among veterans who were deployed to an affected region as compared to an analogous group of veterans who were not deployed could assist in determining whether that condition is more prevalent among the affected veterans than the non - affected veterans .

data and technical experts from other federal agencies such as the national institutes of health ( nih ) , the cdc , and the epa could assist in conducting this supplemental study .

condition ( s ) that are determined to have a strong association with certain exposures , coupled with statistical evidence of higher prevalence rates among the affected veterans , could be deemed sufficient for establishing a presumption .

an individual's lifestyle , genetic heritage , and / or the aging process can have an effect on the development of a variety of medical conditions .

the influence of these factors is currently not considered in the current presumption process .

a health condition related to military service can be expected to manifest within a proximate time period from exposure , and many diseases have multiple risk factors .

as time passes , age and lifestyle factors may have a greater influence on the development of a health condition than prior exposure .

using scientific knowledge to impose time limitations on when a condition ( s ) could be considered "service - connected" may help to reduce the likelihood that extraneous factors — unrelated to military service — influence the determination ( or applicability ) of presumptions .

appendix a .

disease conditions presumptively service - connected appendix b .

summary of va's review of iom reports the va has not adopted formal procedures governing its internal review of iom reports .

however , practice has been it involves a three - tiered review .

in the first tier , a "working group" of va employees from different operational elements of the va reviews the iom report and any other relevant evidence and prepares a summary of its assessment and a statement of recommendations or options .

this summary is intended for the benefit of a "task force" composed of high - level va officials .

in the second tier , the task force , based on the working group's input , provides recommendations to the secretary , usually in the form of a separate written report .

in the third tier , the secretary determines , based on the task force's input , whether a presumption of service connection is warranted for any disease .

va working group the working group ordinarily consists of members of the office of public health and environmental hazards ( opheh ) of the veterans health administration ( vha ) , the compensation and pension service ( c&p service ) of the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) , and representatives from the office of the general counsel ( ogc ) .

additionally , the working group often includes other vha personnel with specialized medical training or experience concerning a health issue implicated by a particular iom report .

members are assigned to the working group by supervisory personnel within vha , vba , and ogc .

the working group convenes after receiving the briefing from the iom committee .

prior to the meeting , vha personnel seek to identify , based on the iom report and the committee briefing , the diseases that may warrant special consideration because the iom's findings with respect to those diseases appear to be potentially significant .

at the initial working group meeting , vha provides the working group members with additional information concerning those diseases , including copies of any significant scientific studies identified in the iom report and other information concerning matters such as the course of the disease , known causes or risk factors , related conditions or health effects , latency periods ( if any ) , and any other known relevant information .

ogc representative briefs the working group on the legal standard governing the secretary's decision .

members of the working group discuss whether any of the iom's findings appear to be potentially significant , in that they might warrant a presumption of service connection for a particular disease or diseases , and the strength of the scientific evidence with respect to such diseases .

the working group will attempt to reach consensus as to whether the scientific evidence appears to warrant a presumption of service connection for any diseases under the applicable legal standard .

if the working group reaches agreement that a presumption is or is not warranted on the basis of the scientific evidence and the legal standard , it will agree to put forth a recommendation based on that conclusion .

in arriving at such recommendations , the working group relies on scientific evidence and the legal standard , and does not consider matters of governmental policy or cost .

if the working group concludes that the scientific evidence and legal standard do not provide a clear basis for recommending for or against establishing a presumption , but permit a range of options , the working group agrees to set forth a range of options for decision by va policy - making officials .

in those circumstances , the working group will discuss the factors that preclude a clear recommendation , which may include ambiguity in the governing statutory standard as applied to certain iom findings , the limited or conditional nature of the iom's findings with respect to certain diseases , or other factors .

the working group will discuss the decisional options available to the secretary and may also discuss the factors that may be relevant to the secretary's decision among those options .

to this extent , the working group may discuss the policy considerations that would be relevant to the secretary's choice among permissible courses of action .

once the working group has reached agreement concerning its recommendations or presentation of options , a written report is completed .

the report will contain ( 1 ) a summary of the issues to be decided under applicable law and the iom report , ( 2 ) a summary of the findings contained in the iom report , ( 3 ) a summary of the legal standard governing va's decision , ( 4 ) a summary of the working group's analysis of the medical evidence in relation to the legal standard , particularly with respect to any potentially significant findings in the iom report , and ( 5 ) a statement of the working group's recommendations or of the options identified by the working group .

the working group does not prepare or obtain a cost estimate for the options , although it may provide general information concerning , eg , the prevalence rates of certain diseases under consideration .

if the working group report lists a range of options available to the secretary , it would identify the scientific and legal considerations relevant to the secretary's choice among those options , and may also identify policy implications associated with various options .

va task force the task force consists of the under secretary for health , the under secretary for benefits , the general counsel , and the assistant secretary for policy and planning .

there is no established procedure for the task force's deliberations .

task force members receive a copy of the working group report and , based on that report , provide advice to the secretary concerning the secretary's determination , which may include recommendations based upon the options , if any , outlined by the working group .

the task force often , though not always , provides a separate report to the secretary .

secretary based on the task force's report , the secretary determines whether or not to establish presumptions for any diseases discussed in the iom report and directs appropriate action to implement the decision .

