over the past three decades , obesity rates have more than doubled among adults , and tripled among children and adolescents .

in 2011-2012 , about 32% of u.s. children and adolescents between the ages of 2 and 19 years old were overweight , and more than half of those children were considered obese .

recent data suggest that obesity rates are stabilizing , but prevalence remains high , and obesity as a public health issue has gained the attention of health care professionals , policymakers , schools , employers , and the media .

obesity increases mortality risk and is associated with a number of chronic conditions in children , such as diabetes , asthma , and risk factors for heart disease .

obese children are at a greater risk for obesity and other chronic conditions in adulthood .

some researchers believe that today's children may lead shorter lives than their parents due to the negative effects of obesity .

in addition to those risks , obesity rates in children and adolescents have raised concerns about increased burden on the health care system and the effects of obesity on military readiness .

overweight and obesity often begin in childhood and adolescence and continue into adulthood .

adults are generally considered capable of understanding how to maintain a healthy weight , and are considered capable of making personal choices , when possible , to control their weight .

however , children may not have the tools or capacity to understand or prevent overweight and obesity , and the government often has a larger influence on their well - being , through schools , health care , and programs for low - income families .

the obama administration has shown a strong interest in developing policies to address childhood overweight and obesity .

childhood obesity is a major initiative of first lady michelle obama , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the 2010 dietary guidelines for americans ( dga ) , the white house task force on childhood obesity report , and the let's move initiative have focused research and policy attention on improving the health of american children , especially in terms of weight status .

the president's task force on childhood obesity released an action plan with a series of recommendations to reduce childhood obesity to 5% by 2030 .

healthy people 2020 objectives aim for a 10% reduction , from 16.1% in 2005-2008 to 14.6% by 2020 , and an increase in access to and consumption of nutritious foods .

in some instances , activities are conducted subject to congress's funding decisions in annual appropriations bills .

in recent years , congress has considered many approaches to these issues , including increased funding for school lunch programs , updating school meal nutrition standards , encouraging "farm - to - school" activities , and broadened coverage and support for school wellness programs .

many of these issues were addressed in the healthy , hunger - free kids act ( p.l .

111-296 ) , which is discussed in greater detail in crs report r41354 , child nutrition and wic reauthorization: p.l .

111-296 .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 ) appropriated $25 million for a childhood obesity research demonstration ( cord ) project that was authorized in the 2009 chip reauthorization ( p.l .

111-3 ) .

funded through september 2015 , cord provides funding for the development of a comprehensive and systematic model for reducing childhood obesity , through targeted support to families , the identification of behavioral risk factors , identification of needed clinical preventive , screening benefits , and medical assistance .

other approaches have addressed collection of program participant data on student fitness levels , nutrition behavior , and physical activity , in addition to higher physical education standards and required activity time in schools and child care settings .

additionally , congress has expressed interest in coordination of these activities with private sector efforts .

some have suggested requirements for local education agencies to integrate fitness into the school environment and to disseminate information on physical activity to families .

others have called for nationwide physical education requirements in schools , which are currently determined at the local level .

programs such as communities putting prevention to work ( cppw ) seek to address environmental determinants of obesity through initiatives that include increasing the availability of healthy food and beverages in schools , supporting development of sidewalks and bike lanes , and working with afterschool programs to implement physical activity requirements .

congress has at times required the collection of participant data , either to establish or compare to national benchmarks , to examine trends over time , or to evaluate programs .

this report presents data on obesity among children and adolescents , and includes a discussion of obesity measurement , trends in obesity rates , and differences in rates that exist across gender , race , ethnicity , socioeconomic status , and geographic location .

according to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , obesity and overweight are terms used to describe ranges of weight that are higher than what is generally considered healthy for a given height .

while several methods are available to measure or estimate overweight and obesity , this report relies on the use of bmi to present the data on childhood overweight and obesity .

while bmi is not an exact measure of body fat , as discussed below , it is regarded as an efficient measure of childhood overweight and obesity for population - based data .

bmi is presented as the indicator of overweight and obesity in most federally sponsored studies and reports of children's health , including the national health and nutrition examination survey ( nhanes ) and healthy people 202 0 .

bmi is also the most commonly used clinical screening measure for both child and adult overweight and obesity , and is recommended by the u.s. preventive services task force ( uspstf ) for screening purposes .

the increase in childhood overweight and obesity has affected certain subsets of the population more than others .

for instance , between 2003-2004 and 2011-2012 , there was no significant change in obesity prevalence overall , but there was a significant decrease in obesity prevalence among children two to five years old .

this section includes information on the increase in childhood overweight and obesity among specific age groups , gender , race , ethnicity , and geography .

at the individual level , obesity is thought to be caused by a number of interacting genetic , behavioral , and environmental factors .

some behavioral factors associated with childhood obesity are modifiable at the individual or family level , including energy intake , physical activity , and sedentary behaviors .

at the most basic level , obesity is the result of a positive energy balance — too many calories in and too few calories expended .

research shows that overall diet quality in the united states remains poor , especially among those of lower socioeconomic status .

sugary drinks , in particular , are the largest source of added sugar and a significant contributor of calories to the diets of children .

the 2010 dietary guidelines for americans cite that children's intakes of solid fats and added sugars exceed recommendations , while intake of nutrients of public health concern ( eg , calcium , dietary fiber , potassium , and vitamin d ) , whole grains , fruits , and vegetables is inadequate .

several studies have shown that availability of food in the home is related to food consumption in youth , and this relationship has been found for fruit and vegetable consumption , as well as soft drink and snack food intake .

research shows that children who are not physically active have a 37% higher risk of obesity than those who exercise five days per week .

in addition , children who watch more than two hours of television per day had a 52% higher risk of obesity than children who watched less than one hour per day .

environmental factors such as schools , communities , large portion sizes , and advertising may also influence eating habits of children .

lack of physical education in schools , and lack of access to safe places to exercise or play in certain communities , may limit physical activity .

one study notes that children aged 10 to 17 who live in neighborhoods with the most unfavorable social conditions , such as unsafe surroundings , poor housing , and no access to sidewalks , parks , and recreation centers , have 20% to 60% higher odds of being obese than children who live in neighborhoods with more favorable social conditions .

these same communities often have limited access to stores and supermarkets with healthy and affordable food options .

large portion sizes and television advertisements have also been found to increase food intake in children , as the foods most often marketed toward children are high in calories , sugar , sodium , and fat .

childhood and adolescent obesity has consequences that may last into adulthood .

youth who are overweight or obese have a higher risk of developing high blood pressure , high cholesterol , and abnormal glucose tolerance , which are risk factors for developing cardiovascular disease later in life .

other health conditions associated with obesity are asthma , hepatic steatosis ( i.e. , fatty liver ) , sleep apnea , and type 2 diabetes .

children with these conditions also have a higher risk of disability .

increasing rates of childhood chronic conditions may also lead to increases in long - term health burdens among adults , along with increasing medical and disability costs , and decreased work force participation .

after age 6 , obese children may have a 50% greater chance of becoming obese adults , regardless of their parents' obesity status .

obesity in adults is associated with increased risk of a number of conditions , including diabetes , cardiovascular disease , hypertension , and certain cancers .

in 2011 , heart disease , cancer , and diabetes mellitus were among the leading causes of death in the united states , and modifiable risk factors ( eg , poor diet , overweight , and lack of physical activity ) are cited as largely responsible for these deaths .

in one study , poor diet and physical inactivity were found to be the second - highest actual cause of death , behind tobacco use .

another recent study of american indians showed that elevated bmi in childhood was associated with a higher risk of premature death .

this long - term study of american indian children found that those in the highest bmi quartile had more than double the risk of premature death than those in the lowest quartile .

finally , children and adolescents who are overweight may also have social issues ; they may be subject to social discrimination , which has long - term effects on self - esteem .

overweight and obese children are less likely to be engaged in school , more likely to repeat a grade in school , and more likely to miss two or more weeks of school per year .

healthy people 2010 , which was released in 2000 , set a number of objectives , including reducing the proportion of children and adolescents who are overweight or obese .

the goal to reduce the proportion of obese children and adolescents to 5% was not achieved .

during this 10-year time period , obesity prevalence increased from 11% to 17% among 6- to 11-year - olds and from 11% to 18% among 12- to 18-year - olds .

healthy people 2020 , released in 2010 , set a goal of reducing child and adolescent obesity by 10% , from 16.1% to 14.6% .

the recent decrease in obesity prevalence among the youngest children suggests progress toward achieving the objectives outlined in healthy people 2020 .

in the two - to five - year - old age group , the proportion of children who are considered obese fell from 10.4% in 2005-2008 to 8.4% in 2011-2012 , dropping below the target goal of 9.4% .

this is significant , as research shows that preventing obesity early in life may help young people maintain a healthy weight into adulthood .

while no individual survey or surveillance system can provide the complete picture , the data consistently show that the prevalence of obesity among children and adolescents remains high , particularly among black and hispanic youth , as well as among those in lower - income households .

research has suggested a comprehensive , multi - pronged policy approach to childhood overweight and obesity .

the usda has implemented several regulations for childhood nutrition programs , the cdc has funded state - and community - level interventions , and several reports and recommendations have been issued by the iom , the u.s .

surgeon general , and the white house .

usda and hhs are in the process of developing the 2015 dietary guidelines for americans , which provide the basis for federal food and nutrition policy .

the food and drug administration ( fda ) has proposed two rules to update the nutrition facts label , including a provision that would require labeling of added sugars , a major source of calories in the diets of american children ( see crs report r43733 , revision of the nutrition facts label: proposed rules ) .

it remains to be seen whether updated nutrition standards in school cafeterias , community initiatives , and new labeling requirements will make an impact on child and adolescent obesity rates .

childhood obesity is a complex and multi - faceted issue that has been addressed by a wide variety of policies , encompassing education and health communication , policy development and support at the state and community level , scientific and public health research , and delivery of services , including nutrition programs .

the data sources discussed in this report may provide decision - making tools for these policies and programs .

they may also provide valuable benchmarks during implementation and evaluation of these new laws .

appendix a .

data sources on childhood overweight and obesity appendix b .

overweight and obesity , by age and sex appendix c. overweight and obesity , by race / ethnicity and se .

