the pending parliamentary elections in burma — to be held on november 7 , 2010 — sparked controversy even before the date was set .

whether it was the manner in which a new constitution was supposedly approved or the provisions of the elections laws , several members of congress and the obama administration have been critical of the process by which burma's ruling military junta , the state peace and development council ( spdc ) , plans on conducting the election .

as the election moves into its campaign phase , there continue to be signs that the results are unlikely to be free and fair , and may not reflect the political wishes of the burmese people .

the election has opened debates about u.s. policy towards burma , including questions about whether the largely isolationist policy of the past 20 years , marked by extensive economic sanctions against the regime for its human rights violations , has been effective in encouraging political change and improving the government's treatment of the burmese people ; whether the obama administration's decision to engage the burmese government can be effective ; and whether sanctions are sufficiently strict and sufficiently well - enforced to pressure the junta to improve its human rights policies .

on november 7 , 2010 , burma ( also known as myanmar ) will hold its first parliamentary elections in 20 years .

on may 27 , 1990 , burma held parliamentary elections in which the opposition national league for democracy ( nld ) won 392 seats out of 485 seats .

its victory stunned both international observers and , many feel , the burmese junta itself , and created a momentary sense of optimism that burma could move towards a functioning democracy .

however , burma's ruling military junta , then known as the state law and order restoration council ( slorc ) , refused to accept the election results , claiming that the newly elected parliament could not be convened until a new constitution had been approved .

following the elections , slorc arrested and imprisoned many of the opposition leaders , including nld leader aung san suu kyi .

since then , burma has been ruled by a military junta , renamed the state peace and development council ( spdc ) on november 17 , 1997 .

in may 2008 , the spdc held a national referendum on a draft constitution , only days after much of the country had been devastated by cyclone nargis .

despite the widespread destruction and the death of an estimated 130,000 people , the spdc announced on may 29 , 2008 , that 98.12% of the eligible voters had cast ballots , with 92.48% voting in favor of the new constitution .

much of the international community , including the u.s. government and burma's opposition groups , quickly denounced the official results as fraudulent .

the spdc responded by announcing that parliamentary elections would be held on an unspecified date in 2010 in accordance with the provisions of the newly approved constitution .

at stake were 330 seats in the parliament's lower house , the pyithu hluttaw ; 168 possible seats in the upper house , the amyotha hluttaw ; and a total of 665 seats in the 14 state and regional hluttaws .

under the provisions of the constitution , 25% of the seats in the upper and lower houses of parliament and each of the 14 regional and state assemblies are to be appointed by the commander - in - chief of burma's defense services .

the full lower house will have 440 members and the full upper house will have 224 members .

the number of members in the regional and state assemblies varies .

on march 9 , 2010 , the spdc released five new laws for the pending parliamentary elections .

three of the laws were about the three main types of parliaments stipulated in the constitution — the two houses of the national parliament ( pyidaungsu hluttaw ) and the regional and state parliaments .

the fourth law — the political parties registration law — set conditions for the registration and operation of political parties in burma .

the fifth law established a union election commission ( uec ) to supervise the parliamentary elections and political parties .

the new laws were quickly subject to sharp criticism , both domestically and overseas .

in particular , the law on political parties was widely denounced for placing unreasonable restrictions on the participation of many opposition political leaders .

u.s. assistant secretary of state for public affairs philip j. crowley said the political parties registration law "makes a mockery of the democratic process and ensures that the upcoming elections will be devoid of credibility. .

there have also been objections to the terms of the union election commission law and the 17 people subsequently appointed to the commission by the spdc .

the political party registration law required all existing political parties that wish to participate in the 2010 elections to submit registration materials to the union election commission within 60 days .

the national league for democracy and several other leading opposition parties decided not to register and not to participate in the election .

on march 29 , 2010 , the spdc transformed its affiliated "social organization," the union solidarity and development association ( usda ) , into the union solidarity and development party ( usdp ) , transferring the assets of the usda over to the new political party .

on may 27 , 2010 , a splinter group of the nld submitted an application to the uec to register a new political party , the national democratic force ( ndf ) .

during the spring and summer of 2010 , 47 existing or new political parties submitted registration applications to the uec .

under the provisions of burma's election laws and the uec's regulations , the approval for political parties is a multi - step process , with no right to appeal the uec's decisions .

applicants had to submit a proposed design for a party flag and seal , the names of the party's officers , and list of party members , and a list of proposed candidates for the election .

in order to qualify , a political party had to submit a minimum of at least three candidates .

on august 13 , 2010 , the uec announced that the parliamentary elections would be held on november 7 , 2010 .

it also set a deadline of august 30 , 2010 , for all political parties to submit the names of their candidates for the elections .

according to a notification released by the uec on september 14 , 2010 , 37 political parties will be allowed to run candidates in the 2010 elections ( see table 1 ) .

the notification also dissolved five previously registered political parties , including the national league for democracy , and cancelled the registrations of five new political parties for failing to submit at least three candidates for the upcoming elections .

although not mentioned in the notification , the uec also refused to allow five political parties associated with burma's ethnic minorities to participate in the election .

in addition to the party candidates , and unknown number of people registered as independent candidates by the deadline of august 30 , 2010 .

the uec was to have decided on the eligibility of the candidates by september 10 .

although the uec has not released a formal notification , there have been reports of candidates being ruled ineligible .

the uec reportedly disqualified a national unity party candidate because he is a retired christian minister .

in addition , the uec disqualified 14 members of the dissolved kachin state progressive party who attempted to register as independent candidates .

one candidate for the democratic party ( myanmar ) was also rejected because of allegations of tax evasion and failure to reside in burma for the required 10 years .

there has also been controversy about some of the usdp candidates .

on april 29 , 2010 , spdc prime minister thein sein and 26 ministers and senior officials joined the newly formed usdp .

opposition groups pointed to provisions in the election laws that precluded government employees from joining political parties or running as candidates in the upcoming parliamentary election .

the uec , however , ruled that ministers and officials were political appointees and not government employees , and therefore could join the usdp .

on august 27 , 2010 , the spdc chief , senior general than shwe , his deputy , general maung aye , and six other top military officers resigned from their military posts , allegedly so they could run as candidates in the upcoming election .

virtually all observers view this as a symbolic move to circumvent laws limiting military officials from running in the polls .

there have been repeated allegations that the spdc is using various mechanisms to control the campaign to ensure its victory in the november elections .

opposition figures claim that five election laws include provisions that prohibit the candidacy of many opposition leaders , including aung san suu kyi , as well as disenfranchise voters inclined to support opposition parties .

in addition , the uec has also been characterized as a mechanism for controlling the elections , as its members were appointed by the spdc and the uec's decisions are not subject to appeal .

critics also point to specific uec decisions as part of a spdc strategy to control the campaign and influence the election .

for example , the uec's refusal to allow five political parties associated with ethnic minorities to participate in the election is viewed as a way of preventing minority kachin opposition groups from being represented in the new parliament .

another example is the relatively short time period — 20 days — in which parties had to select and register candidates .

the cost of registering candidates — a non - refundable fee of 500,000 kyat , or $510 at the official exchange rate — has also been criticized as a means of blocking opposition candidates .

more recently , the uec announced that the elections would not be held in portions of the kachin , kayah , kayin , mon , and shan states "as they are in no position to host free and fair elections. .

these regions are locations largely under the control of armed opposition groups with populations generally opposed to the spdc .

the official campaign period for the november elections began on september 24 , 2010 , with the first broadcast of a uec - approved statement by the national unity party ( nup ) .

each of the 37 political parties contesting the election are to be provided 15 minutes of airtime to present their party's platform on national television and radio .

transcripts of the nup's statement and subsequent party statements appeared the following days in the state newspaper , the new light of myanmar .

under the provisions of uec notification 98 / 2010 , the uec and the ministry of information may refuse to allow any party statement to be broadcast .

in addition , the content of the party statements are subject to a number of restrictions , including a prohibition on language that can "harm security" or "tarnish the image" of the state or tatmadaw ( burma's military ) .

the last date for party broadcasts will be october 31 , 2010 , marking the official end of the campaign period .

besides the national broadcasts , political parties and independent candidates are allowed to stage pre - approved political rallies and speeches .

on august 18 , 2010 , the uec released notification 91 / 2010 , setting a number of conditions on political rallies , speeches , and campaigning .

candidates and election representatives wishing to assemble and give speeches must apply for a permit at least seven days prior to the event .

the application must include the location , date , starting and finishing times , estimated number of attendees , names of speakers ( including identification numbers and addresses ) , and name of applicant ( including identification number and address ) .

permits are to be issued at least 48 hours before the start of the proposed event .

the content of the speeches must abide by the same restrictions placed on the broadcast party statements .

although some opposition rallies have occurred , the organizers claim that they have been closely observed and some attendees have been subsequently harassed by the police .

opposition parties also assert that the uec has been more lenient and forthcoming with permits for the usdp and other pro - junta political parties .

soon after the march 9 , 2010 , release of the five elections laws , various groups began organizing an election boycott campaign .

some of the first voices raised in support of an election boycott were student groups and buddhist monks .

in may 2010 , the 88-generation students , the all burma federation of student unions ( abfsu ) , and the all burma monks' alliance ( abma ) issued a joint statement urging people not to vote in the november elections .

an underground student group that calls itself generation wave is also reportedly running an election boycott campaign .

following its decision not to contest the 2010 elections , the nld launched a national campaign to educate voters of their rights under the elections laws , including their right not to vote .

in august 2010 , the nld officially announced that it was boycotting the election .

the spdc has responded to the boycott movement by publishing articles in the press encouraging people to vote , arresting boycott organizers , and otherwise intimidating supporters of the boycott campaign .

on september 10 and 11 , the new light of myanmar ran extended stories encouraging people to vote in the upcoming elections , and calling a person who chooses not to vote "an irresponsible opportunist. .

the democratic voice of burma reported on september 20 , 2010 , that several university students were arrested in rangoon purportedly because of their work on the election boycott campaign .

the irrawaddy , a leading opposition news service based in neighboring thailand , reported on september 28 , 2010 , that a buddhist monk had been sentenced to 15 years in prison with hard labor for anti - election campaigning .

there have also been reports that members of the nld and other organizations supporting the boycott have been threatened with prison sentences and fines .

in addition to the boycott movement , there are other signs of diminishing support or interest in the elections .

the peace and diversity party , which had registered to participate in the election , decided in july to withdraw , citing censorship by the spdc government .

other parties still contesting the election have requested that the vote be delayed to mid - december to allow more time to campaign and raise funds .

some election observers report little interest in the election , as many voters presume the usdc and other pro - junta parties will be declared the official winners , either because of a lack of opposition or fraud .

it is too early to make precise predictions for the election results .

however , it is possible to project a range of likely outcomes given the known information about the registered candidates and reports on voter attitudes and the situation on the campaign trail .

overall , the preliminary projections indicate that pro - junta parties will win , at a minimum , at least half of the contested seats , and there is a good chance that they will win more than 75% of the seats , enough to amend the new constitution , if they so desire .

in addition , since many of the opposition and ethnic parties are not contesting many seats in the regional or state parliaments , pro - junta candidates may be especially strong at the local level .

on august 23 , 2010 , the irrawaddy ran a story estimating that opposition parties would be unable to contest over half of the seats because of budget and time constraints .

on september 6 , 2010 , the irrawaddy ran another story with a breakdown of party candidates by which type of parliamentary seat they are contesting — upper house , lower house , or state / regional .

according to this story , the usdp will run candidates in almost every seat , and the pro - junta nup will have candidates in over 80% of the contests , making it possible for pro - junta candidates to win nearly all of the seats on november 7 , 2010 .

by contrast , it would take a near complete sweep of contested seats for the opposition parties to win a majority of the contested seats in the national parliament .

in addition , opposition parties do not have a sufficient number of candidates to win a majority of the state or regional parliamentary seats , but could win control in the arakan ( rakhine ) , kachin , mon , and shan states .

however , the decision not to allow portions of these states to participate in the election , as well as continued reports of intimidation in these regions , may indicate that the spdc is trying to insure a usdp victory even in ethnic minority regions .

these estimates are based on partial information about the final list of candidates for each seat up for election on november 7 , 2010 .

there has been no official announcement regarding how many of the submitted party candidates will be allowed to run for office , or how many independent candidates have submitted registration materials .

without a breakdown of candidates by seat , it is not possible to predict the election more accurately .

the obama administration has repeatedly stated that it does not expect burma's parliamentary elections of november 7 , 2010 , to be free and fair .

on september 16 , 2010 , assistant secretary of state for east asian affairs kurt campbell reportedly told an audience at the u.s. institute of peace , "everything we've seen to date suggests that the november elections will be without international legitimacy. .

campbell also confirmed that the obama administration would continue its current policy of diplomatic engagement with the spdc , but reiterated that sanctions could be added or removed , depending on the actions of the ruling military junta .

according to an anonymous source quoted on august 18 , 2010 , in the washington post , the obama administration is considering tightening financial sanctions on burma , and supports the creation of a u.n. commission of inquiry into crimes against humanity and war crimes in burma .

since then , 10 other nations — australia , canada , the czech republic , france , hungary , lithuania , the netherlands , new zealand , slovakia , and the united kingdom — have come out in support of the u.n. commission .

the idea of creating the commission was initially raised in march 2010 , at the 13 th regular session of the u.n. human rights council in geneva , by the u.n. special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in burma , tomas ojea quintana .

under the provisions of three executive orders — e.o .

13310 , e.o .

13448 , and e.o .

13464 — as well as the 2003 burmese freedom and democracy act ( p.l .

108-61 ) and the 2008 tom lantos block burmese jade ( junta's anti - democratic efforts ) act ( 2008 jade act ; p.l .

110-286 ) , the president has the authority to impose financial sanctions on certain burmese officials , military personnel , or their associates .

the 2008 jade act requires the president to notify congress of the addition of new names to the sanctions list as "new information becomes available. .

the tighter financial sanctions will most likely be targeted at the leadership of the spdc and the burmese military , to avoid harm to the people of burma .

no timeframe was given for when the obama administration would impose the new sanctions .

