the power to prescribe rules as to which aliens may enter the united states and which aliens may be removed resides solely with the federal government , and primarily with congress .

concomitant to its exclusive power to establish rules which determine which aliens may enter and which may stay in the country , the federal government also has the power to proscribe activities that subvert this system and establish penalties for those who undertake prohibited activities .

these powers have primarily been implemented through the immigration and nationality act of 1952 , as amended ( ina ) .

the ina establishes a comprehensive set of requirements for legal immigration , naturalization , and the removal of aliens , as well as rules governing aliens' continued presence in the united states .

the ina also establishes an enforcement regime to deter violations of federal immigration law , including through the imposition of penalties upon persons who violate ina requirements .

in examining the ina , it is crucial to distinguish between its civil and criminal provisions .

for example , the ina generally makes it a criminal offense for an alien to enter the united states without authorization , with heightened penalties available in cases where an alien unlawfully reenters after having previously been ordered removed from the country .

moreover , persons who transport unauthorized aliens into or within the united states , or harbor such aliens within the country , are generally subject to criminal penalty .

on the other hand , some violations of the ina are subject to civil penalties .

for example , an entity that knowingly hires an alien who is not authorized to work in the united states may be subject to a civil monetary penalty .

moreover , alien removal ( deportation ) and associated administrative processes are civil in nature .

for example , an alien's unauthorized immigration status makes him removable , but absent additional factors ( eg , having reentered the united states after being formally removed ) , unlawful presence does not constitute a criminal offense .

in some cases , conduct may potentially be subject to both civil and criminal sanction under the ina .

for instance , an alien who unlawfully enters the united states may be subject to criminal penalty as well as deportation .

however , the fact that an alien may be subject to both criminal sanction and removal for an immigration violation does not mean that each tool shall be employed .

congressional authority to prescribe rules on immigration does not necessarily imply exclusive authority to enforce those rules .

congress may expressly authorize states and localities to assist in enforcing federal law .

moreover , there is a notion that has been articulated in some federal courts and by the executive branch that states may possess "inherent" authority to assist in the enforcement of federal immigration law , even in the absence of express authorization by federal statute .

nonetheless , state enforcement of federal immigration law must always be consistent with federal authority .

the supremacy clause of the constitution establishes that federal law , treaties , and the constitution itself are "the supreme law of the land. .

states can therefore be precluded from taking actions that are otherwise within their authority if federal law would thereby be thwarted .

congressional intent is paramount in the analysis as to whether federal law preempts state or local activity ; accordingly , a court must determine whether congress expressly or implicitly intended to preempt state or local action .

generally , a court will determine that congress intended to preempt state regulation or activity when ( 1 ) congress expresses preemptive intent in "explicit statutory language" ; ( 2 ) a state entity regulates "in a field that congress intended the federal government to occupy exclusively" ; or ( 3 ) a state entity's activity "actually conflicts with federal law. .

a question of ongoing legal dispute concerns the extent to which state and local law enforcement may be preempted from directly enforcing federal immigration law in the absence of express authorization by federal statute .

recently , several states have enacted measures to facilitate the detection of unlawfully present aliens by state and local law enforcement officials .

many of these measures are the subject of ongoing litigation .

the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) , in particular , has challenged measures enacted by several states which are intended to deter the presence of unlawfully present aliens within their jurisdiction .

in a 2012 ruling in the case of arizona v. united states , the supreme court ruled that one such measure enacted by arizona , commonly referred to as s.b .

1070 , was largely preempted by federal immigration law .

in the course of its decision , the court indicated that states' ability to enforce federal immigration law , at least as it pertains to non - criminal immigration status violations , is limited in the absence of either direct authorization by federal law or coordination of enforcement efforts with federal authorities .

this report discusses the authority of state and local law enforcement to assist in the enforcement of federal immigration law through the investigation and arrest of persons believed to have violated such laws .

it describes current provisions in federal law that permit state and local police to enforce immigration law directly ; analyzes major cases concerning the ability of states and localities to assist in immigration enforcement , including the supreme court's ruling in arizona v. united states ; and briefly examines opinions on the issue by the office of legal counsel ( olc ) within the department of justice .

this report does not discuss legal issues raised by state and local measures intended to supplement federal immigration laws through the imposition of additional criminal or civil penalties .

for more discussion of the legal implications of such measures , see crs report r42719 , arizona v. united states: a limited role for states in immigration enforcement , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , and crs report r41991 , state and local restrictions on employing unauthorized aliens , by [author name scrubbed] .

the enforcement of federal immigration law by state and local police is most clearly permissible when congress has evidenced intent to authorize such activity .

in exercising its power to regulate immigration , congress is free to delegate to the states , among other things , the authority to arrest , hold , and transport aliens into federal custody .

indeed , congress has created several avenues for states and localities to assist in the enforcement of federal immigration law .

the following sections discuss notable provisions in federal statutes that expressly authorize state and local law enforcement to directly engage in immigration enforcement activities , including arresting persons who have violated federal immigration law .

this section does not discuss those provisions of federal law that , while contemplating participation by state and local authorities in immigration enforcement matters ( such as the sharing of immigration status information between federal , state , and local authorities ) , do not directly authorize state and local police to perform immigration enforcement duties .

at least until the supreme court's decision in arizona v. united states , there had been considerable debate concerning the power of state and local police to enforce federal immigration law in the absence of express authorization in federal statute .

for decades , the prevailing view had been that states were not precluded from arresting persons for criminal violations of the ina , but that they were generally preempted from arresting persons for civil violations making them removable .

more recently , however , some courts appeared to take the view that state and local police could generally arrest persons for either criminal violations of federal immigration laws or civil violations making them removable .

a few states subsequently passed measures that authorized state police to arrest certain categories of aliens who committed immigration status violations making them removable .

many of these measures were subsequently challenged in federal court on preemption grounds .

the supreme court agreed to review one such challenge , concerning a comprehensive immigration enforcement measure enacted by arizona , and held that states are generally preempted from arresting or detaining aliens on the basis of suspected removability under federal immigration law .

it should be noted that inquiries by state and local law enforcement that touch upon the immigration status of stopped individuals do not always constitute attempts to enforce federal immigration law .

such inquiries might arise in the normal course of an investigation unrelated to immigration enforcement .

for example , an officer investigating an offense under state or local law might question a person regarding his identity , and such questioning might possibly touch upon that person's immigration status ( eg , requesting the production of any documents that may verify the person's purported identify , including perhaps any federal immigration documents in the person's possession ) .

these situations might not raise the same legal issues as situations where questioning regarding immigration status either serves as the legal justification for a person's initial stop , detention , or arrest , or constitutes a basis for detaining a person beyond the period necessary to resolve any non - immigration related matters that justified the person's stop or detention .

in recent decades , the executive branch has repeatedly opined on the scope of potential state and local involvement in the enforcement of federal immigration law .

over the years , it has modified its views as to whether state and local officials may enforce the civil provisions of the ina .

in a 1978 press release , the doj "reaffirmed … that the enforcement of the immigration laws rests with [federal immigration authorities] , and not with state and local police. .

the doj further urged state and local police not to "stop and question , detain , arrest , or place an 'immigration hold' on any persons not suspected of crime , solely on the ground that they may be deportable aliens. .

in 1983 , the doj announced revisions to this policy to encourage greater involvement by state and local police in the enforcement of immigration laws , but emphasized that federal authorities "remain responsible for all arrests for [civil] immigration violations. .

in 1989 , the doj's olc opined that while state and local law enforcement could enforce the provisions of the ina concerning criminal offenses , it was "unclear" whether they could enforce non - criminal federal statutes .

in 1996 , the olc reached a more definitive conclusion on the question , issuing an opinion which found that while state and local police are not preempted from making arrests for criminal violations of the ina , they "lack recognized legal authority" to enforce the ina's civil provisions .

the opinion acknowledged that "[i]t is well - settled that state law enforcement officers are permitted to enforce federal statutes where such enforcement activities do not impair federal regulatory interests. .

such enforcement is "subject to the provisions and limitations of state law. .

however , the olc concluded , based upon an examination of jurisprudence , that "state and local police lack recognized legal authority to stop and detain an alien solely on suspicion of civil deportability , as opposed to a criminal violation of the immigration laws or other laws. .

in particular , the olc construed the ninth circuit's ruling in gonzales v. city of peoria as holding that state and local authority to enforce the ina "is limited to criminal violations. .

in 2002 , the olc issued a memorandum which concluded that "federal law did not preempt state police from arresting aliens on the basis of civil deportability," and it withdrew the advice of the 1996 opinion which had suggested otherwise .

the 2002 olc opinion described the states , like the federal government , as possessing the status of "sovereign entities. .

because of this status , states do not require affirmative delegation of federal authority in order to make arrests for violations of federal law — "[i]nstead , the power to make arrests inheres in the ability of one sovereign to accommodate the interests of the other. .

the 2002 olc opinion recognized that the exercise of states' inherent authority to arrest persons for federal violations may be subject to federal preemption .

however , it concluded that "federal law should be presumed not to preempt this arrest authority," because "it is ordinarily unreasonable to assume that congress intended to deprive the federal government of whatever assistance states may provide in identifying and detaining those who have violated federal law. .

the 2002 olc opinion explicitly rejected the 1996 opinion's conclusion that federal law preempts state or local enforcement of the civil provisions of the ina , because "[o]n re - examination , we believe that the authorities we cited in the 1996 olc opinion provide no support for our conclusion that state police lack the authority to arrest aliens solely on the basis of civil deportability. .

in particular , it construed the ninth circuit's statements in gonzales v. city of peoria regarding the preemptive nature of the ina's civil provisions as "mere assumption in dictum ," and instead emphasized tenth circuit jurisprudence supporting the inherent authority of state and local police to enforce both the criminal and civil provisions of federal immigration law .

some critics of the 2002 olc opinion have characterized it as "deeply flawed" and unsupported by judicial precedent or historical practice in the field of immigration .

for example , even prior to the supreme court's ruling in arizona , some critics argued that immigration has long been understood to be a distinctly federal concern , and that congress would not have provided express statutory authorization for state and local enforcement of civil immigration laws in limited circumstances ( eg , pursuant to ina section 287 ( g ) ) unless it was understood that state and local police were otherwise preempted from making arrests for civil immigration violations .

it should be noted that the 2002 olc opinion concerned whether states are preempted from arresting persons for violations of federal immigration law .

the opinion characterized this as "an extremely limited … preemption question," which does not , "[u]nlike the typical preemption scenario," involve a state enacting its own immigration - related measures , which might "arguably conflict with federal law or intrude into a field that is reserved to congress or that federal law has occupied. .

olc opinions are generally viewed as providing binding interpretive guidance for executive agencies and reflecting the legal position of the executive branch , but they cannot compel state action and do not have the same weight as an act of congress .

generally , courts will consider opinion letters by executive agencies on legal matters to the extent that they "have the power to persuade. .

it remains to be seen whether the olc will modify or supplement any of the conclusions reached in its 2002 opinion , in light of the supreme court's ruling in arizona .

the court's opinion indicates that state and local police do not enjoy broad discretion to determine when and whether to arrest or detain persons for immigration status violations .

if such enforcement activity is not directly authorized by federal statute , it must still , at minimum , be pursuant to the "request , approval , or instruction from the federal government. .

