r ecent unauthorized disclosures to the press concerning activities in the white house , and the publication of large quantities of classified information by wikileaks and other organizations and news outlets , has prompted congressional interest in criminal prohibitions on disclosure of classified information .

while president trump and certain media outlets have described certain white house leaks as "criminal" and "illegal , " there is no single statute that criminalizes any unauthorized disclosure of classified information .

instead , criminal prohibitions on unauthorized disclosure of classified information are based on a complex and often overlapping set of statutes with provisions that differ depending on , among other factors , what material was leaked , to whom it was given , and the intent of the discloser .

the most recent large - scale unauthorized disclosure occurred on march 7 , 2017 , when wikileaks published a collection of what it claims is the "largest ever publication of confidential documents" from the central intelligence agency ( cia ) .

this material , dubbed "vault 7" by wikileaks , has been reported to expose classified information concerning , among other things , the cia's technical capabilities to bypass encryption on certain phone and messaging services , to use "smart" televisions as listening devices , and to engage in certain types of cyberattacks .

in a press release , wikileaks claimed that its source for the classified material "wishes to initiate a public debate about the security , creation , use , proliferation and democratic control of cyberweapons. .

this latest disclosure has prompted renewed questions regarding the government's ability to prosecute wikileaks and its founder , julian assange , for their role in the publication of classified material .

historically , the criminal statutes prohibiting the disclosure of protected information have been used almost exclusively to prosecute ( 1 ) individuals with access to classified information ( and a corresponding obligation to protect it ) who make it available to foreign agents and ( 2 ) foreign agents who obtain classified information unlawfully while present in the united states .

in recent years , however , government officials have utilized the espionage act and other relevant statutes to prosecute individuals for providing classified information to news outlets and other organizations , including wikileaks , even when the accused claims to have a salutary motive of influencing public opinion or exposing potentially useful information about government programs .

these prosecutions and the related proceedings that have been filed against members of the press who receive leaked information implicate unique constitutional considerations concerning the scope of first amendment rights to freedom of speech and freedom of the press .

while there is no single statute that criminalizes the unauthorized disclosure of any classified information , a patchwork of statutes exists to protect information depending upon its nature , the identity of the discloser and of those to whom it was disclosed , the purpose of disclosure , and the means by which the information was obtained .

one broad category of information — national defense information — is protected by the espionage act , while other types of relevant information are covered elsewhere in various provisions of the u.s. code .

some provisions apply only to government employees or others who have authorized access to sensitive government information , but many apply to all persons .

analysis of which statutory authorities are applicable to an unauthorized disclosure of classified information is likely to depend on the precise circumstances of the disclosure .

the publication of information pertaining to the national defense or foreign policy may serve the public interest by providing citizens with information that sheds light on the workings of government , but it seems widely accepted that the public release of at least some of this information poses a significant enough threat to national security that the public interest is better served by keeping it secret .

the constitution protects the public right to access government information and to express opinions regarding the functioning of the government , among other things , but it also charges the government with "provid[ing] for the common defense. .

policymakers are faced with the task of balancing these interests within the framework created by the constitution .

the first amendment to the u.s. constitution provides that "congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech , or of the press[.] .

where speech is restricted based on its content , the supreme court generally applies "strict scrutiny," meaning that it will uphold a content - based restriction only if it is necessary "to promote a compelling interest," and is "the least restrictive means to further the articulated interest. .

the supreme court has described protection of the nation's security from external threat as a classic example of a compelling government interest .

it has long been accepted that the government has a compelling need to suppress certain types of speech , particularly during time of war or heightened risk of hostilities .

speech likely to incite immediate violence , for example , may be suppressed .

speech that would give military advantage to a foreign enemy is also susceptible to government regulation .

where first amendment rights are implicated , it is the government's burden to show that its interest is sufficiently compelling to justify enforcement .

whether the government has a compelling need to punish disclosures of classified information turns on whether the disclosure has the potential to cause damage to the national defense or foreign relations of the united states .

actual damage need not be proved , but potential damage must be more than merely speculative and incidental .

on the other hand , the court has stated that "state action to punish the publication of truthful information seldom can satisfy constitutional standards. .

and it has described the constitutional purpose behind the guarantee of press freedom as the protection of "the free discussion of governmental affairs. .

although information properly classified in accordance with statute or executive order , if disclosed to a person not authorized to receive it , carries by definition the potential of causing at least identifiable harm to the national security of the united states , it does not necessarily follow that government classification by itself will be dispositive of the issue in the context of a criminal trial .

however , courts have adopted as an element of the espionage statutes a requirement that the information at issue be "closely held. .

government classification will likely serve as strong evidence to support that contention , even if the information seems relatively innocuous or does not contain much that is not already publicly known .

typically , courts have been unwilling to review decisions of the executive related to national security , or have relied on a strong presumption that the material at issue is potentially damaging .

still , judges have recognized that the government must make some showing that the release of specific national defense information has the potential to harm u.s. interests , lest the espionage act become a means to punish whistleblowers who reveal information that poses more of a danger of embarrassing public officials than of endangering national security .

the supreme court seems satisfied that national security is a vital interest sufficient to justify some intrusion into activities that would otherwise be protected by the first amendment — at least with respect to federal employees .

although courts have not held that government classification of material is sufficient to show that its release is damaging to national security , courts seem to accept without much discussion the government's assertion that the material in question is damaging .

it is unlikely that a defendant's bare assertion that such information poses no danger to u.s. national security would be persuasive without some convincing evidence to that effect or proof that the information is not closely guarded by the government .

although the criminal statutes prohibiting the disclosure of protected information have historically been used to prosecute individuals who made protected information available to foreign governments or against the agents of foreign governments themselves , courts have held that the espionage act is not limited to such "classic spying" cases involving foreign governments .

in some cases , criminal defendants have been successfully prosecuted even when claiming to have an altruistic desire to expose — i.e. , leak — potentially important information regarding government activities to the press or public policy advocacy organizations .

and while there have been cases in which the government has been unable to secure convictions or has dropped or significantly reduced criminal charges against alleged leakers , no individual has ever been acquitted based on a finding that the public interest in the released information was so great that it justified an otherwise unlawful disclosure .

the following section discusses notable criminal prosecutions , both successful and unsuccessful , for leaks to the press or policy advocacy groups .

while courts have held that the espionage act and other relevant statutes allow for convictions for leaks to the press , the government has never prosecuted a traditional news organization for its receipt of classified or other protected information .

the plain terms of the espionage act , however , do not focus solely on the initial disclosure of national defense information .

while there is some authority for interpreting portions of the espionage act as to exclude "publication" of material from the criminal provisions , some have argued that the act could be read to apply to anyone who , while meeting applicable mens rea requirements , disseminates , distributes , receives , or retains national defense information or material , even if such actions are taken as a member of the press .

on one occasion , the government pursued ( but later dropped ) espionage act charges against two aipac lobbyists for their alleged role in receiving and further distributing national security information leaked by a government employee .

and the role of the press in leak prosecutions became the subject of frequent discussion among legal and media commentators following a series of cases in which the government sought to gather evidence from the media about their sources through secret subpoenas that were not made known to their targets .

the following section discusses these notable legal proceedings in which members of the press or other recipients of leaked information were implicated in legal proceedings either as the subject of a civil or criminal suit itself or as the target of the government's effort to gather and present evidence .

the current laws protecting classified information have been criticized by some as a patchwork of mostly outdated provisions that are vague and inconsistent , or that may not cover all the information the government legitimately needs to protect .

conversely , others argue that the laws fail to take due consideration of the value of releasing to the public information that the government would prefer to keep out of view .

in 2000 , and again in 2001-2002 , congress sought to create 18 u.s.c .

section 798a , subsection ( a ) of which would have read as follows: whoever , being an officer or employee of the united states , a former or retired officer or employee of the united states , any other person with authorized access to classified information , or any other person formerly with authorized access to classified information , knowingly and willfully discloses , or attempts to disclose , any classified information acquired as a result of such person's authorized access to classified information to a person ( other than an officer or employee of the united states ) who is not authorized access to such classified information , knowing that the person is not authorized access to such classified information , shall be fined under this title , imprisoned not more than 3 years , or both .

the proposed provision would have penalized the disclosure of any material designated as classified for any reason related to national security , regardless of whether the violator intended that the information be delivered to and used by foreign agents ( in contrast to 50 u.s.c .

section 783 ) .

it would have been the first law to penalize disclosure of information to entities other than foreign governments or their equivalent solely because it is classified , without a more specific definition of the type of information covered .

in short , the provision would have made it a crime to disclose or attempt to disclose classified information to any person who does not have authorized access to such information , with exceptions covering disclosures to article iii courts , or to the senate or house committees or members , and authorized disclosures to persons acting on behalf of a foreign power ( including an international organization ) .

the provision would have amended the espionage laws in title 18 by expanding the scope of information they cover .

the proposed language was intended to make it easier for the government to prosecute unauthorized disclosures of classified information , or "leaks" of information , that might not amount to a violation of current statutes .

the language was also intended to ease the government's burden of proof in such cases by eliminating the need "to prove that damage to the national security has or will result from the unauthorized disclosure," substituting a requirement to show that the unauthorized disclosure was of information that "is or has been properly classified" under a statute or executive order .

the 106 th congress passed the measure as part of the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 2001 .

president clinton , however , vetoed it , calling it "well - intentioned" as an effort to deal with legitimate concerns about the damage caused by unauthorized disclosures , but "badly flawed" in that it was "overbroad" and posed a risk of "unnecessarily chill[ing] legitimate activities that are at the heart of a democracy. .

president clinton explained his view that [a] desire to avoid the risk that their good faith choice of words — their exercise of judgment — could become the subject of a criminal referral for prosecution might discourage government officials from engaging even in appropriate public discussion , press briefings , or other legitimate official activities .

similarly , the legislation may unduly restrain the ability of former government officials to teach , write , or engage in any activity aimed at building public understanding of complex issues .

incurring such risks is unnecessary and inappropriate in a society built on freedom of expression and the consent of the governed and is particularly inadvisable in a context in which the range of classified materials is so extensive .

in such circumstances , this criminal provision would , in my view , create an undue chilling effect .

the 107 th congress considered passing an identical provision , but instead directed the attorney general and heads of other departments to undertake a review of the current protections against the unauthorized disclosure of classified information and to issue a report recommending legislative or administrative actions .

an identical measure was introduced late in the 109 th congress , but was not reported out of committee .

the attorney general , in his report to the 108 th congress , concluded the following: although there is no single statute that provides criminal penalties for all types of unauthorized disclosures of classified information , unauthorized disclosures of classified information fall within the scope of various current statutory criminal prohibitions .

it must be acknowledged that there is no comprehensive statute that provides criminal penalties for the unauthorized disclosure of classified information irrespective of the type of information or recipient involved .

given the nature of unauthorized disclosures of classified information that have occurred , however , i conclude that current statutes provide a legal basis to prosecute those who engage in unauthorized disclosures , if they can be identified .

it may be that carefully drafted legislation specifically tailored to unauthorized disclosures of classified information generally , rather than to espionage , could enhance our investigative efforts .

the extent to which such a provision would yield any practical additional benefits to the government in terms of improving our ability to identify those who engage in unauthorized disclosures of classified information or deterring such activity is unclear , however .

the espionage act on its face applies to the receipt and unauthorized dissemination of national defense information , which has been interpreted broadly to cover closely held government materials related to u.s. military operations , facilities , and personnel .

although cases involving disclosures of classified information to the press have not been common , it seems clear that courts have regarded such disclosures by government employees to be conduct that enjoys no first amendment protection , regardless of the motives of the divulger or the value the release of such information might impart to public discourse .

the question remains open as to whether the publication of unlawfully obtained information by the media can be punished consistent with the first amendment .

thus , although unlawful acquisition of information might be subject to criminal prosecution with few first amendment implications , the publication of that information may be protected .

whether the publication of national security information can be punished may turn on the value of the information to the public weighed against the likelihood of identifiable harm to national security , arguably a more difficult case for prosecutors to make .

