the purpose of this report is to provide background and analysis for congress on u.s. rule of law ( rol ) and justice sector assistance programs to afghanistan .

this report provides context for rol issues in afghanistan by defining rol and the justice sector , describing the scope of the rol problem in afghanistan , including the role of corruption , and surveying the range of afghan justice sector institutions .

this report also describes u.s. , afghan , and multilateral policy approaches to the afghan justice sector since the u.s. military invasion of afghanistan in 2001 , u.s. policy coordination and funding , and current u.s. justice sector assistance programs in afghanistan .

additionally , this report examines several issues for the 112 th congress , which is likely to remain concerned with all aspects of u.s. policy toward afghanistan , including authorizing and appropriating rol - related programs and assistance , as well as oversight on policy implementation and effectiveness .

issues for congress include the implications of afghan corruption on future u.s. foreign assistance to afghanistan , limitations of u.s. rol support efforts in afghanistan , debates regarding u.s. support to the afghan informal justice sector , and long - term effectiveness of u.s. rol support efforts in afghanistan .

u.s. efforts to train and support afghan police forces as well as counternarcotics and anti - corruption efforts are discussed due to their cross - cutting relationship to rol , but they are not the primary focus of this report .

after several decades of conflict , warlordism , and government misrule , the u.s. government and international community began to rebuild the afghan government's capacity , including rol institutions , following the 2001 fall of the taliban .

helping afghanistan build its justice sector , however , suffers from the same difficulties that have complicated all efforts to expand and reform governance in that country: lack of trained human capital ; traditional affiliation patterns that undermine the professionalism , neutrality , and impartiality of official institutions ; and complications from the broader lack of security and stability in afghanistan .

at stake in u.s. government and multilateral efforts to support rol development in afghanistan is the goal of a stable , capable , and legitimate afghan government .

in a report evaluating rol programs in afghanistan , the state department's inspector general's office ( oig ) states: in afghanistan , there is a direct connect between the lack of a workable system of governance and the national security of the united states .

the absence of a modern , functional government sustains the taliban and al qaeda and encourages the rapid growth of the opium trade .

confidence that the government can provide a fair and effective justice system is an important element in convincing war - battered afghans to build their future in a democratic system rather than reverting to one dominated by terrorists , warlords , and narcotics traffickers .

without rol the country cannot progress no matter what contributions are made by outsiders .

by all accounts , the challenges in afghanistan confronting rol development and justice sector reform remain substantial .

limits to rol reflect deficiencies in or the absence of effective national laws , police forces , and judicial systems .

afghanistan suffers from significant resource limitations in implementing a formal rol system and from high levels of corruption .

by most accounts , official corruption , which involves the misuse of public office for private gain , permeates all sectors of governance and is particularly prevalent in the law enforcement and judicial sectors .

the legitimacy of afghan national law continues to be challenged by alternate power structures , including tribal and militia leaders , and the taliban , as well as major faction or ethnic leaders .

u.s. and afghan officials have raised concerns that , in the absence of effective rol and a functioning formal justice system , afghans may turn to or be forced to use the taliban justice system to resolve disputes .

given the challenges facing rol efforts and the perceived security imperative to address current rol shortcomings in afghanistan , rol efforts have become the subject of increasing attention within the obama administration's strategy for achieving u.s. goals in afghanistan .

several u.s. policy and guidance documents provide a framework for u.s. participation in rol operations in afghanistan , including the 2009 integrated civilian - military campaign plan and the 2010 afghanistan and pakistan regional stabilization strategy , both of which identify as top priorities the strengthening of afghan rol and access to justice .

while not formally approved , the u.s. government has also maintained draft strategies that specifically address rol efforts and , separately , anti - corruption efforts in afghanistan .

afghan and international efforts to strengthen rol and the justice sector in afghanistan are held together by a series of overlapping and evolving strategic frameworks .

justice sector strategy guidance is outlined in several afghan strategic documents , including the 2008 afghanistan national development strategy ( ands ) , the national justice sector strategy , national justice program , and most recently the 2010 ands prioritization and implementation plan .

collectively , these documents lay out the key rol objectives of the afghan government , steps for implementation , and a framework for international donors to support afghanistan's rol sector .

separately , the u.s. government maintains a corresponding set of overlapping and evolving strategic frameworks for its civilian and military support to afghanistan , which include rol elements .

promoting rol and justice sector development is part of the broader effort to increase the legitimacy of afghan governance and institutions .

emphasis on this aspect of the overall u.s. strategy for stabilizing afghanistan appears to be increasing under the obama administration , particularly as the karzai government continues to be challenged by widespread perceptions of corruption .

specifics regarding the implementation of such broad rol goals , however , continue to evolve .

justice sector assistance programs in afghanistan have historically centered on efforts to build the capacity of the courts and justice agencies ( eg , supreme court , ministry of justice , and attorney general's office ) .

these efforts include support to develop the physical infrastructure of the justice system , as well as training , mentoring , and other forms of capacity building .

while the police are considered a component of the justice sector , assistance to the law enforcement sector in afghanistan has historically been implemented and evaluated separately from other rol programs .

a similar explanation applies to counternarcotics efforts in afghanistan , which also have rol dimensions .

more recent efforts have sought to expand upon existing programs to increase afghan access to justice at the provincial and district level as well as to develop linkages between the formal and informal justice sector .

since approximately 2004 , when the first formal u.s. government rol programs were first implemented , rol programs have evolved to include greater emphasis on the informal justice sector .

this is a development that is both considered central to the counterinsurgency ( coin ) strategy in afghanistan and controversial among some for its lack of uniform adherence to international human rights standards and for other reasons .

however , the traditional justice system is difficult for international donors to influence because it is practiced in areas that are not under government control or that are difficult to access .

u.s. assistance to afghanistan's justice sector is provided in the form of justice sector training , mentoring , equipping , and infrastructure building .

justice sector assistance is funded through both civilian and military appropriations vehicles and implemented by a combination of u.s. government agencies , ngos and private contractors .

civilian expenditures on rol support in afghanistan have increased from an estimated $7 million in fy2002 to an estimated $411 million in fy2010 , totaling $904 million from fy2002 to fy2010 .

in 2008 , the state department stated in testimony to congress that afghanistan's justice sector would require more than $600 million worth of additional assistance over the next five years .

other u.s. government reports indicate that $600 million might underestimate the likely costs , given degradations in the afghan security environment since the estimate was made .

u.s. rol funding for programs in afghanistan , including both civilian and military components , is difficult to identify and quantify .

as a 2008 inspection review of rol programs in afghanistan by the state department's office of the inspector general ( oig ) explains: funding for the rol program in afghanistan is split among several u.s. government agencies .

there is no one place where all funds spent specifically on rol can be identified .

rol program funding is often multiyear and is combined with other programs such as police training and corrections facilities , which often make identification of specific costs difficult .

rol programs are also funded by the un , other bilateral donors , and a variety of ngos .

the result is that there is currently no way to readily identify rol funding and subsequently identify duplicate programs , overlapping programs , or programs conflicting with each other .

afghans , while seemingly eager to embrace rol , are confused by the variety of programs implemented specifically by inl , usaid , and the u.s. military units in afghanistan .

funding figures from one source may not match other department or agency funding matrices identifying funds that are rol specific .

most non - defense department foreign assistance for rol activities in afghanistan is funded by from two foreign aid accounts: economic support fund ( esf ) and international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) .

dod rol efforts are funded through the commander's emergency response program ( cerp ) and the afghanistan security forces fund ( asff ) , among other sources .

at least a few estimates for total u.s. government spending on rol assistance are available .

these estimates , however , suffer from several various limitations , which include differing or unclear criteria for what constitutes rol programming , such as whether police , corrections , or justice - related counternarcotics assistance are included , and whether general governance capacity building assistance and support for human rights are included ; incomplete or non - comparable estimates of rol programming across agencies , due to the varying inclusion or omission of staffing and administrative program management costs , differing appropriations vehicles , as well as changes in foreign aid tracking methodologies since the beginning of rol assistance in afghanistan ; and the unclear inclusion or omission of potential sources of rol assistance funding and rol assistance - related costs , particularly for u.s. military and law enforcement funding sources .

as the 2008 oig report explains , "the u.s. government , through several agencies , is funding many programs related to rol... .

however , no one source seems to have a clear picture of the scope of u.s. expenditure in this field. .

overall , these estimates indicate that u.s. assistance to the afghan justice sector has grown gradually since fy2002 , accelerating in recent years to become the largest foreign donor in this sector ( see figure 4 ) .

in fy2002 , the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) estimates that the u.s. government provided $7 million for rol programming .

from fy2002 through fy2007 , u.s. assistance totaled a combined $160 million for rol programming .

in the next two fiscal years , u.s. assistance for rol in afghanistan more than doubled prior expenditures .

international donors also provided financial contributions to rol efforts in afghanistan .

at the 2007 rome conference on rol in afghanistan , for example , international donors , other than the united states , pledged to contribute $83 million in new rol assistance to be administered by the world bank , which exceeded prior international commitments to contribute $82 million for rol assistance in afghanistan .

the u.s. government pledged $15 million at the 2007 rome conference .

it remains unclear , however , whether u.s. and other donor contributions will cover the estimated afghan need for rol assistance .

the scope of u.s. rol programs in afghanistan is broad and inherently multi - disciplinary .

the following sections break down such programs into three categories: major justice sector programs , selected other justice sector programs , and cross cutting rol programs .

major programs include the primary projects implemented by the departments of state , justice , and defense , as well as usaid .

the state department , usaid , and dod also fund several smaller projects to support afghanistan's justice sector .

these are described in the section on selected other justice sector projects .

additionally , multiple other u.s. efforts in afghanistan have implications for the rol .

while these projects tend not to be described or defined as rol programs , many observers would agree that the success of these projects is likely to impact the success of the major u.s. - funded justice sector programs .

current administration policy emphasizes expanding and improving afghan governance as a long - term means of stabilizing afghanistan , in recognition of the essential role effective rol plays in securing afghanistan .

yet , the weak performance of and lack of transparency within the afghan government are growing factors in debate over the effectiveness of u.s. strategy in afghanistan .

congress has been active in all aspects of u.s. policy toward afghanistan , including authorizing and appropriating rol - related programs and assistance , as well as conducting oversight on policy implementation and effectiveness .

in the context of broader congressional interest in the evaluation , oversight , and funding of the overall u.s. effort in afghanistan , the following sections identify several issues for congress related to u.s. efforts to strengthen rol and the justice sector in afghanistan .

these include recent afghan corruption allegations and implications for congressional funding , criticism of rol support efforts by program evaluators , u.s. support to the informal justice sector , and the future of u.s. support to afghan rol .

heightened alarm over the extent and scale of corruption in afghanistan has spurred policymakers to question the direction of u.s. policy in afghanistan under the obama administration .

u.s. assistance to afghanistan for fy2011 is under particular congressional scrutiny due to press allegations in june 2010 that corrupt afghan officials may be pocketing billions of u.s. aid and logistics funding and siphoning it out of afghanistan's kabul airport to financial safe havens elsewhere .

major concerns for congress are whether u.s. assistance to afghanistan is susceptible to waste , fraud , and diversion ; whether such aid funds may be in part fueling afghan corruption ; and what can the u.s. government do to address potential vulnerabilities .

in june 2010 , representative nita lowey , chair of the house appropriations subcommittee responsible for the state department's foreign operations budget , announced that she would place a hold on certain u.s. aid to afghanistan until she has "confidence that u.s. taxpayer money is not being abused to line the pockets of corrupt afghan government officials , drug lords , and terrorists. .

following such allegations and congressional concern , several congressional hearings in july 2010 on the issue of civilian assistance to afghanistan ensued .

while the specific allegations of corruption were not confirmed , witnesses generally acknowledged corruption in afghanistan to be a major impediment to establishing effective rol efforts and overall reconstruction goals .

earlier in 2009 , representative dave obey , chair of the house appropriations committee , also emphasized concerns regarding corruption and the need for specific and measurable benchmarks for anti - corruption improvement to justify future u.s. commitments afghanistan .

recent concerns over corruption have also prompted a broader policy debate over the relative importance of fighting corruption among other u.s. strategic priorities in afghanistan .

central questions in current debates include the following: how far should the u.s. government go in combating corruption in afghanistan ? .

are there limits in the extent to which anti - corruption should be a priority in u.s. strategy to afghanistan ? .

how should anti - corruption investigations in afghanistan be conducted and resolved ? .

through due process of afghan law ? .

through diplomatic negotiation ? .

or with or without overt endorsement from president karzai and other top - level afghan officials ? .

on the one hand , obama administration policy , as articulated in two major afghanistan policy addresses on march 27 , 2009 , and december 1 , 2009 , emphasizes the need for more to be done to combat corruption within the afghan government .

the latter obama statement , for example , specified that "the days of providing a blank check are over" for the afghan government if it does not reduce corruption and deliver services .

supporters of such a policy approach have emphasized the importance of anti - corruption efforts in an overall counterinsurgency ( coin ) strategy in afghanistan , focused on improving afghan perceptions of the afghan government's legitimacy and transparency .

supporters would also emphasize the importance of anti - corruption efforts in plugging some of the most serious corruption - related leaks , including , potentially , the recently reported bulk cash movements out of the kabul airport .

recent afghan investigations involving several u.s. - supported anti - corruption and oversight agencies may also be indicative of improvements in afghan government capacity to combat corruption .

others , however , have questioned whether the benefits of anti - corruption efforts in afghanistan outweigh several drawbacks .

for example , recent high - profile corruption investigations targeting prominent karzai supports have had the unintended consequence of aggravating u.s. - karzai relations and also potentially undermining recent u.s. successes in strengthening afghan anti - corruption capabilities .

some observers have discussed the possible need to avoid investigating and prosecuting particular high - level afghan officials to avoid future complications in the u.s. government's relationship with president karzai .

observers suggest that such an approach , while potentially beneficial from a diplomatic perspective , may risk facilitating the existing perceptions among many afghans that high - level corrupt officials are exempt from the full force of afghan law .

other observers have also argued that meaningful improvements in combating corruption in afghanistan require a long - term u.s. commitment to stay in afghanistan for potentially decades .

short of that , such observers predict that prioritizing anti - corruption will yield limited success .

as congress conducts oversight and appropriates funding for u.s. assistance programs to support rol in afghanistan , an issue to consider is the extent to which the afghan government can absorb and effectively use such assistance .

such sentiments have been variously confirmed by the special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction ( sigar ) , u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) , the state department's office of the inspector general ( oig ) , and others in legislatively mandated reports to congress on the status of u.s. rol efforts in afghanistan .

collectively , these reports indicate that although significant progress in establishing rol in afghanistan have been achieved , there appear to be several fundamental limitations on the ability of the u.s. government and other donors to strengthen the afghan justice sector in the short term .

for example , a 2009 gao report identified low literacy rates and the related lack of basic computer skills as fundamental limiting factors for the recruitment of afghan justice sector personnel , including police , prosecutors , investigators , and administrative staff , as well as for the ability to implement a modern management system for the justice sector .

retention of trained staff is also challenging as many reportedly leave afghan ministries for better paying jobs with donor countries and ngos .

separately , a 2010 state department oig report warned that there is "tension" between , on the one hand , the u.s. government's stated goals for rol in afghanistan , and on the other hand , the capacity and commitment of the afghan government to implement such ambitions .

also missing are components of an effective rol and anti - corruption program , according to program evaluators .

additional reported concerns included the following: the lack of both a formally approved rol strategy and an anti - corruption strategy for afghanistan limits the u.s. embassy in kabul from setting rol and anti - corruption priorities and timelines , as well as identifying the appropriate number of personnel and needed skill sets , according to the state department's oig and sigar .

the need for improved rol coordination and guidance between the u.s. embassy in kabul and provincial reconstruction teams ( prts ) in the field , as well as improved reporting on rol - related activities from the field to the u.s. embassy in kabul , according to the state department's oig .

the inability of afghan anti - corruption and oversight institutions , such as the afghan high office of oversight ( hoo ) and the afghan control and audit office ( cao ) , to function effectively due to the lack of independence , a weak legal framework , and lack of commitment from donors , including from the u.s. government , according to sigar .

observers have described current u.s. efforts to support afghan rol development , including increased emphasis on the informal justice sector and other civilian and military efforts to improve access to justice at the provincial and district level , to be in many ways unique and untested , due the sheer scale of the programs involved , the low level of existing justice sector capacity , gaps in u.s. government understanding of existing dispute resolution mechanisms throughout the country , the absence of security in many parts of afghanistan , and the existence of entrenched corruption at all levels of the afghan bureaucracy .

this means that , while many u.s. projects may be assessed as helping to improve the afghan justice system , other u.s. projects , at times , may be perceived as ineffective or even counterproductive .

in this vein , human rights and development advocates have questioned the value of funding u.s. programs to support the informal justice sector in afghanistan .

one concern is how deeply the international community , including the united states , should be involved in trying to ensure that the informal justice sector provides equitable justice .

some see supporting the traditional justice sector as an expedient means of building ties to local community leaders — a process that can improve the prospects for the u.s. counterinsurgency ( coin ) strategy .

others believe that supporting use of the traditional justice system could harm the longer term objective of building a democratic and progressive afghanistan by preserving some of its undemocratic traditional elements .

still others believe that policies to address the sector might be viewed by afghans as intrusive .

there are also some international officials who feel that reforming or overseeing these mechanisms is beyond the scope of the international stabilization mission in afghanistan .

this debate is an issue of concern for u.s. lawmakers , given the recent strategic focus on improving afghan access to justice and increased attention and funding to strengthen and support the informal justice sector in afghanistan .

various analysts continue to disagree regarding the value and efficacy of u.s. support to the informal justice sector , with some , on the one hand , arguing that such support is vital , particularly in the short term , to ensure that increasing numbers of afghans have access to fair and timely dispute resolution mechanisms .

others , on the other hand , argue that , given finite amounts of resources available to strengthen the justice sector , all of such resources should be devoted to strengthening the quality and reach of the formal justice sector .

u.s. efforts to support rol and anti - corruption in afghanistan have evolved and grown since 2001 , beginning with support to the afghan interim authority , ratification in 2004 of the afghan constitution , and continuing through 2010 as the obama administration has sought to strengthen and expand the reach of afghan justice institutions throughout the country .

proponents of the current u.s. approach to rol institutions in afghanistan would argue that it is informed by prior challenges and policy criticism and reflects a strategic evolution in the level of u.s. commitment , resources , and policy approach to rol - related efforts in afghanistan .

observers continue to debate , however , whether or to what extent these shifts in the level of u.s. commitment and resources for rol efforts in afghanistan will help the u.s. government reach its ultimate goal of developing a stable , capable , and legitimate afghan government .

at stake in such a debate is the long - term effectiveness and value of continued congressional funding and policy support for the obama administration's efforts to strengthen rol in afghanistan .

already , some u.s. government assessments raise concerns about the long - term effectiveness of current efforts .

in 2008 , the state department's office of the inspector general ( oig ) concluded that "the many u.s. efforts to support rol in afghanistan are laudable for their professionalism and tenacity , but it is often not clear how , even if , rol efforts are being measured for success , and when the intense international attention wanes , whether these projects can be sustained. .

separately , a defense department report in 2010 warned that there has been "little enduring progress despite significant investment toward reform , infrastructure and training" in the justice sector and that while afghanistan has "achieved some progress on anti - corruption , in particular with regard to legal and institutional reforms , real change remains elusive and political will , in particular , remains doubtful. .

afghan officials have also raised similar concerns , arguing that despite increasing resources devoted to justice sector support , efforts have not yet translated into a functional formal justice system in afghanistan .

the 112 th congress may choose to address these long term issues in the context of the obama administration's review of u.s. strategy to afghanistan , expected to take place in mid - 2011 .

other potential decision points for congress may center on fy2011 appropriations and congressional review of the administration's fy2012 budget request .

