the department of veterans affairs ( va ) has administered and supervised several life insurance programs for servicemembers and veterans since 1919 .

currently , three va life insurance programs that provide benefits to the families of servicemembers and veterans are still enrolling new policyholders .

these programs are servicemembers' group life insurance ( sgli ) , veterans' group life insurance ( vgli ) , and service - disabled veterans' insurance ( s - dvi ) .

the va's regional office and insurance center ( varoic ) in philadelphia , pa , supervises sgli and vgli , but the day - to - day administration of the programs is handled by the office of servicemembers' group life insurance ( osgli ) , a division of the prudential insurance company of america .

the service - disabled veterans' insurance ( s - dvi ) program , on the other hand , is administered entirely by the va. access to va - administered life insurance programs gives servicemembers and veterans , who may not be eligible for private life insurance policies , the opportunity to carry group life insurance .

this provides for their families in the event of the servicemember's or veteran's death .

across all va insurance programs , 7.1 million people have $1.3 trillion in face value of insurance coverage .

this report is structured into three major sections .

the first section provides an overview of the va's different life insurance programs , including eligibility requirements , premium rates , and benefits .

the second section describes the va's management and administrative structure , as well as how policy proceeds to beneficiaries are currently paid out for sgli , vgli , and s - dvi .

the third section discusses major areas of congressional interest and policy issues as they pertain to sgli , vgli , and s - dvi .

in september 1965 , congress established the servicemembers' group life insurance program in p.l .

89-214 by mandating the va to enter into an agreement with the private insurance industry to meet the insurance needs of vietnam era servicemembers .

since 1965 , congress has amended sgli to include all eligible servicemembers in the uniformed services .

the sgli program , through a group policy issued by the prudential insurance company of america , provides low - cost term insurance protection to servicemembers .

it is administered by the department of veterans affairs regional office and insurance center's office of servicemembers' group life insurance , located in philadelphia , pa .

when first enacted , the sgli program provided up to $10,000 in coverage for members .

today , all servicemembers can receive a maximum of $400,000 insurance coverage under the program .

as of september 30 , 2012 , about 2.4 million members of the uniformed services were covered under the program .

under the veterans' survivor benefits improvement act of 2001 ( p.l .

107-14 ) , congress extended coverage to the spouses and children of servicemembers covered under the sgli program .

the fy2005 emergency supplemental appropriations act for defense , the global war on terror , and tsunami relief ( p.l .

109-13 ) added traumatic injury protection insurance to sgli , which extended the program to provide short - term financial assistance to servicemembers suffering from traumatic injuries .

on august 1 , 1974 , veterans' group life insurance ( vgli ) became available to former servicemembers ( p.l .

93-289 ) .

vgli provides for the conversion of sgli after separation from active duty .

the administration of the vgli program is handled by the osgli , a division of the prudential insurance company of america .

vgli is a five - year renewable term policy which provides a maximum of $400,000 of coverage .

vgli policyholders have the right to renew their coverage at the end of each five - year term period .

policyholders may also convert vgli to an individual commercial policy at any time with any of the participating private companies without proof of insurability .

vgli has no cash , loan , paid up , or extended values and does not pay dividends .

during the korean war , congress passed the insurance act of 1951 ( p.l .

82-23 ) and established the service - disabled veterans' insurance ( s - dvi ) program , which is administered entirely by the va. s - dvi was created to meet the insurance needs of certain veterans with service - connected disabilities , many of whom would not be eligible for private life insurance due to their service - connected disabilities .

s - dvi is available as a permanent plan or as a five - year term policy for disabled veterans , and policyholders can apply for up to $10,000 in coverage .

policies for this insurance are issued with the letters "rh" in front of the policy number .

rh insurance is considered nonparticipating , which means that no dividends are paid to policyholders .

s - dvi is still being issued to new policyholders , and it is currently the only issue of direct va life insurance for veterans that is open to new policyholders .

table 6 shows basic statistics related to s - dvi , including the current number of veterans covered and the average age of covered veterans .

in 1919 , the va began oversight of all servicemember life insurance programs .

the va issued united states government life insurance to world war i servicemembers ( 1919-1951 ) , national service life insurance for world war ii servicemembers ( 1940-1951 ) , veterans' special life insurance for korean war servicemembers ( 1951-1956 ) , and veterans' reopened life insurance for disabled world war ii and korean war servicemembers ( 1965-1966 ) .

all of these life insurance programs are currently closed to new issues .

the only three va life insurance programs that provide benefits to the families of servicemembers and veterans , and that are still allowing new issues of life insurance , are s - dvi , sgli , and vgli .

congress passed the insurance act of 1951 ( p.l .

82-23 ) and established the s - dvi program .

s - dvi was created to meet the insurance needs of certain veterans with service - connected disabilities , many of whom would not be eligible for private life insurance due to their service - connected disabilities .

following s - dvi , in 1965 , with the authorization of congress ( as part of establishing sgli ) , the va administrator purchased group life insurance and selected the prudential insurance company of america to cover its policies .

in 1974 , vgli became available to former servicemembers under p.l .

93-289 .

vgli provides for the conversion of sgli after separation from active duty .

in 1965 , the advisory council on servicemembers' group life insurance was established .

initially , the advisory council is responsible for reviewing the sgli programs and advising the va secretary on policy matters concerning sgli .

however , in 1974 , the advisory council became responsible for reviewing the vgli program as well .

the advisory council consists of the following six members according to current law: secretary of the treasury as chairperson , secretary of defense , secretary of commerce , secretary of health and human services , secretary of homeland security , and director of the office of management and budget .

the va regional office and insurance center ( varoic ) in philadelphia , pa , supervises the sgli and vgli programs .

however , the osgli in roseland , nj , a division of prudential , administers the day - to - day operations of sgli and vgli .

currently , s - dvi policies are issued for a maximum face value of $10,000 .

this amount has not been increased in almost six decades .

the $10,000 maximum coverage was part of the s - dvi program at its inception in 1951 .

by comparison , $10,000 in 1951 would be worth nearly $88,300 in 2012 after adjusting for inflation .

also , policyholders are denied the opportunity to buy additional coverage under the program .

as of june 24 , 2009 , less than 4% of veterans who were eligible to participate in the program were insured under s - dvi .

according to a recent congressionally mandated study , the lowest area of veteran satisfaction was "the maximum amount of s - dvi insurance coverage that veterans were authorized to purchase. .

some critics say the program falls far short of delivering the protection it was originally designed to provide .

for example , brian e. lawrence , assistant national legislative director of the disabled american veterans , said government life insurance programs have limited basic coverage to $10,000 since their inception under the war risk insurance act in 1917 .

then , they were an excellent benefit .

more than 93 percent of military members adopted the maximum coverage of $10,000 because they knew that in the event of their death , their family members would have the financial resources available to pay for the cost of a home and also to cover the cost of living for a considerable amount of time .

for example , sears , roebuck and co. sold prefabricated houses in the early 1900's .

its 1920 catalogue featured 80 models , ranging in price from $4,900 to $6,000 .

obviously , $10,000 went much further in 1917 than it does in 2003 .

according to the va , 49% of the veterans enrolled in the s - dvi program are considered totally disabled and are eligible for a premium waiver for their basic coverage .

of those who were eligible in 2009 , only 27% had a supplemental s - dvi policy .

this means that a relatively small percentage of all s - dvi policyholders have $30,000 in total coverage , while a large majority of participants have $10,000 in total coverage .

in comparison , the vgli program offers maximum coverage of $400,000 .

in addition , because coverage for s - dvi is not wholly funded by the premiums paid by policyholders , congress appropriates funds to subsidize the program .

these appropriations are necessary to support veterans who are waived from paying premiums because they are totally disabled from service - connected disabilities .

therefore , if the amount of coverage available to veterans were to increase , the appropriation allocated for the s - dvi program would also have to increase to avoid facing a shortfall .

