this section of the report discusses insurance premiums and deductibles for those with hdhps and perhaps hsas .

the individual's ( or family's ) decision whether or not to select an hdhp and whether or not to subsequently open an hsa are separate but related decisions .

the decisions are separate because selecting an hdhp does not require subsequently opening an hsa .

the decisions are related because some of the factors that influence selecting an hdhp might also influence opening an hsa .

for example , wealthy individuals might choose an hdhp because they can easily afford the relatively high out - of - pocket payments for health care associated with a high deductible .

these same individuals might go on to open an hsa because they will receive relatively high tax benefits because of their high marginal tax bracket .

on the other hand , lower - income individuals might choose an hdhp for its lower premiums but would not necessarily have the same tax incentive to open an hsa .

in addition , all individuals may not face the same insurance plan options .

those who purchase insurance on the individual market can purchase hdhps in all states .

individuals who receive employer - sponsored insurance ( esi ) , however , can only purchase hdhps if their employer offers a plan with this structure .

some individuals who elect to receive esi must purchase hdhps because their employer offers only this plan structure .

in any case , the price of the plan to the individual influences the individual's decision whether to enroll in an hdhp and take out an hsa .

in health insurance , the common recurring and consistent measure of price is the premium , or the monthly ( or annual ) amount the policyholder pays for coverage .

this section covers the degree to which hdhps , with or without hsas , have met four possible goals of consumer - directed care by summarizing and evaluating the current literature .

to preview the results of the literature review: hdhps are designed to change consumer behavior by providing incentives for consumers to be more concerned with the cost and quality of their health care .

although some consumers do seem to respond to the new incentives for lower cost , the small number of available empirical studies reach differing conclusions .

hsas could encourage individuals to save for their health expenses in retirement by increasing the balance in their hsas .

data are not available to describe which demographic groups , if any , are indeed saving for their retirement .

nevertheless , not all demographic groups are equally likely to open an hsa .

in particular , those who open an hsa generally have higher income than those who do not open an hsa .

because hdhps have lower premiums than other policies , previously uninsured individuals might purchase these plans .

there is little evidence , however , that the widespread adoption of hdhps would lower the aggregate uninsurance rate or affect the operations of insurance markets .

aggregate health expenditures could fall if most policy holders moved from standard ppo plans to hdhp / hsa plans .

enrollment in hdhps , as measured by covered lives , has been increasing since hsas were authorized in 2003 , although the growth rate of this increase is slowing ( see figure 2 ) .

it is estimated that between 51% and 58% of hdhp holders go on to open an hsa .

although some say that hdhps only benefit the young and healthy , it can be demonstrated that some individuals at many levels of the health spending distribution would face equal or lower costs with an hdhp / hsa than with a standard ppo ( see figure 1 ) .

it is generally too soon to evaluate whether hdhps and hsas have met some of their original objectives .

the evidence on whether consumers respond to the new incentives provided by the hdhps and hsas is mixed .

health providers may also change their behavior , but it is impossible to say whether the change would raise or lower the quality of care they provide .

according to recent research , not all individuals seem to be saving for their health expenses in retirement because only about half of those who are eligible to open an hsa do so .

in addition , some of these may value the tax benefits more than accumulating a fund for health care later in life .

there is some evidence that those individuals who do open hsas have higher income than those who do not .

there is almost no evidence that the widespread adoption of hdhps would lower the overall uninsurance rate or modify the operations of insurance markets .

a widespread change from standard ppo policies to hdhps / hsa policies could lower aggregate health expenditures .

nevertheless , the empirical evidence backing many of these results is weak , and much remains unknown about the effects of hdhps and hsas on uninsurance , utilization of health care , and aggregate health expenditures .

this report contains both a literature review and original data analysis .

this section first discusses the criteria used to select literature for the analysis .

the section then reviews the available data .

literature search to locate the relevant articles , crs first searched the academic search indexes medline , jstor , econlit , and the websites of congressional and policy organizations .

additional references were located from the citations within these articles .

finally , the table of contents of health affairs for each issue since 2004 was scanned for relevant articles .

the report describes many of the located articles .

research was generally excluded if it met one or more of the following criteria: was a theoretical exercise designed to build mathematical models of insurance market , was primarily about health retirement accounts ( hras ) , covered post - health insurance reform in massachusetts , or did not describe the methodology used .

data sources it has been difficult to calculate enrollment in hdhps and hsas because no comprehensive data source has information on hdhp enrollment , hsa enrollment , and the socioeconomic characteristics of the plan holder .

in fact , many of the available data sources are uniquely organized .

for example , each source can look at the characteristics , attitudes and / or behaviors of a different analytical "entity. .

the individual data sources therefore cannot be combined to provide a comprehensive data source .

much of the available hdhp data come from an industry source , the association for health insurance plans ( ahip ) .

enrollment measures total lives covered by an hdhp plan , and is reported by insurance firms .

the data cover the individual , small group , and large group markets .

although all individuals in these hdhps are eligible to open an hsa , ahip has only recently begun to provide limited information on hsas .

the latest data cover january 2010 .

two types of data on hsas are available from the irs .

first , the number of tax returns that took an hsa deduction and the average value of the deduction are publicly available .

the hsa deduction is available to all filers with an hsa ; whether or not the filer itemizes deductions is irrelevant .

second , the number of hsas and their aggregate market value are filed by banks ( and other account trustees ) .

both the individual and trustee data are available with a considerable time lag , and only data through tax year 2008 have been released .

another source of information on hsas is provided by a survey of employers conducted by the kaiser family foundation and the health research and educational trust ( kff - hret ) .

this is an annual survey of employer - sponsored health insurance ( esi ) benefits .

while this data source contains detailed information on those with esi , it has no information on those who purchase insurance in the non - group market , or those who are uninsured .

the sample size in 2009 was 2,054 employers , and the sample is weighted to represent a population of about 3.4 million employers .

turning to less general sources , data from the employee benefit research institute ( ebri ) can be used to answer a limited number of questions .

in addition , a number of surveys of individual firms provide information on hdhps and hsas belonging to employees at those firms .

these and other surveys are described as needed throughout the report .

a final data issue concerns the characterization of insurance plan structures .

first , in this report , comparisons by insurance plan structures give priority to hdhps .

in other words , if a consumer has an hdhp that uses a ppo network , he or she is considered in the hdhp group and not in the ppo group .

most of the academic and policy literature follows this convention , and the articles almost never provide enough information to calculate what the conclusions would be if hdhps were not given priority .

second , hdhps are compared to ppos ( instead of indemnity plans or other plan structures ) because more employers offering health insurance offer ppos than any other plan structure ; about 44% of employers offered a ppo in 2009 .

