since 1974 , congress has created multiple trade preference programs designed to foster economic growth and development in less developed countries .

these programs provide temporary , non - reciprocal , duty - free u.s. market access to select exports of eligible countries .

congress conducts regular oversight of these programs , often revising and extending them .

the112th congress passed extensions to three trade preference programs: ( 1 ) the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) , which expired on december 31 , 2010 , and was renewed retroactively from that date to july 31 , 2013 ( p.l .

112-40 ) ; ( 2 ) the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) for colombia and ecuador until july 31 , 2013 ( p.l .

112-42 ) ; and ( 3 ) a third - country fabric provision in the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) until september 30 , 2015 ( p.l .

112-163 ) .

since the gsp and atpa programs were only extended until the end of july 2013 , congress may consider further renewal of these programs in the first session of the 113th congress , along with possible trade preference reform options .

three bills in the 112th congress , s. 105 , s. 1244 , and h.r .

2387 , propose a new trade preference program that would provide duty - free and reduced tariff treatment for certain apparel from the philippines .

other bills in the 112 th congress proposing preference programs include s. 1443 , which would create a new trade preference program for selected asian and south pacific countries .

the multilateral trading system that has evolved since the end of world war ii is centered on the guiding tenet of non - discrimination .

it is embodied in the most favored nation ( mfn ) principle of the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) and its successor , the world trade organization ( wto ) .

the economic rationale for this foundational idea rests on avoiding the type of protectionist policies prominent during the inter - war period that exacerbated the great depression .

as fundamental as mfn treatment is to the conduct of modern trade , the gatt / wto also allows for certain exceptions , one being special and differential treatment ( sdt ) for developing countries .

special trade treatment permits , among other policies , preferential programs that reduce tariffs on certain goods from eligible developing countries .

lower tariffs support an export development strategy that is based on increasing trade and diversifying it away from traditional commodity exports into more value - added goods in industry and manufacturing .

because commodity prices have declined over the long run and experienced periods of extreme volatility over shorter periods of time , countries dependent on them often find their trade position weakened over time .

exports are also key to development of industry in countries with small domestic markets .

by diversifying trade to other sectors and industries it is hoped that developing economies will attract more investment , create more jobs , become more stable , and grow faster .

many developed countries have unilateral trade preference programs ; congress has legislatively established five in the united states .

the first was the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) , established in the trade act of 1974 .

it applies to developing countries as a whole .

in addition , there are four regional programs that followed , created in the andean trade preference act ( apta ) , the caribbean basin economic recovery act ( cbera ) ; the caribbean basin trade partnership act ( cbtpa ) , the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) , and the haitian opportunity through partnership encouragement ( hope ) act ( discussed in detail below ) .

the regional programs were built on the gsp concept , but are more targeted and tend to offer more generous and flexible access to the u.s. market .

trade preferences provide duty - free u.s. market access to select exports of eligible developing countries .

all u.s. preference programs are unilateral , meaning that they do not require reciprocal trade concessions .

congress conducts oversight of these programs , revising and extending them periodically .

in order to qualify to receive benefits , beneficiary developing countries must meet eligibility criteria , which vary by program .

some examples include ensuring that prospective countries make strides toward enhancing the rule of law , adopting internationally recognized worker rights , supporting counternarcotics policies , and providing open markets for u.s. exports .

preference programs , as such , are regarded by many as integral elements of u.s. trade , development , and foreign policy .

supporters of trade preferences include beneficiary developing country governments who have established industries and jobs partially as a result of preference programs , u.s. importers , including retailers and u.s. consuming industries , and u.s. producers working in joint production with assembly plants in developing countries .

these groups tend to favor longer - term renewal of preferences to ensure more predictability , which is one important factor in investment and sourcing decisions .

stakeholders opposed to preference programs include u.s. manufacturers of competing import - sensitive products and some labor groups representing workers negatively affected by them , although the strict labor requirements of preference programs can attract support from labor groups .

generally , preference programs receive broad support in congress , but some lawmakers have reservations about their design and operation .

the gatt and wto agreements are based on the fundamental principle that unconditional most - favored - nation ( non - discriminatory ) status must be offered to the products of other members with respect to tariffs and other trade - related measures .

programs offering preferential treatment , such as the gsp , are inconsistent with this principle .

because these programs were designed to help less developed countries through trade expansion , parties to the gatt provided a legal basis for one - way tariff preferences in the 1979 "enabling clause," which stated that "contracting parties may accord differential and more favorable treatment to developing countries , without according such treatment to other contracting parties" under certain conditions .

the enabling clause was formally incorporated into the gatt 1994 when the uruguay round agreements — the same agreements that established the wto — entered into force on january 1 , 1995 .

other developed countries offer special trade preferences for developing countries including canada , the european union , japan , and australia .

some developing nations , such as india and brazil , also provide tariff concessions to least developed countries ( ldcs ) .

generally , each preference - granting country extends to eligible developing countries ( as determined by each benefactor ) an exemption from duties ( in the form of duty - free access or reduced tariffs ) on designated "non - sensitive" manufactured products and agricultural goods .

product coverage and the type of preferential treatment offered vary widely .

although most preference schemes ( including all u.s. programs ) admit eligible products duty - free , some countries provide tariff reductions , rather than complete exemption , from duties .

the australian system , for example , is based on a five percentage point margin of preference , meaning that when the australian general tariff ( gt ) is 5% or higher on a given product , the amount of the tariff is reduced by 5 percentage points for products of beneficiary countries .

when the gt rate is 5% or less , the preferential rate is zero .

other developed countries also offer regional preferences , or preferences that "reward" developing countries that comply with additional eligibility criteria such as anti - corruption measures , environmental sustainability goals , or core worker rights provisions .

for example , the european union offers additional duty - free access to its market to ldc beneficiaries under the "everything but arms" preference , as well as an incentive - based program ( known as gsp+ ) that provides enhanced benefits for "vulnerable countries" ( in terms of size or limited diversification in its exports ) .

gsp+ beneficiaries must have ratified and effectively implemented 27 specified international conventions in the fields of human rights , core labor standards , sustainable development , and good governance .

also in the wto , as a part of the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations , developed country members and "developing country members declaring themselves in a position to do so" agreed to provide "duty - free and quota - free" ( dfqf ) market access for all products originating from all least - developed countries "in a manner that ensures stability , security , and predictability. .

members "facing difficulties" would be permitted to exempt 3% of all tariff lines , provided that steps are taken to build the list of covered products until total dfqf is reached .

since the dda is a "single undertaking" ( which means that nothing is finally agreed until everything is agreed ) , the dfqf agreement reached in 2005 , will not be implemented until the negotiating round is concluded .

like all public policies , the costs and benefits do not fall uniformly to all affected parties .

this is reflected in various stakeholder responses to trade preferences .

supporters include beneficiary developing country governments , producers , workers , and exporters .

many of these countries receive foreign investment based on u.s. trade preferences , resulting in increased employment in certain industries .

for these countries , jobs and related income created by u.s. trade preference programs have become an important element for economic growth and development .

many beneficiary stakeholders express concern that if preferences are not renewed , other low - cost countries such as china would benefit at their expense .

u.s. manufacturers who import intermediate products through the various trade preference programs in downstream products also support trade preferences .

some u.s. producers , especially in the u.s. textile and apparel industries , have made use of preferences to remain competitive through cooperative relationships with certain beneficiaries , especially the caribbean and latin american countries .

businesses that benefit from preference programs favor longer - term renewal of trade preferences because they provide predictability when signing import contracts and making investment decisions .

trade preferences reflect both economic development and foreign policy goals .

in addition to the economic benefits , eligibility criteria create incentives for beneficiary countries to support u.s. objectives such as adopting and enforcing internationally recognized worker rights , reducing barriers to investment , and enforcing intellectual property rights .

in addition , u.s. regional preferences created with particular goals in mind — such as eradication of drug production in the case of the andean trade preference program — create incentives to fulfill additional u.s. policy goals .

organized labor , for example , tends to support trade preferences because worker rights provisions have led to improvements in labor rights in some regions .

labor officials have cited the gsp process , specifically annual country practice reviews , as helpful in addressing enforcement and rule - of - law issues relating to compliance .

labor support , however , is also tempered by the fact that certain workers will be negatively affected by increased imports of products with which they compete .

stakeholders opposed to preferences programs mostly include u.s. manufacturers of competing import - sensitive products .

in particular , some in the u.s. textile and apparel industry are opposed to unfettered extension of textile and apparel preferences , especially when u.s. workers are potentially adversely affected .

all trade preference programs have in common the goal to promote export - driven growth and development in less developed countries .

the programs themselves , however , raise multiple economic and political issues .

preference program features are a key factor in determining their effectiveness .

among key issues is the extent to which preferences: ( 1 ) target the developing country's productive capacity ; ( 2 ) have sufficiently flexible and manageable rules of origin ; ( 3 ) are not overly restricted by domestic interests ; and ( 4 ) are extended for a sufficiently long period of time to attract foreign investment .

because of eligibility requirements that countries must accept from the preference giver , and the fact that they can also be unilaterally cut off , there are also opportunity costs to preferences .

the debate in congress over trade preferences encompasses multiple viewpoints .

leaving the programs largely as they are is one .

others see the need for revision to address specific problems .

these include: ( 1 ) the role that preferences may play as a disincentive for beneficiary countries , particularly large developing countries , to embrace fully the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations ; ( 2 ) problems of compliance with eligibility criteria ; ( 3 ) the need to press for reciprocal trade treatments as poor countries reach a certain level of development ; and ( 4 ) the need to focus them more on the least developed countries .

policy discussions tend to revolve around five basic program parameters: ( 1 ) renewal period , ( 2 ) harmonization , ( 3 ) country coverage , ( 4 ) product coverage , and ( 5 ) eligibility criteria .

the 111 th congress held hearings on trade preference programs in both the house and senate , where some members expressed interest in amending and harmonizing some of the preferences provisions .

as specialized programs intended to serve as a form of assistance to developing countries , program design is critical in determining whether those countries most in need are being well served .

because these are complex programs with multiple design features , evaluating them is a challenging and complicated exercise .

since the gsp and atpa programs were given short term extensions until the end of july 2013 , the 113 th congress may consider further renewal of these programs , along with possible trade preference reform options .

appendix a .

eligible countries and products imported by preference progra .

