social security provides dependent benefits and survivors benefits , sometimes collectively referred to as auxiliary benefits , to the spouses , former spouses , widow ( er ) s , children , and parents of retired , disabled , or deceased workers .

auxiliary benefits are based on the work record of the household's primary earner .

social security spousal benefits ( i.e. , benefits for a wife or husband of the primary earner ) are payable to the spouse or divorced spouse of a retired or disabled worker .

social security survivors benefits are payable to the survivors of a deceased worker as a widow ( er ) , as a child , as a mother or father of the deceased worker's child ( ren ) , or as a dependent parent of the deceased worker .

although social security is often viewed as a program that primarily provides benefits to retired or disabled workers , 33% of new benefit awards in 2017 were made to the dependents and survivors of retired , disabled , and deceased workers .

spousal and survivors benefits play an important role in ensuring women's retirement security .

however , women continue to be vulnerable to poverty in old age , due to demographic and economic reasons .

this report presents the current - law structure of auxiliary benefits for spouses , divorced spouses , and surviving spouses .

it makes note of adequacy and equity concerns of current - law spousal and widow ( er ) 's benefits , particularly with respect to female beneficiaries , and discusses the role of demographics , the labor market , and current - law provisions on adequacy and equity .

the report concludes with a discussion of proposed changes to spousal and widow ( er ) benefits to address these concerns .

the original social security act of 1935 ( p.l .

74-271 ) established a system of old - age insurance to provide benefits to individuals aged 65 or older who had "earned" retirement benefits through work in jobs covered by the system .

before the old - age insurance program was in full operation , the social security amendments of 1939 ( p.l .

76-379 ) extended monthly benefits to workers' dependents and survivors .

the program now provided old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) .

the 1939 amendments established benefits for the following dependents and survivors: ( 1 ) a wife aged 65 or older ; ( 2 ) a child under the age of 18 ; ( 3 ) a widowed mother of any age caring for an eligible child ; ( 4 ) a widow aged 65 or older ; and ( 5 ) a surviving dependent parent aged 65 or older .

in its report to the social security board ( the predecessor to the social security administration ) and the senate committee on finance , the 1938 social security advisory council justified creating spousal benefits on the grounds of the adequacy of household benefits: the inadequacy of the benefits payable during the early years of the old - age insurance program is more marked where the benefits must support not only the annuitant himself but also his wife .

in 1930 , 63.8 per cent of men aged 65 and over were married .

payment of supplementary allowances to annuitants who have wives over 65 will increase the average benefit in such a manner as to meet the greatest social need with the minimum increase in cost .

the council believes that an additional 50 percent of the basic annuity would constitute a reasonable provision for the support of the annuitant's wife .

the social security board concurred in its own report , which it wrote based on the council's report .

the board also found that benefit adequacy was the primary justification for spousal benefits: the board suggests that a supplementary benefit be paid for the aged dependent wife of the retired worker which would be related to his old - age benefit .

such a plan would take account of greater presumptive need of the married couple without requiring investigation of individual need .

since 1939 , auxiliary benefits have been modified by congress many times , including the expansion of benefits to husbands , widowers , and divorced spouses .

the legislative history of auxiliary benefits is outlined in detail in appendix a .

auxiliary benefits for a spouse , survivor , or other dependent are based on the benefit amount received by a primary earner ( an insured worker ) .

the primary earner may receive a social security retirement or disability benefit .

social security retirement benefits are based on the average of a worker's highest 35 years of earnings ( less up to 5 years for years of disability ) from covered employment .

a worker's basic benefit amount ( primary insurance amount or pia ) is computed by applying the social security benefit formula to the worker's career - average , wage - indexed monthly earnings ( average indexed monthly earnings or aime ) .

the benefit formula replaces a higher percentage of the preretirement earnings of workers with low career - average earnings than for workers with high career - average earnings .

the primary earner's initial monthly benefit is equal to his or her pia if benefits are claimed at full retirement age ( fra , which ranges from age 65 to age 67 , depending on year of birth ) .

a worker's initial monthly benefit will be less than his or her pia if the worker begins receiving benefits before fra , and it will be greater than his or her pia if the worker begins receiving benefits after fra .

the purpose of the actuarial adjustment to benefits claimed before or after fra is to ensure that the worker receives roughly the same total lifetime benefits regardless of when he or she claims benefits ( assuming he or she lives to average life expectancy ) .

auxiliary benefits are paid to the spouse , former spouse , survivor , child , or parent of the primary earner .

auxiliary benefits are determined as a percentage of the primary earner's pia , subject to a maximum family benefit amount .

for example , the spouse of a retired or disabled worker may receive up to 50% of the worker's pia , and the widow ( er ) of a deceased worker may receive up to 100% of the worker's pia .

as with benefits paid to the primary earner , auxiliary benefits are subject to adjustments based on age at entitlement and other factors .

a basic description of auxiliary benefits is provided in the following sections , with more detailed information provided in appendix b .

spousal and survivors benefits play an important role in ensuring women's retirement security .

in december 2017 , about 25.4 million elderly ( aged 65 and older ) women received social security benefits , including 13.3 million women who received only retired - worker benefits , 2.1 million women who were entitled solely as the spouse of a retired worker , 3.2 million women who were entitled solely as the survivor of a deceased worker , and 6.7 million women who were dually entitled to a retired - worker benefit and a spousal or survivor benefit .

in 2017 , social security provided 50% or more of family income for more than 53% of elderly women in beneficiary families and 90% or more of family income for about 28% of elderly women in beneficiary families .

women , however , continue to be vulnerable to poverty in old age for several reasons .

these reasons can generally be split into demographic reasons and economic reasons .

in addition , the design of auxiliary benefits can lead to equity concerns .

with respect to demographic and economic reasons that lead to adequacy concerns , women on average live longer than men , and thus more women are likely to be widowed than are men .

women reaching the age of 65 in 2017 are likely to live another 20.7 years , on average , compared with another 18.2 years for men .

about 5% of women aged 50-59 , about 16% of women aged 60-75 , and about 56% of women aged 75 and older are currently widowed .

by comparison , about 2% of men aged 50-59 , about 5% of men aged 60-75 , and about 21% of men aged 75 and older are widowed .

as a consequence , women may spend more time in retirement and are more vulnerable to inflation and the risk of outliving other assets .

the real value of private pension benefits declines with age , as private pensions are generally not adjusted for inflation , and some private pensions cease with the death of the retired worker .

women are more likely to take employment breaks to care for children or parents , and thus have a lower labor force participation rate than men .

during 2016 , 88.5% of men and 74.3% of women aged 25-54 participated in the labor force .

the rate for women with children under three years old was lower , at 63% .

breaks in employment result in fewer years of contributions to social security and employer - sponsored pension plans and thus lower retirement benefits .

the median earnings of women who are full - time wage and salary workers are 82% of their male counterparts .

because social security and private pension benefits are linked to earnings , this "earnings gap" can lead to lower benefit amounts for women than for men .

social security benefits are designed in a way that can result in inequities between households with similar earning profiles .

spousal and survivors benefits were added to the social security system in 1939 .

at that time , the majority of households consisted of a single earner — generally the husband — and a wife who was not in the paid workforce but instead stayed home to care for children .

however , in recent decades , women have increasingly assumed roles as wage earners or as heads of families .

a beneficiary who qualifies for both a retired - worker benefit and a spousal benefit does not receive both benefits in full .

instead , the spousal benefit is reduced by the amount of the retired - worker benefit ; this effectively means the beneficiary receives the higher of the two benefit amounts .

because of this , a two - earner household receives lower combined social security benefits than a single - earner household with identical total social security - covered earnings , despite paying more in social security taxes .

moreover , after the death of one spouse , the disparity in benefits may increase: in a one - earner couple , the surviving spouse receives two - thirds of what the couple received on a combined basis , whereas in some two - earner couples with roughly equal earnings , the surviving spouse receives roughly one - half of what the couple received on a combined basis .

a number of proposals have been put forward to modify the current structure of social security spousal and survivors benefits .

these proposals have different potential consequences for benefit levels of current , divorced , and surviving spouses ; for the redistribution of benefits among couples from different socioeconomic levels ; for the eligibility of means - tested programs such as supplemental security income ; and for work incentives .

although more women have qualified for social security benefits based on their own earning records in recent decades , social security auxiliary benefits continue to play a crucial role in improving income security for older women , as well as for young surviving spouses and children of deceased workers .

some policymakers and researchers , however , have expressed concerns about the current structure of social security auxiliary benefits on both equity and adequacy grounds .

for example , the current structure can lead to situations in which a one - earner couple receives higher retirement and survivors benefits than a two - earner couple with identical total household earnings .

in addition , auxiliary benefits do not reach certain groups , such as persons who divorced before 10 years of marriage or mothers who never married .

some proposals have been suggested to increase social security benefits to certain , but not all , vulnerable groups .

for example , an enhanced widow ( er ) 's benefit would provide income support to many elderly women and men , but it would not help those who divorced before 10 years of marriage or who never married .

similarly , a caregiver credit for workers who stay at home to care for young children would increase benefits for never - married and divorced women , but it would not help those without children , whether married or unmarried .

the consideration of potential changes to social security spousal and survivors benefits involves balancing improvements in benefit equity , for example , between one - earner and two - earner couples , with improvements in benefit adequacy for persons who experience relatively higher poverty rates , such as never - married men and women .

in addition , the policy discussion about auxiliary benefits may involve balancing benefit increases for spouses and survivors , divorced spouses , or never - married persons with other potential program changes to offset the higher program costs in light of the social security system's projected long - range financial outlook .

appendix a .

major changes in social security auxiliary benefits appendix b .

summary of possible adjustments to social security spousal and widow ( er ) 's benefits under current law social security benefits for spouses and widow ( er ) s are based on a percentage of the worker's primary insurance amount ( pia ) , with various adjustments for age at entitlement and other factors .

the following section describes some of the adjustments that apply to benefits for spouses and widow ( er ) s. age - related benefit adjustment for spouses spousal benefits ( including those for divorced spouses ) are reduced when the spouse claims benefits before full retirement age ( fra ) to take into account the longer expected period of benefit receipt ( assuming the individual lives to average life expectancy ) .

a spouse who claims benefits at the age of 62 ( the earliest eligibility age for retirement benefits ) may receive a benefit that is as little as 32.5% of the worker's pia .

age - related benefit adjustments for widow ( er ) s the earliest age a widow ( er ) can claim benefits is age 60 .

if a widow or widower ( including divorced and disabled widow ( er ) s ) claims survivors benefits before fra , his or her monthly benefit is reduced by a maximum of 28.5% to take into account the longer expected period of benefit receipt ( assuming he or she lives to average life expectancy ) .

in addition , survivors benefits may be affected by the deceased worker's decision to claim benefits before fra .

if the deceased worker claimed benefits before fra ( and therefore was receiving a reduced benefit ) and the widow ( er ) claims survivors benefits at fra , the widow ( er ) 's benefit is reduced under the widow ( er ) 's limit provision .

under the widow ( er ) 's limit provision , which is intended to prevent the widow ( er ) 's benefit from exceeding the deceased worker's retirement benefit , the widow ( er ) 's benefit is limited to ( 1 ) the benefit the worker would be receiving if he or she were still alive , or ( 2 ) 82.5% of the worker's pia , whichever is higher .

benefit adjustments based on other factors benefits for spouses and widow ( er ) s may be subject to other reductions , in addition to those based on entitlement before fra .

for example , under the dual entitlement rule , a social security spousal or widow ( er ) 's benefit is reduced or fully offset if the person also receives a social security retired - worker or disabled - worker benefit ( see " dually entitled beneficiaries " above ) .

similarly , under the g overnment p ension o ffset ( gpo ) , a social security spousal or widow ( er ) 's benefit is reduced or fully offset if the person also receives a pension based on his or her own employment in certain federal , state , or local government positions that are not covered by social security .

in some cases , a spousal or widow ( er ) 's benefit may be reduced to bring the total amount of benefits payable to family members based on the worker's record within the maximum family benefit amount .

under the social security retirement earnings test ( ret ) , auxiliary benefits may be reduced if the auxiliary beneficiary is below the fra and has earnings above specified dollar thresholds .

also , under the ret , benefits paid to spouses may be reduced if the benefits are based on the record of a worker beneficiary who is affected by the ret ( excluding benefits paid to divorced spouses who have been divorced for at least two years ) .

table b - 1 shows the percentage of a worker's pia on which various categories of spousal and widow ( er ) 's benefits are based .

it also shows the age at which benefits are first payable on a reduced basis ( the eligibility age ) and the maximum reduction to benefits claimed before fra relative to the worker's pia .

