medicare is a federal insurance program that pays for covered health care services of qualified beneficiaries .

it was established in 1965 under title xviii of the social security act as a federal entitlement program to provide health insurance to individuals 65 and older , and has been expanded over the years to include permanently disabled individuals under 65 .

generally , individuals are eligible for premium - free part a of medicare if they or their spouse paid medicare payroll taxes for at least 40 quarters , are at least 65 years old , and are a citizen or permanent resident of the united states .

individuals under 65 may also qualify for coverage if they have a permanent disability , have end - stage renal disease ( permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or transplant ) , or have amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( lou gehrig's disease ) .

medicare consists of four parts — a through d. part a covers hospital services , skilled nursing facility services , home health visits , and hospice services .

part b covers a broad range of medical services , including physician services , laboratory services , durable medical equipment , and outpatient hospital services .

enrollment in part b is optional , however most beneficiaries with part a also enroll in part b .

part c , also known as medicare advantage , provides private plan options , such as managed care , for beneficiaries who are enrolled in both parts a and b .

part d provides optional outpatient prescription drug coverage through private plans .

medicare serves approximately one in six americans and virtually all of the population aged 65 and over .

in 2013 , the program covered 52.3 million persons ( 43.5 million aged and 8.8 million disabled ) at a total cost of $583 billion , accounting for about 20% of national health spending and 3.5% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

medicare is an entitlement program , which means that it is required to pay for covered services provided to enrollees so long as specific criteria are met .

since 1965 , the medicare program has undergone considerable change .

for example , the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 as amended ) , made numerous changes to the medicare program that modify provider reimbursements , provide incentives to increase the quality and efficiency of care , and enhance certain medicare benefits .

for example , under the legislation , annual updates of the prices paid by medicare for almost all non - physician categories of health services are being reduced by the growth in economy - wide productivity ( productivity adjustments ) .

the aca also established a new independent payment advisory board ( ipab ) , which is required to make recommendations to reduce medicare spending in years in which medicare costs are projected to exceed a target growth rate .

the legislation did not , however , make changes to the physician sustainable growth rate ( sgr ) payment system ; unless congress takes action before april 1 , 2015 , reductions in physician payment rates of about 21% will be required .

additionally , the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) provided for increases in the debt limit and established procedures designed to reduce the federal budget deficit , including the creation of a joint select committee on deficit reduction .

the failure of the joint committee to propose deficit reduction legislation by its mandated deadline triggered automatic spending reductions ( "sequestration" of mandatory spending and reductions in discretionary spending ) in fiscal years 2013 through 2021 .

the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra , p.l .

112-240 ) delayed the automatic reductions by two months , while the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( bba , p.l .

113-67 ) extended sequestration for mandatory spending for an additional two years — through fy2023 .

on february 15 , 2014 , the president signed into law an amended version of s. 25 ( p.l .

113-82 ) , which , among other things , included a provision to extend bca's sequester of mandatory spending through fy2024 .

section 256 ( d ) of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca , p.l .

99-177 ) contains special rules for the medicare program in the event of a sequestration .

among other things , it specifies that for medicare , sequestration is to begin the month after the sequestration order has been issued .

therefore , as the initial sequestration order was issued march 1 , 2013 , medicare sequestration began april 1 , 2013 , and will continue through march 31 , 2025 .

under sequestration , medicare's benefit structure generally remains unchanged ; however , benefit related payments are subject to 2% reductions .

in other words , most medicare payments to health care providers , as well as to ma and part d plans , are being reduced by 2% .

certain medicare payments are exempt from sequestration and therefore not reduced .

some non - benefit related medicare expenses , such as administrative and operational spending , are subject to higher reductions , 7.3% in 2014 .

this report provides an overview of how the medicare program is financed , including a description of the medicare trust funds and a summary of key findings and estimates from the 2014 report of the medicare board of trustees regarding 2013 program operations and future financial soundness .

medicare's financial operations are accounted for through two trust funds maintained by the department of the treasury — the hospital insurance ( hi ) trust fund for part a and the supplementary medical insurance ( smi ) trust fund for parts b and d. for beneficiaries enrolled in medicare advantage ( part c ) , payments are made on their behalf in appropriate portions from the hi and smi trust funds .

hi is primarily funded by payroll taxes , while smi is primarily funded through general revenue transfers and premiums ( see figure 1 ) .

the hi and smi trust funds are overseen by a board of trustees that provides annual reports to congress .

in calendar year ( cy ) 2013 , medicare provided about 52.3 million beneficiaries with benefits at a total cost of about $583 billion , or an average of $11,910 per enrollee .

 ( see appendix a , appendix b , and appendix c for historical and projected enrollment , total medicare income and expenditures , and per capita expenditures. ) .

because hi and smi have different funding mechanisms , a description of each fund's 2013 operations is presented separately below .

over the next 10 years , total medicare expenditures are projected to increase at an average annual rate of 6.8% , with total spending growing from $582.9 billion in 2013 to close to $1.1 trillion in 2023 ( see figure 2 and appendix b ) .

the average growth rate reflects the expected growth in the number of individuals eligible for medicare as well as expected increases in utilization and complexity of services per beneficiary and in the prices of those services .

the growth rate also factors in aca changes that affect cost growth rates , such as the productivity adjustments to the annual payment updates to certain providers and changes in payments to medicare advantage plans .

additionally , unlike in prior years' projections , these growth rates assume that the scheduled physician payment reductions of about 21% in april 2015 will not go into effect .

medicare's fiscal health is often gauged by the projected solvency of the hi trust fund .

as noted in the section " medicare trust funds ," in years in which hi expenditures exceed income , the program still has authority to continue to make payments as long as the trust fund has a balance .

however , when the trust fund balance reaches $0 , it is deemed insolvent and this part of the program would no longer have the authority to cover expenditures that exceed hi trust fund income .

the 2014 trustees report estimates that the hi trust fund will become insolvent in 2030 , four years later than projected in last year's report ( see figure 4 ) .

the improved projections are primarily due to lower than expected expenditures in 2013 , the base year used to project future expenditures , and reductions in assumptions of utilization of part a services .

in the past decade , beginning in 2004 , hi expenditures began exceeding tax income ( from payroll taxes and from the taxation of social security benefits ) .

expenditures began to exceed total income ( tax income plus all other sources of revenue ) in 2008 .

 ( refer to figure 3 for illustration of expenditure and income trends through 2023. ) .

at that time , hi assets ( the balance of the hi trust fund at the beginning of the year ) were used to meet the portion of expenditures that exceeded income ( the hi deficit ) .

expenditures have exceeded income every year since then , and are expected to continue doing so through 2014 .

although the trust fund is projected to run a small surplus in years 2015 through 2022 , after that time expenditures are expected to again exceed income , with trust fund assets making up the difference until the asset balance is depleted in 2030 .

at that time , the trust fund is projected to only have sufficient income to cover 85% of part a expenditures .

unless action is taken prior to that date to increase hi revenue and / or decrease expenditures , congress would need to appropriate additional funding ( eg , through general revenue transfers ) to make up for these deficits and to allow for full and on time payments to providers of part a services .

because the impact of the aca productivity adjustments on projected hi expenditures is relatively modest in the short term , the expected trust fund exhaustion date provided in the illustrative alternative , 2029 , is only a year earlier than that under the projected baseline scenario .

for projections beyond 2023 , the medicare trustees do not provide actual dollar figures due to the difficulty of making meaningful comparisons of dollar values for different time periods over a long timeframe .

instead , the long - term financial soundness of the medicare program is generally determined using one or more of the following measures: a comparison of the program's income and its cost as a percentage of taxable payroll ( how much would need to be added to the payroll tax to keep hi solvent — this measure is only applicable to the hi trust fund ) ; a determination of the present value of the program's unfunded liabilities over a particular period ( the amount in today's dollars that would be needed to be in the trust fund for the program to remain financially sound for a specified period ) ; and / or a comparison of expected benefit costs with gdp , the most frequently used measure of the total output of the u.s. economy ( the amount spent on medicare compared to the size of the economy in general ) .

the trustees caution that while these estimates can provide indications as to whether the trust funds are in adequate financial condition , financial outcomes are inherently uncertain , especially over a very long time period .

as noted , hi and smi are financed very differently .

hi is funded by current workers through a payroll tax , while smi is funded by premiums from current beneficiaries and federal general revenues .

because of this financing , the smi trust fund's income is projected to equal expenditures for all future years .

however , there is concern that over time the economy will be unable to support the increasing reliance on general revenues which in large measure comes from taxes paid by the under - 65 population .

in response , the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma , p.l .

108-173 ) required the trustees report to include an expanded analysis of medicare expenditures and revenues .

specifically , a determination must be made as to whether general revenue financing will exceed 45% of total medicare outlays within the next seven years ( on a fiscal year basis ) .

the law specifies that if an excess general revenue funding determination is made for two successive years , a "medicare funding warning" is triggered , and the president is to submit a legislative proposal to respond to the warning .

the congress is required to consider the proposals on an expedited basis ; however , passage of legislation within a specific time frame is not required .

to date , no legislation has been enacted to specifically respond to these funding warnings .

in each report issued from 2006 through 2013 , the medicare trustees made a determination of excess general revenue funding .

however , in their 2014 report , the trustees project that general revenues will not exceed 45% of total medicare outlays within the next 7 fiscal years ( fy2014-fy2020 ) , and therefore did not issue a funding warning .

the trustees project that from fy2014 through about fy2022 , the expected higher tax income and lower outlays due to aca provisions and other legislation will result in general revenue funding remaining below the 45% threshold .

however , the trustees estimate that beginning in fy2024 , the ratio of dedicated funding and outlays will exceed 45% , grow to 55% by 2043 , and stay at that level through 2088 .

proponents of the 45% threshold measurement believe that it can serve as an effective early warning system and that it forces fiscal responsibility .

opponents of the measure suggest that it doesn't adequately recognize a shift towards the provision of more services on an outpatient basis or the impact of the part d program on general revenue increases , and that other measures , such as medicare spending as a percentage of gdp , medicare spending as a portion of total federal spending , or the number of workers subject to payroll taxes per medicare beneficiary , are better ways to measure the health of the medicare program .

by law , the annual medicare trustees reports focus on the financial status of the medicare hi and smi trust funds .

trust fund accounting methods are used to determine whether dedicated sources of medicare revenue , together with any asset balances , are sufficient to allow the payment of expected expenditures on a timely basis .

in contrast , when examining medicare finances under unified budget accounting methods , the total flow of money into and out of the u.s. treasury is typically examined regardless of the source of revenue .

the expected shortfall in payroll taxes needed to fully cover future hi expenses and the rapid growth of smi , which relies primarily on general revenues for financing , have made it increasingly important to look at medicare expenditures from the perspective of the federal budget as a whole .

to illustrate , over the next 75 years , hi revenues are projected to fall short of expenditures by $3.8 trillion in present value terms .

this is the additional amount that is expected to be needed in order to pay hi benefits at the level expected under current law over the next 75 years .

note that the federal liability from a budget perspective includes the beginning accumulated assets in the hi trust fund , as they represent federal payment obligations .

in other words , from the budget perspective , the total liability includes both the present value of the hi deficit of $3.6 trillion ( see table 2 ) plus the approximately $0.2 trillion in trust fund assets as of january 1 , 2014 .

additionally , general revenue transfers in present value terms of $24.7 trillion are expected to be needed to cover smi expenditures ( parts b and d combined ) over the next 75 years .

the medicare trustees estimate that , assuming personal and corporate income taxes in the future maintain their historical average level relative to the national economy , the portion of income taxes that will be needed to fund the general revenue portion of smi will grow from 13.8% in 2014 to 30.6% in 2080 ( see table 4 ) .

as shown in this report , a wide array of measures can be used to describe the short - and long - term financial status of the medicare program .

while trust fund solvency issues are important , they only present part of the picture .

when viewed from the perspective of the entire federal budget and the economy , medicare spending obligations , even under the more optimistic scenario presented in the 2014 medicare trustees report , are expected to consume an increasing portion of federal budgetary resources over time .

budget experts have expressed concern about the long - run implications of medicare expenditures on federal deficits ; for example , in its long - term budget forecast , cbo noted: the long - term budget outlook is much less positive , however .

the combination of three factors — the aging of the population , growth in per capita spending on health care , and an expansion of federal subsidies for health insurance — is expected to significantly boost the government's spending for social security and major health care programs .

barring changes to current law , that additional spending would contribute to larger budget deficits toward the end of the 10-year period that runs from 2015 to 2024 , causing federal debt , which is already quite large relative to the size of the economy , to swell even more .

the medicare trustees caution that it is difficult to forecast health and economic indicators over an extended period of time .

for example , forecasts are based on the assumption that health spending will outpace gdp growth in the future because it has consistently done so in the past .

it is possible that in the future , advances in medical technology , changes in consumer preferences , shifts in the health status of the population , or changes in the way health care services are delivered could result in very different financial outcomes from those estimated in the trustees report .

further , as evidenced by the issuance of an illustrative alternative to the 2014 trustees report , if changes to current health care policies are enacted ( most notably these affecting provider productivity adjustments ) , future medicare costs could be significantly different from current projections .

there are no simple solutions to address the problems raised by the rapid growth in health care costs , the economic conditions , and the aging of the population .

additionally , as an entitlement program , medicare must pay for all medically necessary covered benefits for enrollees ; except for constraints placed on the program by the hi financing mechanism , there are no limits on overall medicare spending .

as such , policy options to restrain the growth of medicare spending will continue to attract considerable interest .

proposals to reduce medicare spending generally fall into one of two categories: ( 1 ) those that would reduce the federal share of medicare spending ( for example , by increasing beneficiary premiums and / or cost - sharing , changing medicare eligibility criteria such as age , reducing the range of covered benefits , reducing provider payment amounts , establishing defined federal contributions , or setting federal spending limits ) ; and ( 2 ) those that would reduce u.s. health care spending regardless of who is paying ( eg , decreasing medical errors , reducing unneeded , duplicative and / or ineffective care , and reducing fraud and abuse ) .

on the revenue side , options to increase program income may include modifying dedicated medicare payroll taxes or general income taxes , and / or imposing new fees or dedicated taxes .

some of the above changes could be made while still retaining medicare's current structure , while others could only be made in the context of major program restructuring .

many of the proposals could be combined as part of an overall reform package .

the challenge to policy makers will be to slow the growth in medicare spending over the long term , to establish fair levels of contributions from beneficiaries and taxpayers , and to ensure continued beneficiary access to needed health care services .

the medicare trustees suggest that prompt action is needed to address both the short - and the long - range financial challenges of the medicare program ; the sooner that solutions can be enacted , the more flexible these solutions can be , and the more gradually they may be phased in .

appendix a. medicare enrollment appendix b .

total medicare income and expenditures ( hi and smi combined ) appendix c. medicare per capita expenditures appendix d. operation of the hospital insurance trust fund appendix e. operation of the supplementary medical insurance trust fund , part b account appendix f. operation of the supplementary medical insurance trust fund , part d account appendix g. medicare expenditures as a percentage of gd .

