on april 20 , 2010 , an explosion occurred at the deepwater horizon drilling platform in the gulf of mexico , resulting in 11 fatalities .

the incident disabled the facility and led to a full evacuation before the platform sank into the gulf on april 22 .

a significant release of oil at the sea floor was soon discovered .

according to the national incident command's flow rate technical group estimate of august 2 , 2010 , the well released approximately 206 million gallons of oil ( 4.9 million barrels ) before it was contained july 15 , 2010 .

the 2010 gulf oil spill has generated considerable interest in oil spill issues .

the house of representatives has conducted at least 33 hearings in 10 committees .

the senate has conducted at least 30 hearings in eight committees .

members have introduced over 150 legislative proposals that include one or more provisions that would affect oil spill policy .

this report focuses primarily on oil spill policy matters that concern prevention , preparedness , response , and the liability and compensation framework .

for the most part , the underlying statutes for these provisions are found in either the oil pollution act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-380 ; 33 u.s.c .

2701 et seq. ) .

or the clean water act and its amendments ( 33 u.s.c .

1251 et seq. ) .

in general , this report does not address legislation that would alter the organizational structure of the former minerals management service ( mms ) or legislation that would affect the offshore leasing process .

this report highlights oil spill provisions in enacted legislation , legislation that has passed one of the chambers , and legislation that has received committee action: reported or ordered to be reported from a committee .

this last group also includes bills that have been placed on the senate's legislative calendar .

in addition , this report provides a more comprehensive summary of two selected bills in congress , both of which contain a substantial number of oil spill policy provisions .

this information is captured in the following tables: table 1 identifies enacted legislation .

table 2 identifies legislation that has either passed the house or been reported from a house committee .

table 3 identifies legislation that has passed the senate , been reported from a committee , or placed on the legislative calendar .

table 4 highlights selected oil spill policy provisions in h.r .

3534 — the consolidated land , energy , and aquatic resources act of 2010 ( clear act ) .

table 5 highlights selected oil spill policy provisions in s. 3663 — the clean energy jobs and oil company accountability act of 2010 .

the bills identified in the tables are listed in ( descending ) order by bill number .

