to address growing challenges in western water management , in 1992 , congress directed the secretary of the interior to establish a federal water reclamation , recycling , and reuse program to share project costs in the west ( title xvi of p.l .

102-575 , as amended ( 43 u.s.c .

§390h ) ) .

commonly referred to as title xvi , the program is administered by the department of the interior's ( doi's ) bureau of reclamation and provides funding for projects in several western states and hawaii .

as reuse and desalination have become more cost - competitive and technically viable , interest in the program has increased .

program implementation has at times been contentious , with various stakeholders having widely different views of the program and its performance .

doi has taken action in recent years to improve program implementation .

at issue for congress is the degree to which doi actions are consistent with congressional priorities , whether legislative attention is needed to improve the program , and if so , how it should be changed .

one question is whether to authorize additional title xvi projects ; several bills pending before the 111 th congress ( eg , h.r .

2442 , h.r .

2522 ) would authorize additional title xvi projects or amend existing project authorities .

another question is how to tackle the set of authorized activities: whether a funding priority system proposed by reclamation should be used to allocate funding among authorized projects , whether there needs to be a statutorily based priority system , or whether the status quo of decision making during the annual appropriations process should be continued .

the 111 th congress has not legislatively responded to reclamation's funding criteria proposal , nor has legislation to change the overall program been introduced .

no programmatic legislation has been enacted since amendments in 1996 , although legislation in recent congresses contemplated programmatic changes .

recent congresses have also held several oversight hearings on the program , its projects , and their funding .

the rate of title xvi project authorizations has outpaced annual appropriations .

the program has a $630 million "backlog" of authorized projects awaiting appropriations .

the obama administration has opposed the authorization of additional title xvi projects , including projects with agency - approved feasibility studies , citing the outstanding authorized funding and oversubscription of the program .

at the same time , the obama administration has demonstrated support for the program .

it broke with policies of the g. w. bush administration by declaring water reuse as an appropriate part of reclamation's mission , and was supportive of title xvi implementation under the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

the doi has issued three documents to guide the program's implementation: ( 1 ) agency guidelines for preparing , reviewing , and processing title xvi project proposals , ( 2 ) internal "directives and standards" to increase the consistency and effectiveness of the program by establishing feasibility study requirements for prospective title xvi projects , and ( 3 ) funding criteria to prioritize project funding .

the latter document was developed following legislative consideration of programmatic changes to the program , including streamlining the feasibility process and establishing project evaluation criteria .

this report presents a brief description of the title xvi program , the current status of the program , and information on program funding and implementation .

it also discusses title xvi legislative and administrative issues .

table a - 1 in the appendix provides details on the status of individual title xvi projects , as well as additional program information .

the bureau of reclamation's water reuse program was first authorized in 1992 in title xvi of p.l .

102-575 , the reclamation wastewater and groundwater studies and facilities act .

the act directs the secretary to "investigate and identify" opportunities for water reclamation and reuse in the west and authorizes financial and technical support for the design and construction of demonstration and permanent facilities to reclaim and reuse wastewater or other impaired waters ( including saline groundwater and seawater ) .

it also authorizes research on technologies for treating these impaired waters .

title xvi assistance , to date , has been limited to projects in the 17 western states and hawaii .

each permanent title xvi project requires congressional authorization for construction .

however , demonstration projects may be constructed under general authority provided in § 1605 of p.l .

102-575 .

the initial legislation authorized five individual projects , including one specifically identified demonstration project .

congress has authorized more than 50 permanent projects as of november 2010 .

congress continues to authorize title xvi projects and has done so more frequently in recent years .

some members of congress continue to voice concern over the program's goals and implementation , including costs .

a frequent concern is how much the program costs and its impact on available funding for more traditional bureau of reclamation activities and aging infrastructure .

some have also questioned the cost of water produced and whether the program is cost - effective .

in general , title xvi issues fall into two categories: ( 1 ) issues specific to the program's implementation and structure ( legislatively and administratively ) , and ( 2 ) broad policy issues .

reclamation has developed more detailed evaluation criteria over the years , such as reclamation guidelines for project evaluation , directives and standards ( d&s ) for the title xvi program , and most recently , funding criteria .

however , none of these documents have been promulgated as official rules or regulations ; nor do they appear to be binding .

for example , the evaluation procedures do not include criteria for competitively ranking projects or selecting projects .

both the d&s and guidelines provide more explicit evaluation and feasibility criteria than are provided in statute ; however , the criteria are referred to as factors to be "considered" and are not ranking or decision - making criteria .

with the administration's fy2011 budget request for a lump sum of $20 million to be allocated using proposed funding criteria , the administration seems to be trying to accomplish administratively what some programs ( eg , epa water quality programs ) have in statute .

other overarching issues include the scope of the program and the degree to which project assistance should be targeted to certain types of projects or broadened to include more projects in more areas .

different stakeholder views on these overarching issues will ultimately affect specific decisions to address broad policy issues , as well as program criteria , project evaluation , and funding issues discussed below .

under the status quo , the prospect for the title xvi program is a growing list of authorized projects competing for limited appropriations and administration support .

the 111 th congress thus far has not addressed title xvi program management via legislation .

instead , legislative activity has been limited to individual project authorizations and oversight .

if congress were to consider programmatic changes , it would face several broad questions in addition to those already raised , including: how urgent is the problem of water scarcity in west ? .

if urgent , what is the federal interest in the problem ? .

is funding title xvi projects an efficient or appropriate response ? .

how important is the problem and what is the right approach ? .

while the problem may be acute in some areas , it may be less so in others — should an adjustment to the program acknowledge such differences and focus federal resources in certain areas ? .

or is that already happening as a function of which local governments and sponsors are seeking legislation ? .

what are other options to address the problem and are they more cost - effective ? .

should it be a federal responsibility to promote water reuse in the west ? .

if so , why , or why not nationwide ? .

how does reuse contribute to national well - being ? .

how does promoting or facilitating reuse in the west facilitate other federal goals , objectives , and legal obligations ( eg , tribal trust obligations or protection of threatened and endangered species ) ? .

why are some states already embracing the reuse program , but not others ? .

for example , are there important differences in state water laws that make reclamation and reuse feasible in some areas but not others ? .

is it access to capital , or other reasons ? .

congress also would face numerous questions related to the specifics of the programmatic changes: should congress continue to subsidize water reuse in the west through this de facto grant process , or are there other priorities for limited federal funding ? .

is there a more efficient way to encourage reuse ? .

should title xvi funding be subject to reclamation reimbursement policies for the federal cost - share , as is generally the case for more traditional reclamation projects ? .

how does , or could , the title xvi program mesh with other federal activities ( eg , interior's water smart grant initiative or water reuse and storage activities under calfed or the california water plan ) ? .

should the program be tied to alleviating demand or reducing existing diversions where endangered species or other fish and wildlife or water quality concerns are at issue ? .

should reuse be used to help communities "drought - proof" their supplies , or to slow pressure on agricultural water supplies , by possibly slowing conversion of "agriculture - to - urban" water transfers ? .

will promoting water reclamation and reuse simply encourage more growth in already water scarce areas ? .

will growth or development come at the expense of federal investment in other economically depressed areas with plentiful water resources , or in other projects that might produce more water ? .

these questions are just a few that arise when discussing the future of title xvi .

reclamation's new funding criteria and other programmatic actions attempt to answer some of these questions ; whether congress agrees with reclamation's approach and appropriates the lump sum funding for the administration to allocate has yet to be decided .

growing demands on water resources in the west and elsewhere make it likely that interest in federal assistance for water reuse projects will continue .

depending on perceptions of problems with the title xvi program , different solutions to resolving program issues will be sought .

different stakeholders will have different opinions on the magnitude , importance , and scope of the broad policy , program criteria , project evaluation , and funding issues identified in this report .

resolution of title xvi issues will depend on many factors , including to what degree congressional and administration priorities for the program can be articulated and balanced .

title xvi has been amended multiple times since 1992 , resulting in a total of 53 authorized projects .

 ( see table a - 1 . ) .

active projects as noted earlier , title xvi funding obligations for 16 projects are complete , and nearly complete for 3 additional projects .

title xvi projects were yielding an estimated 245,111 acre - feet of water annually as of fy2009 – double the production of 121,678 acre - feet annually as of september 20 , 2005 .

because water yield figures are based on total design capacity , actual water yield at full build out will likely be slightly less than depicted in the last column of table a - 1 .

unfunded projects eleven projects have not received funding to date and appear to be inactive ; however , to clarify this situation , reclamation is surveying sponsors of authorized projects to determine the status of each project .

results from the survey and an analysis of new data are expected in early 2011 .

projects unfunded by reclamation are shown in bold in table a - 1 .

the other title xvi projects are considered active .

the eleven projects that have not received funding from reclamation include at least one project that has received other federal funding , including funding from epa and the bureau of indian affairs .

it is not clear how many projects may ultimately seek multiple sources of federal funding or already have done so .

title xvi federal contribution title xvi projects authorized prior to 1996 ranged in total costs from $152 million ( $38 million for reclamation's share ) , to $690 million ( $172 million for reclamation's share ) , with 25% of the total project costs eligible for title xvi funding .

in 1996 , the program's authorization was amended to limit the federal share to no more than $20 million per project .

the three costliest title xvi projects were authorized in 1992 , before federal contributions were capped at $20 million .

post - 1996 projects have been smaller in scale , ranging from $700,000 for reclamation's share to the authorized federal cost - share cap of $20 million .

