the small business administration ( sba ) administers several programs to support small businesses , including loan guaranty programs to enhance small business access to capital ; programs to increase small business opportunities in federal contracting ; direct loans for businesses , homeowners , and renters to assist their recovery from natural disasters ; and access to entrepreneurial education to assist with business formation and expansion .

it also administers the small business investment company ( sbic ) program .

authorized by p.l .

85-699 , the small business investment act of 1958 , as amended , the sbic program is designed to "improve and stimulate the national economy in general and the small - business segment thereof in particular" by stimulating and supplementing "the flow of private equity capital and long - term loan funds which small - business concerns need for the sound financing of their business operations and for their growth , expansion , and modernization , and which are not available in adequate supply. .

the sbic program was created to address concerns raised in a federal reserve board report to congress that identified a gap in the capital markets for long - term funding for growth - oriented small businesses .

the report noted that the sba's loan programs were "limited to providing short - term and intermediate - term credit when such loans are unavailable from private institutions" and that the sba "did not provide equity financing. .

equity financing ( or equity capital ) is money raised by a company in exchange for a share of ownership in the business .

ownership is represented by owning shares of stock outright or having the right to convert other financial instruments into stock .

equity financing allows a business to obtain funds without incurring debt , or without having to repay a specific amount of money at a particular time .

the federal reserve board's report concluded there was a need for a federal government program to "stimulate the availability of capital funds to small business" to assist these businesses in gaining access to long - term financing and equity financing .

facilitating the flow of capital to small businesses to stimulate the national economy was , and remains , the sbic program's primary objective .

the sba does not make direct investments in small businesses .

it partners with privately owned and managed sbics licensed by the sba to provide financing to small businesses with private capital the sbic has raised ( called regulatory capital ) and with funds ( called leverage ) the sbic borrows at favorable rates because the sba guarantees the debenture ( loan obligation ) .

as of december 31 , 2018 , there were 305 licensed sbics participating in the sbic program .

in fy2018 , the sba provided $2.52 billion in leverage to sbics .

in recent years , some members of congress have argued that the program should be expanded as a means to stimulate economic activity and create jobs .

for example , p.l .

113-76 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , increased the annual amount of leverage the sba is authorized to provide to sbics to $4 billion from $3 billion and p.l .

114-113 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 , increased the amount of outstanding leverage allowed for two or more sbic licenses under common control ( the multiple licenses / family of funds limit ) to $350 million from $225 million .

in addition , p.l .

115-187 , the small business investment opportunity act of 2017 , increased the amount of outstanding leverage allowed for individual sbics to $175 million from $150 million .

others worry that an expanded sbic program could result in losses and increase the federal deficit .

in their view , the best means to assist small business , promote economic growth , and create jobs is to reduce business taxes and exercise federal fiscal restraint .

some members and small business advocates have also proposed that the program target additional assistance to startup and early stage small businesses , which are generally viewed as relatively risky investments but also as having a relatively high potential for job creation .

for example , during the 113 th congress , s. 1285 and h.r .

30 , the small business investment enhancement and tax relief act , would have authorized the administration to establish a separate sbic program for early stage small businesses .

in addition , as part of the obama administration's startup america initiative , the sba established a five - year , $1 billion early stage sbic initiative in 2012 .

early stage sbics are required to allocate at least 50% of their investments in early stage small businesses , defined as small businesses that have never achieved positive cash flow from operations in any fiscal year .

the sba stopped accepting new applicants for the early stage sbic initiative in 2017 .

in addition , on june 11 , 2018 , the sba withdrew a proposed rule published on september 19 , 2016 , to amend the initiative to make it "more attractive and ... a permanent part of the sbic program. .

the sba indicated that it withdrew the proposed rule "because very few qualified funds applied to the early stage sbic initiative , the costs were not commensurate with the results , and the comments to the proposed rule did not demonstrate broad support for a permanent early stage sbic program. .

this report examines the sbic program's structure and operations , focusing on sbic eligibility requirements , investment activity , and program statistics .

it includes information concerning the sba's debenture sbic program , participating securities sbic program , impact investment sbic program ( targeting underserved markets and communities facing barriers to access to credit and capital ) , and early stage sbic initiative .

this report also discusses legislative efforts that led to an increase in ( 1 ) the maximum annual leverage the sba is authorized to provide to sbics and ( 2 ) the maximum amount of outstanding leverage allowed for two or more sbic licenses under common control .

there are two types of sbics .

investment companies licensed under section 301 ( c ) of the small business investment act of 1958 , as amended , are referred to as original , or regular , sbics .

investment companies licensed under section 301 ( d ) of the act , called specialized small business investment companies ( ssbics ) , focus on providing financing to small business entrepreneurs "whose participation in the free enterprise system is hampered because of social or economic disadvantage. .

section 301 ( d ) was repealed by p.l .

104-208 , the omnibus consolidated appropriations act , 1997 ( title ii of division d , the small business programs improvement act of 1996 ) .

as a result , no new ssbic licenses have been issued since october 1 , 1996 .

however , existing ssbics were "grandfathered" and allowed to remain in the program .

with few exceptions , sbics and ssbics are subject to the same eligibility requirements and operating rules and regulations .

therefore , the term sbic is usually used to refer to both sbics and ssbics .

five types of regular sbics exist .

debenture sbics , impact investment sbics , and early stage sbics receive leverage through the issuance of debentures .

debentures are debt obligations issued by sbics and held or guaranteed by the sba .

p articipating securities sbics receive leverage through the issuance of participating securities .

participating securities are redeemable , preferred , equity - type securities , often in the form of limited partnership interests , preferred stock , or debentures with interest payable only to the extent of earnings .

bank - owned , non - leveraged sbics do not receive leverage .

this report focuses on the four types of regular sbics that receive leverage from the sba .

a sbic can be organized in any state as either a corporation , a limited partnership ( lp ) , or a limited liability company ( llcs must be organized under delaware law ) .

most sbics are owned by relatively small groups of local investors , although many are partially owned , and some ( 47 of 305 ) are wholly owned , by commercial banks .

a few sbics are corporations with publicly traded stock .

one of the primary criteria for licensure as a sbic is having qualified management .

the sba reviews and approves a prospective sbic's management team based upon its professional capabilities and character .

specifically , the sba examines the sbic's management team and looks for at least two principals with substantive and analogous principal investment experience ; realized track record of superior returns , based on an overall evaluation of appropriate quantitative performance measures ; evidence of a strong rate of business proposals and investment offers ( deal flow ) in the investment area proposed for the new fund ; a cohesive management team , with complementary skills and a history of working together ; managerial , operational , or technical experience that can add value at the portfolio company level ; and a demonstrated ability to manage cash flows so as to provide assurance the sba will be repaid on a timely basis .

applying for a sbic debenture license is a multi - step process , beginning with the submission of the sba management assessment questionnaire ( maq ) and an initial , nonrefundable licensing fee of $10,000 .

the questionnaire includes , among others , questions concerning the fund's legal name and the name and addresses of its principals and control persons ; the fund's investment strategy ( including geographic focus , industry focus , diversification strategy , primary types of securities to be used , whether it plans to be primarily an equity or debt investor , etc .

 ) ; the management team's history and professional experience ; the fund's investment decisionmaking process , from deal origination to portfolio monitoring ; the fund's economics ( including a description of the fund's carried interest , the formula used to calculate management fees and the fund's policy on the allocation of fees between the fund and any management or other affiliated entities , details concerning compensation the principals earn outside of this partnership , etc .

 ) ; the fund's capitalization ( including investment strategy , whether a placement agent has been or will be hired , information concerning any third - party borrowing arrangements , etc .

 ) ; the fund's governance structure ( including an organizational chart ) ; and a 10-year financial forecast for the fund .

after receiving the firm's application , a member of the sba's program development office reviews the maq ; assesses the investment company's proposal in light of the program's minimum requirements and management qualifications ; performs initial due diligence , including making reference telephone calls ; and prepares a written recommendation to the sba's investment division's investment committee ( composed of senior members of the division ) .

if , after reviewing the maq and the sba's program development office's evaluation , the investment committee concludes , by majority vote at a regularly scheduled meeting , that the investment company's management team may be qualified for a license , that management team is invited to the sba's headquarters in washington , dc , for an in - person interview .

if , following the interview , the investment committee votes to proceed , the investment company is provided a "green light" letter formally inviting it to proceed to the final licensing phase of the application process .

once an applicant receives a green light letter , the applicant typically has up to 18 months to raise the requisite private capital .

during this time frame , the sba "keeps in touch with the applicant , conducts sbic training classes , and provides guidance as needed. .

final licensing occurs when the sba accepts an applicant's complete licensing application ( consisting of an updated sba form 2181 and complete sba forms 2182 and 2183 ) , which is submitted after raising sufficient private capital , and receives a final licensing fee , currently $20,000 .

obtaining a sbic license for the first time usually takes six to eight months from the initial maq submission to the license issuance .

as discussed below , new applications for the participating securities program , impact investment program , and early stage sbic initiative are no longer being accepted .

the eligibility requirements and application process for small businesses requesting financial assistance from a sbic is provided in the appendix .

 table 1 provides five key features distinguishing the sba's debenture sbics , participating securities sbics , impact investment sbics , and early stage sbics the minimum amount of capital required to obtain a license ; the amount of sba leverage that can be received ; the nature of the investments provided ; a description of the requirements for repaying the sba's leverage ; and any profit participation requirements .

sbics provide equity capital to small businesses in various ways , including by purchasing small business equity securities ( eg , stock , stock options , warrants , limited partnership interests , membership interests in a limited liability company , or joint venture interests ) ; making loans to small businesses , either independently or in cooperation with other private or public lenders , that have a maturity of no more than 20 years ; purchasing debt securities from small businesses , which may be convertible into , or have rights to purchase , equity in the small business ; and providing small businesses , subject to limitations , a guarantee of their monetary obligations to creditors not associated with the sbic .

sbics are subject to statutory and regulatory restrictions concerning the nature of their approved investments .

for example , sbics are not allowed to directly or indirectly provide financing to any of their associates ( eg , officers , directors , and employees ) ; control , either directly or indirectly , any small business on a permanent basis ; invest , without sba approval , more than specified percentages of their private ( regulatory ) capital in securities , commitments , or guarantees in any one small business ( eg , sbics are not allowed to invest more than 30% of their private capital in any one small business if their investment plan includes two or more tiers of sba leverage ) ; invest in farmland , unimproved land , or any small business classified under major group 65 ( real estate ) of the standard industrial classification ( sic ) manual , with the exception of title abstract companies , real estate agents , brokers , and managers ; provide funds for small businesses whose primary business activity involves directly or indirectly providing funds to others , purchasing debt obligations , factoring , or leasing equipment on a long - term basis with no provision for maintenance or repair ; or provide funds to a small business if the funds will be used substantially for a foreign operation .

the sba also regulates the interest rates and fees sbics are allowed to charge small businesses on loans , debt securities , and equity financing .

in 1999 , the sba introduced the low and moderate income investments ( lmi ) initiative to encourage sbics to invest in small businesses located in inner cities and rural areas "that have severe shortages of equity capital" because investments in those areas "often are of a type that will not have the potential for yielding returns that are high enough to justify the use of participating securities. .

this ongoing initiative provides incentives to sbics that invest in small businesses that have at least 50% of their employees or tangible assets located in a low - to - moderate income area ( lmi zone ) or have at least 35% of their full - time employees with their primary residence in an lmi zone .

for example , unlike regular sbic debentures that typically have a 10-year maturity , lmi debentures are available in two maturities , for 5 years and 10 years , plus the stub period .

the stub period is the time between the debenture's issuance date and the next march 1 or september 1 .

the stub period allows all lmi debentures to have common march 1 or september 1 maturity dates to simplify administration of the program .

in addition , lmi debentures are issued at a discount so that the proceeds that a sbic receives for the sale of a debenture is reduced by ( 1 ) the debenture's interest costs for the first five years , plus the stub period ; ( 2 ) the sba's annual fee for the debenture's first five years , plus the stub period ; and ( 3 ) the sba's 2% leverage fee .

as a result , these interest costs and fees are effectively deferred , freeing sbics from the requirement to make interest payments on lmi debentures or pay the sba's annual fees on lmi debentures for the first five years of a debenture , plus the stub period .

in fy2018 , sbics made 609 investments in small businesses located in a lmi zone , totaling nearly $1.03 billion — about 18.6% of the total amount invested .

in 2007 , p.l .

110-140 , the energy independence and security act of 2007 , authorized the sba to issue energy saving debentures for the purpose of making "energy saving qualified investments," defined in the act as an investment "in a small business concern that is primarily engaged in researching , manufacturing , developing , or providing products , goods , or services that reduce the use or consumption of non - renewable energy resources. .

energy saving debentures are structured as a discount debenture similar to lmi debentures .

for example , there are no interest payments or sba annual charge for the first five years of the energy saving debenture , plus the stub period between the debenture's issuance date and the next march 1 or september 1 payment date .

once licensed , each sbic is required to file with the sba an annual financial report that includes an audit by a sba - approved independent public accountant .

sbics are also subject to annual on - site regulatory compliance examinations and required to provide the sba a portfolio financing report within 30 days of the closing date for each financing of a small business ; the value of their loans and investments within 90 days of the end of the fiscal year in the case of annual valuations and within 30 days following the close of other reporting periods ; any material adverse changes in valuations at least quarterly ( within 30 days following the close of the quarter ) ; and copies of reports provided to investors , documents filed with the securities and exchange commission , and documents pertaining to litigation or other legal proceedings , including criminal charges against any person required by the sba complete a personal history statement in connection with the sbic's license .

as of december 31 , 2018 , there were 305 licensed sbics in operation ( 227 debenture sbics , 25 participating securities sbics , 47 bank - owned , non - leveraged sbics , and 6 ssbics ) .

as shown in table 2 , the number of debenture sbics has generally increased in recent years .

however , the total number of licensed sbics has stayed relatively the same in recent years , primarily due to the planned reduction in the number of participating securities sbics and ssbics .

the sba has made it a goal to increase the number of new sbic licenses issued each year , with an emphasis on new debenture sbics licenses , "to position the program for continued growth. .

overall , sbics pursue investments in a broad range of industries , geographic areas , and stages of investment .

some individual sbics specialize in a particular field or industry and others invest more generally .

most sbics concentrate on a particular stage of investment ( i.e. , startup , expansion , or turnaround ) and identify a geographic area in which to focus .

p.l .

111-5 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) , included provisions designed to increase the amount of leverage issued under the sbic program by increasing the maximum amount of leverage available to an individual sbic to 300% of its private capital or $150 million , whichever is less , and by increasing the maximum amount of leverage available for two or more licenses under common control to $225 million .

it also encouraged sbic investment in smaller enterprises by requiring sbics licensed after the date of its enactment ( february 17 , 2009 ) to certify that at least 25% of all future financing dollars are invested in smaller enterprises .

arra defined smaller enterprises as firms having either a net worth of no more than $6 million and average after - tax net income for the preceding two years of no more than $2 million or meeting the sba's size standard for its industry classification .

arra also encouraged sbic investments in low - income areas by allowing a sbic licensed on or after october 1 , 2009 , to elect to have a maximum leverage amount of $175 million , and $250 million for two or more licenses under common control , if the sbic has invested at least 50% of its financings in low - income geographic areas and certified that at least 50% of its future investments will be in low - income geographic areas .

as part of its startup america initiative , on january 31 , 2012 , the obama administration recommended that the sbic program's annual authorization be increased to $4 billion from $3 billion and that the amount of sba leverage available to licensees under common control ( the multiple licenses / family of funds limit ) be increased to $350 million from $225 million .

on april 27 , 2012 , the sba also published a final rule in the federal register establishing the $1 billion early stage innovation sbic initiative ( up to $150 million in sba leverage in fy2012 and up to $200 million in sba leverage per fiscal year thereafter until the limit is reached ) to encourage sbic program investments in early stage small businesses .

as will be discussed , several bills have been introduced during recent congresses to expand the sbic program by increasing its annual authorization to $4 billion ( enacted ) , increasing the multiple licenses / family of funds limit to $350 million ( enacted ) , increasing the individual sbic fund limit to $175 million ( enacted ) , or authorizing a sbic program specifically designed to encourage sbic investments in business startups and other early stage small businesses ( introduced ) .

some members of congress have argued that the sba should be provided additional resources to assist small businesses in acquiring capital necessary to start , continue , or expand operations and create jobs .

in their view , encouraging greater utilization of the sbic program will increase small business access to capital , result in higher levels of job creation and retention , and promote economic growth .

for example , on march 19 , 2012 , during senate consideration of the invest in america act of 2012 , then - senator olympia snowe argued the amendment [ s.amdt .

1833 ] i and senator landrieu introduced would also help small companies access capital by modifying the small business investment company , sbic , program to raise the amount of sbic debt the small business administration , sba , can guarantee from $3 billion to $4 billion .

it would also increase the amount of sba guaranteed debt a team of sbic fund managers who operate multiple funds can borrow .

the sbic provisions in this amendment have bipartisan support , are noncontroversial , come at no cost to taxpayers and will create jobs .

we do not get many bills of this kind in the senate anymore .

one of the most difficult challenges facing new small businesses today is access to capital .

the sbic program has helped companies like apple , fedex , callaway golf , and outback steakhouse become household names .

as entrepreneurs and other aspiring small business owners well know , it takes money to make money .

this legislation ensures that our entrepreneurs and high - growth companies have access to the resources they need so they can continue to drive america's economic growth and job creation in these challenging times .

there is no reason why congress should not approve this amendment to ensure capital is getting into the hands of america's job creators .

this amendment will spur investment in capital - starved startup small businesses , which will play a critical role in leading the nation of the devastating economic downturn from which we have yet to emerge .

for those who may be unfamiliar , despite significant entrepreneurial demand for small amounts of capital , because of their substantial size , most private investment funds cannot dedicate resources to transactions below $5 million .

the nation's sbics are working to fill that gap , especially even during these challenging times .

others worry about the potential risk an expanded sbic program may have for increasing the federal deficit .

in their view , the best means to assist small business , promote economic growth , and create jobs is to reduce business taxes and exercise federal fiscal restraint .

for example , representative sam graves , then - chair of the house committee on small business , indicated in the small business committee's fy2013 "views and estimates" letter to the house budget committee that the house small business committee supported an increase in the sbic program's authorization to $4 billion from $3 billion .

however , he indicated that the committee opposed funding for the sba's early stage sbic initiative and impact investment sbic initiative because of their potential to generate losses that could lead to higher sbic fees or to the need to provide federal funds to subsidize the sbic program .

representative graves wrote in the fy2013 views and estimates letter that the debenture sbic program is designed to provide equity injections to small businesses that have been operational and have a track record of cash - flow and profits .

… the program is financially sound because the structure of repayments ensures that the government will not suffer significant losses .

thus , no changes are needed to the program and it operates on a zero subsidy basis without an appropriation .

the sba budget is fully supportive of this program and we concur in that recommendation , including raising the program level from $3 billion to $4 billion .

presumably , some of the additional program level ( which will cost the federal government no money ) will be used to support two new variations in the debenture sbic program [the early stage sbic initiative and the impact investment sbic initiative] … neither initiative has received authority from congress nor had its operational principles assessed by the committee prior to implementation .

the committee reiterates its recommendation from last year's views and estimates – no funds should be allocated from the additional debenture program levels for these two programs .

the committee on the budget also should provide further protection to the existing debenture sbic program by requiring any modifications to the program , whether a pilot program or not , be based on a new subsidy calculation that ensures the current debenture program will operate at zero subsidy without any increase in fees due to losses stemming from the impact and early stage innovation programs .

the house committee on small business's fy2016 views and estimates letter reiterated the committee's opposition to the funding of these two initiatives and recommended that any modifications to the sbic program "whether a pilot program or not , be based on a new subsidy calculation that ensures the current debenture program will operate at zero subsidy without any increase in fees. .

as these quotations attest , congressional debate concerning the sbic program has primarily involved assessments of the ability of small businesses to access capital from the private sector and evaluations of the program's risk , the effect of proposed changes on the program's risk , and the potential impact of the program's risk on the federal deficit .

empirical analysis of economic data can help inform debate concerning the ability of small businesses to access capital from the private sector and the extent of the program's risk , the effect of proposed changes on the program's risk , and the potential impact of the program's risk on the federal deficit .

additional data concerning sbic investment impact on recipient job creation and firm survival might also prove useful .

small business eligibility requirements only businesses that meet the sba's definition of "small" may participate in the sbic program .

businesses must meet either the sba's size standard for the industry in which they are primarily engaged or the sba's alternative size standard for the sbic program .

sbics use the size standard that is most likely to qualify the company , typically the alternative size standard for the sbic program .

the current sbic alternative size standard , which became effective on july 14 , 2014 , is tangible net worth not in excess of $19.5 million and average net income after federal income taxes ( excluding any carry - over losses ) for the preceding two completed fiscal years not in excess of $6.5 million .

all of a company's subsidiaries , parent companies , and affiliates are considered in determining if it meets the size standard .

in addition , since 1997 , the sba has required sbics to set aside a specified percentage of their financing for "businesses at the lower end of the permitted size range," primarily because "the financial size standards applicable to the sbic program are considerably higher than those used in other sba programs. .

p.l .

111-5 requires sbics licensed after the date of its enactment ( february 17 , 2009 ) to certify that at least 25% of their future financing is invested in smaller enterprises .

a smaller enterprise is a company that , together with any affiliates , either has net worth of no more than $6 million and average after - tax net income for the preceding two years of no more than $2 million or meets the sba's size standard in the industry in which the applicant is primarily engaged .

a sbic licensed on or before february 17 , 2009 , that has not received any sba leverage commitments after february 17 , 2009 , must have at least 20% of its aggregate financing dollars ( plus 100% for leverage commitments over $90 million ) invested in smaller enterprises .

a sbic licensed on or before february 17 , 2009 , that has received a sba leverage commitment after february 17 , 2009 , must meet the 20% threshold ( plus 100% for leverage commitments over $90 million ) for financing provided before the date of the first leverage commitment issued after february 17 , 2009 , and the 25% threshold for financing made after such date .

sbics are not allowed to invest in the following: other sbics , finance and investment companies or finance - type leasing companies , unimproved real estate , companies with less than 51% of their assets and employees in the united states , passive or casual businesses ( those not engaged in a regular and continuous business operation ) , or companies that will use the proceeds to acquire farmland .

in addition , sbics may not provide funds for a small business whose primary business activity is deemed contrary to the public interest or if the funds will be used substantially for a foreign operation .

small business application process small business owners interested in receiving sbic financing can search for active sbics using the sba's sbic directory .

the directory provides contact information for all licensed sbics , sorted by state .

it also includes the sbic's preferred minimum and maximum financing size range , the type of capital provided ( eg , equity , mezzanine , subordinated debt , 1 st and 2 nd lien secured term , or preferred stock ) , funding stage preference ( eg , early stage , growing and expansion stage , or later stage ) , industry preference ( eg , business services , manufacturing , environmental services , or distribution ) , geographic preference ( eg , national , regional , or specific state or states ) , and a description of the firm's focus ( eg , equity capital to later stage companies for expansion and acquisition or targeting companies with revenues of at least $5 million and profitability at the time of financing ) .

after locating a suitable sbic , the small business owner presents the sbic a business plan that addresses the business's operations , management , financial condition , and funding requirements .

the typical business plan includes the following information: the name of the business as it appears on the official records of the state or community in which it operates ; the city , county , and state of the principal location and any branch offices or facilities ; the form of business organization and , if a corporation , the date and state of incorporation ; a description of the business , including the principal products sold or services rendered ; a history of the general development of the products or services during the past five years ( or since inception ) ; information about the relative importance of each principal product or service to the volume of the business and its profits ; a description of the business's real and physical property and adaptability to other business ventures ; a description of technical attributes of its products and facilities ; detailed information about the business's customer base , including potential customers ; a marketing survey or economic feasibility study ; a description of the distribution system for the business's products or services ; a descriptive summary of the competitive conditions in the industry in which the business is engaged , including its competitive position relative to its largest and smallest competitors ; a full explanation and summary of the business's pricing policies ; brief resumes of the business's management personnel and principal owners , including their ages , education , and business experience ; banking , business , and personal references for each member of management and for the principal owners ; balance sheets and profit and loss statements for the last three fiscal years ( or from inception ) ; detailed projections of revenues , expenses , and net earnings for the coming year ; a statement of the amount of funding requested and the time requirements for the funds ; the reasons for the request for funds and a description of the proposed uses ; and a description of the benefits the business expects to gain from the financing ( eg , expansion , improvement in financial position , expense reduction , or increase in efficiency ) .

because sbics typically receive hundreds of business plans per year , the sba recommends that small business owners seek a personal referral or introduction to the particular sbic fund manager being targeted to increase "the likelihood that the business plan will be carefully considered. .

according to the small business investor alliance , "a thorough study an sbic must undertake before it can make a final decision could take several weeks or longer. .

