the u.s. petroleum refining industry experienced what some have called a "golden age" during the years 2004-2007 .

during this period , the demand for petroleum products , especially gasoline , increased rapidly both in the united states and world markets .

refiners found favorable price - spreads between heavy and light crude oils as well as between crude oil and refined products .

the industry operated plants at nearly maximum capacity and posted record profit levels .

unexpected events such as hurricanes that shut down gulf coast refineries , concerns over "peak oil" production , and crude oil price speculation likely contributed to spikes in gasoline prices .

during the period , many policy makers expressed the concern that u.s. refining capacity was not increasing rapidly enough to keep up with the expected growth in demand for petroleum products .

the concern now may be that excess refining capacity has affected bottom - line refining profitability and the ability to meet consumer demand .

current economic conditions have led to lower refinery utilization rates and recent closure of a few refineries .

in a continuing trend , some vertically integrated oil companies ( those engaged in all phases of production , refining and marketing ) either have divested their refineries or spun them off as separate business units .

the concentration of refining capacity in the u.s. gulf coast , an outcome of the region's significant petroleum resources and their history of development , influenced the current network of crude oil and product distribution pipelines .

new sources of heavy crude oils from canada and light crude oils from the mid - continent and mid - west are altering the logistics in supplying established refining centers .

in the absence of pipeline capacity , existing rail lines are proving a viable alternative .

rail appears to offer an immediate solution to both crude supply and product delivery bottlenecks , as rail - delivered ethanol appears to demonstrate .

no matter what the investment , refineries must adapt to changing crude streams to ensure lowest cost of operation , and the largest product / crude price spread .

the greatest cost in refining is not capital investment , but crude costs .

but , the growing availability of new unconventional oil resources in the mid - continent resources is changing refining economics and profitability on both the east and west coasts , and perhaps challenging the gulf coast's refining center status .

the u.s. refining industry faces a number of new policies that could force downward pressure on refinery numbers , capacity , or utilization: tighter corporate average fuel economy ( cafe ) and vehicle greenhouse gas standards ; the federal renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) ; natural gas as a transportation fuel ; and epa mandatory greenhouse gas reporting .

further , the potential binding greenhouse gas limits in the future , either through a federal cap - and - trade or carbon tax program , or through regulation under the environmental protection agency's "tailoring rule," could provide further downward pressure on petroleum demand .

this report reviews the current production capacity of the refineries operating in the united states , and the sources and changes in their crude oil supply .

it also examines the changing characteristics of petroleum and petroleum product markets and identifies the effects of these changes on the refining industry , including tax considerations .

it concludes with discussion of the policy and regulatory factors that are likely to affect the structure and performance of the industry during the next decade .

crude oil is a complex mix of hydrocarbon compounds , ranging from simple compounds with small molecules and low densities to very dense compounds with extremely large molecules .

an average crude oil contains about 84% carbon , 14% hydrogen , 1% to 3% sulfur , and less than 1% each nitrogen , oxygen , metals , and salts .

the american petroleum institute ( api ) compares the "lightness" or "heaviness" of crude oils on an inverted scale in terms of degrees ( " ) api gravity .

figure 1 illustrates a range of crude oil gravities .

any crude above 10 °api will float on water .

light crude's api gravity is higher than 31.1 "api , medium crude between 22.3 °api and 31.1 °api , and heavy crude below 22.3 °api .

the benchmark for comparing crudes has been west texas intermediate ( wti ) , or texas light sweet .

light crude has a low wax - content , and sweet crude has less than 0.5% sulfur .

 ( refer to appendix a for further information on crude oil properties. ) .

a hypothetical refinery distills crude oil into various products , according to their boiling point range .

the most common products — gasoline , diesel , and jet fuels — are complex mixtures of hydrocarbons that include paraffins , naphthenes , and aromatics ( which give fuel its unique odor ) .

refineries vary in complexity , but have several basic processing steps in common: distillation , cracking , treating and reforming .

distillation involves heating crude oil in a furnace then condensing it in an atmospheric distillation tower ( or crude unit ) — the tall , narrow columns that give a refinery its distinctive skyline .

the crude unit separates light hydrocarbon molecules from heavy hydrocarbons based on their boiling temperatures .

the lightest materials , like propane and butane , vaporize and rise to the top of the atmospheric column .

medium weight materials , including gasoline , jet and diesel fuels , condense in the middle .

heavy materials , called gas oils , condense in the lower portion of the atmospheric column .

residuum ( a heavy tar - like material ) referred to as the "bottom of the barrel," has a high boiling temperature that keeps it in the lower portion of the column .

in some cases , distillation columns operate at less than atmospheric pressure ( vacuum ) to lower the temperature at which a hydrocarbon mixture boils .

vacuum distillation reduces the chance of thermal decomposition ( cracking ) due to overheating .

as the heavier oils move through the refinery , heat and catalysts "crack" them into lighter products through fluid - catalytic - cracking ( fcc ) , hydrocracking , or thermal - cracking ( coking ) .

fluid catalytic cracking uses high temperature and catalysts to convert heavy gas oil mostly into gasoline .

hydrocracking uses catalysts to react gas oil and hydrogen under high pressure and high temperature to make both jet fuel and gasoline .

coking converts low - value residuum ( using thermal - cracking ) to high - value light products , producing petroleum coke as a by - product .

while the cracking breaks most of the gas oil into gasoline and jet fuel , it also breaks off some smaller hydrocarbons that are lighter than gasoline .

these lighter hydrocarbons recombine in alkylation units , in the presence of sulfuric acid catalyst , to reform into high - octane gasoline .

the products from the crude unit and the feeds to other units contain some natural impurities , such as sulfur and nitrogen that contribute to air pollution when fuels combust .

hydrotreating ( a milder version of hydrocracking ) removes these impurities by converting the sulfur to hydrogen sulfide and then to elemental sulfur ; and converting nitrogen into ammonia and then removing it by water - washing for recovery as ammonia for fertilizer .

the gasoline stream that comes out of the crude unit or cracking unit has a relatively low octane rating ( a key measure of how gasoline performs in an automobile engine ) .

to upgrade gasoline octane - rating , a reforming unit uses precious - metal catalysts ( platinum and rhenium ) to "reform" hydrocarbon molecules into high - octane gasoline components .

the reforming process removes hydrogen from low - octane gasoline , which refinery reuses in various cracking ( hydrocracking ) and treating ( hydrotreating ) units .

when refined , a 35 api crude might yield a product slate range of 27% gasoline and 25% middle distillate fuels in the range diesel and jet fuel .

for further information on refining processes refer to appendix a .

after a volatile decade marked by record crude oil prices and profit margins , u.s. refiners now face the prospect of possibly long - term decreased demand for their products .

refiners are responding by cutting costs , reducing capacity utilization , and closing facilities .

a decade ago , 158 refineries operated in the united states and its territories .

by the congressional research service's ( crs ) most recent count , 115 refineries primarily process crude oil into fuels ( of which four refineries are complexes made up of two or three formerly independent refineries joined by pipeline ) .

despite permanent closures , operable refining capacity has increased over the past decade from 16.5 million barrels / day to approximately 18 million barrels / day .

by the energy information administration's ( eia ) definition , "operable capacity" includes both operating refineries and idle refineries which shut down temporarily for repair or "turn around" for seasonal adjustment in the product slate ( for example , reformulating gasoline from winter to summer blends ) .

eia includes refineries that also produce lubricating oils , asphalts , and other products for this report , crs reviewed petroleum refiners that primarily produce fuel and used the capacity that these refiners advertise on their corporate web pages to estimate an overall refinery capacity in excess of 18 million barrels / day .

eia had reported a u.s. operable crude oil distillation capacity of 17.73 million barrels / day and a gross crude oil input of 15.29 million barrels / day in 2011 yielding a refinery utilization capacity at slightly over 86% .

as a refinery's year - to - year performance changes ( for the reasons noted above ) a better measure of capacity may be "barrels / stream day" — the barrels of crude oil input a refinery reports over the number of days it annually operates also termed "utilization. .

eia also reported prime suppliers of refined products sold approximately 14.53 million barrels / day .

a prime supplier produces , imports , or transports selected petroleum products ( motor gasoline , aviation gasoline , kerosene - jet fuel , propane , total distillate and kerosene , and distillate fuel oil ) across state boundaries and local marketing areas , and sells the product to local distributors , local retailers , or end users .

a 95,000-mile network of petroleum product pipelines serves most of the united states , making them interdependent .

the west coast ( padd 5 ) remains largely isolated from the rest of the united states , especially from the large refineries in padd 3 , as well as crude oil imports to the gulf coast .

the virginia and colonial product pipelines , built during world war ii , link up padd 3 gulf coast refineries with padd 1 northeast states .

regional differences in epa mandated fuel gasoline specifications , however , limit the flexibility of distribution by pipeline .

the isolation has resulted in a gasoline market that has exhibited higher prices and reduced availability under some market conditions .

no crude oil pipelines link padd 1 or padd 5 with the rest of the country , but rail shipment offers a near - term alternative .

canada supplies padd 2 refineries through the alberta clipper crude oil pipeline .

permitting issues currently stall the keystone - xl pipeline that would deliver canadian syncrude ( a diluted bitumen from oil sands ) to padd 3 gulf coast refineries .

figure 3 compares each padd's refining capacity to supplied petroleum products .

figure 4 provides a general map of refinery locations by "petroleum administration for defense district" ( padd ) .

at one time , refineries in each padd processed crude oil and distributed petroleum products for use in the district .

maps that are more detailed are available in appendix c .

table 1 provides refineries by padd , city , and capacity .

crs count does not include refineries that primarily produce lubricating oils , or asphalt .

rail freight and the class i railroad system of north america are offering an alternative transport mode that both east coast and west coast refiners are turning to for shipping crude from new resources like north dakota's bakken formation .

while new pipeline projects can face increasing permitting hurdles and environmental opposition , rail sidings can be quickly constructed and put into service loading rail tank cars .

the advantage that freight rail offers in flexibility of delivery , however , may be outweighed by the volumetric advantage that pipelines offer .

although in defense of rail , it has proved viable in shipping ethanol ( which now makes up 10% or more of the volumetric consumption of gasoline ) .

in 2011 , the united states consumed 5,327 million barrels of crude oil , importing 3,261 million barrels and producing 2,065 million barrels .

the united states met roughly 39% of its crude oil demand in 2011 through domestic production ( figure 8 ) .

this does not include natural gas needed in various refining processes , nor natural gas and petroleum condensates that are sold directly to retail markets ( for example , propane and butane ) .

canada provided roughly 15% of u.s. demand , followed by saudi arabia at 9% ( which has directly invested in u.s. refineries to directly refine its exports ) , and mexico at 8% .

in total , the united states meets 62% of its demand from crude oil produced in north america .

canada has become the united states' leading imported crude oil supplier through its increasing production from oil sands .

while crude oil input to u.s. refineries has decreased somewhat compared to a decade ago , input appears to be on the rise from a low point in 2009 ( table 2 ) .

in 2011 , refineries consumed an average 15.3 million barrels per day of crude oil , an increase of 630 thousand barrels / day over 2009 .

the increase does not necessarily reflect a rise in u.s. demand , as product exports have been steadily increasing , partly due to ethanol blending into the fuel supply ( see " renewable fuel standard / alternative fuels ." ) .

crude oil imports by the united states have declined since the middle of the last decade , while u.s. crude oil production has been increasing .

volumetrically , u.s. crude oil production in 2011 essentially matched the 2003 level of approximately 2.06 billion barrels per day ( figure 9 ) .

however , the production reflected the new unconventional resources ( such as the north dakota bakken and texas woodford shales ) coming online to make up for a decline in production from the outer continental shelf / gulf of mexico .

while net imports have been declining , canadian imports have been on a steady rise .

the improved trend in u.s. crude production compared to imports in the last several years is more apparent in figure 10 .

in 2011 , imports had declined to roughly 60% of demand .

each refinery depends upon a certain grade or blend of crude oils to operate efficiently , depending upon its custom - designed processing equipment .

a light crude oil might not be interchanged for heavy crude oil , and without coking capacity a refinery designed to process light sweet crude could not refined heavy sour crude .

some refineries — for example the citgo refinery ( a subsidiary of the venezuelan national oil company ) — rely on a very heavy range of crude oil produced in venezuela , whereas motiva refineries rely on saudi arabian crude oils .

over the last 25 years , the "api gravity of imported crude oils has been decreasing while average sulfur content has been increasing .

until quite recently , the diminishing supply of light sweet crude oil led u.s. refineries to make multi - million dollar investments in processing - upgrades to convert lower - priced heavier sour crude oils to high - value products such as gasoline , diesel , and jet fuel .

newly available light sweet crudes from the north dakota's bakken formation are changing refining dynamics in some regions of the united states .

bitumen - derived crudes from the athabasca oil sands of alberta , canada , represent an increasingly important feedstock for u.s. refineries .

the enbridge north dakota pipeline system already pumps canadian crude oil to padd 2 refineries , and the proposed keystone xl pipeline will transport "diluted bitumen ( dilbit ) " to padd 3 refineries .

pumping bitumen - derived crudes by pipeline requires dilution with conventional crude oil and gas condensate  ( a by - product of natural gas production ) .

dilbit is comparable to other types of heavy crude oils produced in northern california , nigeria , russia , mexico , and venezuela and currently transported and refined in the united states .

if the keystone - xl gulf coast expansion project is complete , in addition to canadian crude oil , keystone will also be able to transport crude oil from u.s. producers in texas , oklahoma , montana , and north dakota .

over the period of 2006 through 2001 , leading refiners' net income ( profit ) generally declined .

this may be attributable to several factors including the combination of high crude oil prices and weak demand .

the comparative financial performance of the leading firms' downstream business for the 2006 through 2011 period is presented in table 5 .

high inventories of gasoline and diesel fuel depressed product prices relative to the cost of crude oil , which further reduced refining profit margins .

in addition , the narrowing price spread between light and heavy crude reduced the refining margin and contributed to earlier capital investments failing to generate expected returns .

all the major integrated oil companies have experienced mixed returns in the last few years .

valero , an independent refiner and marketer and owner of the most u.s. refineries , experienced a substantial gain in 2011 .

provisions adopted in the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 ; p.l .

109-58 ) allowed taxpayers to expense 50% of qualified investments in refinery assets .

congress adopted this provision to address concerns that domestic refineries would not have the capacity to meet anticipated growth in domestic fuel demand ; a condition that has since reversed .

the potential for fuel price spikes also rises when domestic refineries operate at near capacity , as there may be insufficient spare capacity to make up for a refinery outage .

the provisions allowing taxpayers to partially expense investments in refinery assets was initially enacted on a temporary basis .

specifically , taxpayers making qualified investments in domestic refinery property used to refine liquid fuel from crude oil ( or other qualified fuels ) were eligible for the tax deduction if a binding contract for construction of the qualified property had been entered into by january 1 , 2008 .

further , under epact05 , it was required that qualifying property be placed in service prior to january 1 , 2012 .

the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( eesa ; p.l .

110-343 ) extended the under - contract and placed - in - service deadlines , such that the incentive is now available for refineries that entered into a binding construction contract before january 1 , 2010 , and will be placed in service by january 1 , 2014 .

allowing taxpayers to expense part of their investment in refinery property reduces the cost of construction , encouraging additional refinery investment .

allowing 50% of refinery investments to be expensed , rather than depreciated over the normal 10-year life , reduces the cost of construction by approximately 5% for taxpayers in the 35% tax bracket .

since the provision is temporary , there is an incentive to speed up the investment in refinery capacity so as to qualify for the tax incentive .

nevertheless , the incentive to speed up investment is limited , because the effective price discount is small .

investing in excess capacity that would not otherwise be desirable would either leave the plant idle or provide too much output and lower prices and profits for a period of time .

the latter cost should be at least as big as the cost of remaining idle .

with a 5% price discount , the interest cost of carrying excess capacity or losing profits could offset the tax credit's value .

the estimated reduction in federal receipts associated with provisions allowing taxpayers to expense 50% of qualified investments in refinery assets is presented in table 8 .

over the five - year 2009 through 2013 budget window , estimates suggest this provision will cost $3.4 billion .

the conventional gasoline refined today has changed considerably since the clean air act amendments of 1990 prohibited lead additives and established requirements for oxygenated gasoline and reformulated gasoline ( rfg ) .

each of the three formulations of gasoline ( conventional , oxygenated and reformulated ) is available in at least three grades ( 87 , 89-mid grade , and 91+ super ) and the volatility is adjusted for winter / summer and northern / southern driving conditions .

 ( for information on other properties such as reid vapor pressure , octane , and cetane refer to appendix d . ) .

the petroleum refining industry has a long history of cyclical performance .

the most recent downturn closely followed a period many identified as the "golden age" of refining .

cycles in the industry have been historically related to movements in the price of oil , which is the primary cost element in refinery operations , and this will likely remain true in the future .

the composition and properties of crude oil inputs to u.s. refineries has shifted over time , requiring investments in new equipment to refine heavier , more sour crudes .

as international supply continues to shift toward heavier crudes , investments in these capabilities may increase .

the refining industry also faces structural challenges from recent government policies that aim at directly reducing the demand for the industry's output .

higher fuel mileage standards for automobiles , increased blending of renewable fuels in gasoline and diesel fuel , and the expansion in the use of pure biofuels suggest that even if economic conditions encourage a period of increasing demand for transportation fuels , the need for refined petroleum products will not necessarily increase proportionately .

electric vehicles , if adopted on a large - scale basis , could reduce the demand for liquid transportation fuels of all types , although a large - scale shift in this direction seems unlikely any time soon .

these policies were intended , in part , to address the growing demand for refined petroleum products .

now , though , combined with the prospect of declining motor fuel demand overall , the use of more renewable fuels could influence operators to idle , consolidate , or permanently close refineries .

this possibility may help explain why some refiners do not see a need to expand , or even maintain , production capacity in the united states .

because of market forces , technological changes , and regulatory pressures on the refining industry , additional refineries are likely to close even as some of the more technologically complex and efficient refineries are likely to expand .

if a trend toward even larger refineries emerges , this could lead to concentration in the industry at least on the national level .

in the event such adjustments occur , congress may wish to monitor competitive conditions in oil refining , and in particular the impact of consolidation on consumer prices and consumer choice .

appendix a .

crude oil properties light oil , also called conventional oil , has an api gravity of at least 22° and a viscosity less than 100 centipoise ( cp ) .

viscosity is a measure of the fluid's resistance to flow .

it varies greatly with temperature .

viscosity matters to producers because the oil's viscosity at reservoir temperature determines how easily oil flows to the well for extraction .

heavy oil is an asphaltic , dense ( low api gravity ) , and viscous oil that is chemically characterized by its content of asphaltenes ( very large molecules incorporating most of the sulfur and perhaps 90% of the metals in the oil ) .

although variously defined , the upper limit for heavy oil has been set at 22 °api gravity and a viscosity of 100 cp .

extra - heavy oil is that portion of heavy oil having an api gravity of less than 10° .

natural bitumen , also called tar sands or oil sands , shares the attributes of heavy oil but is yet more dense and viscous .

natural bitumen is oil having a viscosity greater than 10,000 cp .

sour crude contains sulfur present as hydrogen sulfide ( h2s ) , which is generated at temperatures greater than 392°f ( 200°c ) by thermolysis of carbon - sulfur bonds in sulfur - containing compounds in the crude .

part of crude oil refining involves removing sulfur by converting it to hydrogen sulfide ( h2s ) .

until the 1970s , refineries burned h2s as a fuel and along with the other gaseous hydrocarbons released during refining .

in response to the clean air act , refineries had to add processes that converted the h2s to elemental sulfur .

natural bitumen is a very viscous crude oil that may be up to 50% by weight of asphaltenes — a general class of aromatic - type hydrocarbons that are very high in molecular weight , highly viscous , and lack a specific melting point .

asphaltenes have a pronounced tendency to "self - aggregate" ( self - join ) , and thus cause problems in crude oil processing and refining .

the same property lends itself well to making asphalt ( a mixture of asphaltenes and petrolenes ) useful for road paving .

syncrude has no formal definition but typically represents a blend of naphtha , distillate , and gas oil range materials , containing no resid , with a boiling range of 1050°f+ ( 565°c ) .

canada began producing oil - sand bitumen in the 1960s by partially refining the bitumen into "synthetic crude" ( or "syncrude" ) .

in 1967 , suncor ( then great canadian oil sands ) started producing a light sweet syncrude by hydrotreating the naphtha , distillate , and gas oil generated in a refinery delayed coking unit ; marketed today as suncor oil sands blend a ( osa ) .

syncrude canada ltd. started producing a fully hydrotreated syncrude blend in 1978 , using fluidized - bed coking technology as the primary upgrading step , marketed today as syncrude sweet blend ( ssb ) .

husky oil started upgrading a heavy , conventional crude in 1990 using a combination of ebullated - bed hydroprocessing and delayed coking technologies to produce a sweet synthetic crude marketed as husky sweet blend ( hsb ) .

most recently , the athabasca oils sands project ( aosp ) started producing a sweet , synthetic crude in 2003 called premium albian synthetic ( pas ) using ebullated - bed hydroprocessing technology .

dilbit , or diluted bitumen , is produced without refinery upgrading , by blending the bitumen with natural gas condensates to meet the specifications required for pipeline shipping .

condensates form when the heavier fractions of natural gas — propane , butane , pentane — turn to liquid in surface processing facilities .

dilbit may be blended with 25% - 30% condensate and 70% - 75% bitumen .

the most common dilbit streams are cold lake blend ( clb ) , bow river ( brh ) , and various lloyd blends ( llb , llk , wcb ) .

since the majority of condensate is in the c5 to c12 length hydrocarbons ( 5 to 12 carbon atoms ) range , and the majority of bitumen is c30+ boiling range material , these blends are referred to as "dumbbell crudes," reflecting the absence of intermediate range hydrocarbons .

synbit is a blend of sweet synthetic crude ( typically osa ) and bitumen , typically 50% synthetic crude and 50% bitumen .

as natural gas condensate is in short supply in northern alberta and sells at a significant premium to light sweet crudes , some producers have started marketing "synbit. .

the most common synbits on the market today are christina lake blend ( csb ) and mackay heavy ( mkh ) , both of which are blends of bitumen produced by steam assisted gravity drainage ( sagd ) and osa crudes .

as a result of the condensate shortage , some condensate is separated from the sybits after delivery to the united states , and is being shipped back to alberta by rail car .

syndilbit s are actually blends of condensate , hydrotreated synthetic crude , and bitumen .

they typically contain about 65% bitumen , with the remaining volume split between the two dilutent streams .

the most common of these streams are wabasca heavy ( wh ) and western canadian select ( wcs ) .

appendix b .

refining processes crude oil contains natural components in the boiling range of gasoline , kerosene / jet fuel and diesel fuel .

 ( table b - 1 . ) .

light crude oils tend to have more paraffin in the range of gasoline , as much as 10% - 40% .

when light crude oils were more abundant in the united states , early refineries directly distilled a straight - run gasoline ( light naphtha ) of low - octane rating .

source: crs .

notes: gasoline's molecular weight is based on the number of carbon atoms , in the range of c5 to c10 ; middle - distillate fuels like kerosene , jet , and diesel range from c11 to c18 .

crude oil processing begins in a refinery's atmospheric distillation unit .

the refinery's "name plate capacity," usually expressed as barrels per calendar day or barrels per stream day describes the volume of crude oil that flows through a refinery's atmospheric distillation unit .

this is the initial refining stage that separates crude oil into gasoline , kerosene , diesel fuel and heavier petroleum components on the basis of their boiling range .

there , the "straight - run" petroleum fractions in the boiling ranges of gasoline , naphtha , kerosene , diesel , and jet fuel condense and separate .

heavier fractions are cracked with catalysts and hydrogen to produce more gasoline range ( c5+ ) blending stock , and low - octane paraffins are converted into high - octane aromatics ( octane is discussed below ) .

other processes such as alkylation produce branched chain hydrocarbons in the gasoline range .

generally , refineries are set up to run specific grades of crude oil , for example light sweet or heavy sour .

light sweet crude is particularly desirable as a feedstock for gasoline refining because its lighter - weight hydrocarbons make it easier to refine .

heavier crude oils require more complex processing than light crudes , and sour crudes require desulfurization .

refineries upgraded to process heavier crudes cannot readily switch back to lighter oils and run at normal capacity .

catalytic cracking , coking , and other conversion units , referred to as secondary processing units , have enabled refineries to produce more high - value products , such as gasoline , from a barrel of crude oil and process heavier crude oils .

these processing units add to a refinery's complexity and can actually increase the volume of its output .

these processes also require a supply of hydrogen , typically derived from natural gas .

source: reliance industries , ltd. , "types of refinery & nelson's complexity. .

notes: complexity , as denoted above , is based on the nelson complexity index , which rates the proportion of secondary processes to primary distillation ( topping ) capacity .

nelson's index varies from about 2 for hydroskimming refineries to about 5 for cracking refineries , and over 9 for coking refineries .

while the average index for u.s. refineries is 10 , only 52 have coking capacity ( accounting for the delaware city refinery closure , this represent 3.485 million barrels per day capacity ) .

by and large , u.s. refineries have become the most complex in the world in order to convert low - value residuum , formerly used as heavy heating oil , to high - value gasoline .

european refineries , in comparison , are less complex than u.s. refineries on average , being geared toward producing more diesel fuel .

distillation unit : heats crude oil until it boils and vaporizes .

each hydrocarbon rises to a tray at a temperature just below its own boiling point .

there , it cools and turns back to a liquid .

the lightest fractions are liquefied petroleum gases ( propane and butane ) and the petrochemicals used to make plastics and other products .

next come gasoline , kerosene , and diesel fuel .

heavier fractions are used as home heating oil and as fuel in ships and factories .

still heavier fractions are made into lubricants and waxes .

the remains , which include asphalt , are known as "residuals. .

fluid catalytic cracker : "cat cracking" is a refining process used to manufacture gasoline .

the process uses intense heat , low pressure , and powdered catalyst to accelerate the chemical reaction of the heavy fractions into smaller gasoline molecules .

selective hydrocracker : partially converts diesel - range material into gasoline , propane and butane via a chemical reaction that uses high temperatures and pressures in a catalyst - containing reactor .

alkylation plant : converts light hydrocarbons to heavier hydrocarbons more compatible as gasoline components for high - octane gasoline .

catalytic reforming : a process for upgrading low octane naphtha to a high octane gasoline blending component , reformate .

important by - products of this process include hydrogen , benzene , toluene , and xylenes .

delayed coker : converts petroleum pitch into petroleum coke and gas oils for processing in other units to higher quality , higher value diesel fuel and gasoline .

gas oil hydrotreater : provides for removal of sulfur and nitrogen from various products , making them more suitable for conversion feed to other process units .

gas plants : collect gases from processing units ( hydrocracker , hydrotreater , reformer , coker , cat cracker ) and separate volatiles into appropriate product streams .

sulfur recovery unit : recovers sulfur from refinery streams as elemental sulfur for a typical refinery yields a limited supply of jet and diesel fuel depending on the type of crude oil processed .

gulf coast ( texas and louisiana ) may yield up to 8% jet fuel , and over 30% diesel .

 ( see figure b - 1 . ) .

these refineries have an average complexity of 12 to 13 , which is above the national average of 9.5 .

appendix c. operable refineries by padd appendix d. important fuel properties reid vapor pressure vapor pressure is an important physical property of both automotive and aviation gasoline , affecting starting , warm - up , and tendency to vapor lock with high operating temperatures or high altitudes .

epa regulates the vapor pressure of gasoline sold at retail stations during the summer ozone season ( june 1 to september 15 ) to reduce evaporative emissions from gasoline that contribute to ground - level ozone and diminish the effects of ozone - related health problems .

shifting to gasoline with lower reid vapor pressure ( rvp ) reduces emissions .

the reid method refers to american society for testing and materials ( astm ) standard test method d 323-08 for measuring the vapor pressure of petroleum products .

rvp of conventional gasoline varies from 8.7 in the summer to 11.5 in the winter ; reformulated gasoline ( rfg ) and state "boutique" fuel blends may have a summer rvp as low as 7.0 .

octane higher octane - number fuels better resist engine "knock" — the sound caused by fuel prematurely igniting during compression .

in early gasoline research , the least knock resulted from using iso - octane , which arbitrarily received a rating of 100 .

isooctane refers to a branched "isomer" in the paraffin series having eight carbons ( c 8 h 18 ) .

the straight - chain isomer in this series , n - octane , has a rating - 19 .

modern formulated gasoline ranges in octane from 87 to 93 , achieved by blending various petroleum distillates , reforming gasoline - range hydrocarbons , and adding oxygenates such as ethanol to boost octane - number .

cetane the standard for rating diesel fuel's ease of auto - ignition during engine compression is based on "cetane"─a straight - chain hydrocarbon in the paraffin series with the common name of n - hexadecane .

it consists of 16 carbon atoms with three hydrogen atoms bonded to the two end carbons and two hydrogens bonded to each of the middle carbons ; written as c 16 h 34 .

pure cetane received the number 100 for rating purposes .

diesel fuel cetane - number ranges from 40 to 45 in the united states to as high as 55 in europe ( where high - speed diesel engines are prevalent in light - duty passenger vehicles ) .

diesel fuel formulation blends straight - run cut distillates with cracked stock ( heavier fractions ) to meet standardized specifications developed by the american society for testing and materials ( astm international ) and epa .

sulfur as now regulated by epa ( 40 c.f.r .

80.520 ) , diesel fuel must contain less than 15 parts - per - million ( ppm ) sulfur — referred to as ultra - low - sulfur diesel ( ulsd ) .

conventionally refined aviation jet fuel may contain as high as 3,000 ppm sulfur .

however , as it has been used in blending winter diesel fuel to lower the gel point , it has had a practical limit of 500 ppm ( the previous epa limit for diesel ) .

it is uncertain whether epa may promulgate future rules on jet fuel sulfur - content , thus limiting its use in blending winter ulsd .

despite its detrimental environmental effects , sulfur contributes to the "lubricity" of fuel .

under reduced sulfur , engines wear out sooner .

fuel can be blended with additives to make up for the loss of sulfur lubricity and engines can be manufactured from tougher materials , as has been the case in the epa mandated transition from low - sulfur diesel ( 500 ppm ) to ultra - low - sulfur diesel ( 15 ppm ) .

average annual sulfur content in all gasoline dropped from about 300 ppm in 1997 to a maximum of 30 ppm for most refiners in 2006 .

exhaust emissions diesel engines characteristically emit lower amounts of carbon monoxide ( co ) and carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) than gasoline engines , but they emit higher amounts of nitrogen oxides ( nox ) and particulate matter ( pm ) .

nox is the primary cause of ground - level ozone pollution ( smog ) and presents a greater problem , technically , to reduce in diesel engines than pm .

the co , nox , and pm emissions for gasoline and diesel engines are regulated by the 1990 clean air act amendments ( 42 u.s.c .

7401-7671q ) .

appendix e. glossary motor gasoline ( finished ) .

a complex mixture of relatively volatile hydrocarbons with or without small quantities of additives , blended to form a fuel suitable for use in spark - ignition engines .

motor gasoline ( as defined in astm specification d 4814 or federal specification vv - g - 1690c ) has a boiling range of 122" to 158" f at the 10% percent recovery point , and a 365" to 374" f boiling range at the 90% recovery point .

"motor gasoline" includes conventional gasoline , all types of oxygenated gasoline ( including gasohol ) , and reformulated gasoline , but excludes aviation gasoline .

volumetric data on blending components , such as oxygenates , are not counted in data on finished motor gasoline until the blending components are blended into the gasoline .

note: e85 is included only in volumetric data on finished motor gasoline production and other components of product supplied .

conventional gasoline .

finished motor gasoline not included in the oxygenated or reformulated gasoline categories .

note: this category excludes reformulated gasoline blendstock for oxygenate blending ( rbob ) as well as other blendstock .

reformulated gasoline .

finished gasoline formulated for use in motor vehicles , the composition and properties of which meet the requirements of the reformulated gasoline regulations promulgated by the u.s. environmental protection agency under section 211 ( k ) of the clean air act .

it includes gasoline produced to meet or exceed emissions performance and benzene content standards of federal - program reformulated gasoline even though the gasoline may not meet all of the composition requirements ( eg , oxygen content ) of federal - program reformulated gasoline .

note: this category includes oxygenated fuels program reformulated gasoline ( oprg ) .

reformulated gasoline excludes reformulated blendstock for oxygenate blending ( rbob ) and gasoline treated as blendstock ( gtab ) .

blendstock for oxygenate blending ( rbob ) .

specially produced reformulated gasoline blendstock intended for blending with oxygenates downstream of the refinery where it was produced .

includes rbob used to meet requirements of the federal reformulated gasoline program and other blendstock intended for blending with oxygenates to produce finished gasoline that meets or exceeds emissions performance requirements of federal reformulated gasoline ( eg , california rbob and arizona rbob ) .

excludes conventional gasoline blendstocks for oxygenate blending ( cbob ) .

rbob for blending with alcohol .

motor gasoline blending components intended to be blended with an alcohol component ( eg , fuel ethanol ) at a terminal or refinery to raise the oxygen content .

fuel ethanol ( e10 ) .

blends of up to 10% by volume anhydrous ethanol ( 200 proof ) ( commonly referred to as "gasohol" ) .

