the world is experiencing a shortage of helium - 3 , a rare isotope of helium with applications in homeland security , national security , medicine , industry , and science .

federal officials have testified that the shortage is acute and , unless alternatives are found , will affect federal investments in homeland security , scientific research , and other areas .

scientists have expressed concern that the shortage may threaten certain fields of research .

this report discusses the nature of the shortage ; federal actions undertaken so far to address it ; current and potential sources of helium - 3 and options for increasing the supply ; current and projected uses of helium - 3 and options for reducing the demand ; and options for allocating the supply if it continues to fall short of demand .

while the federal response to the events of 2001 increased the profile and use of helium - 3 , the federal government did not foresee the impending shortage .

thus , the executive branch response to the helium - 3 shortage began after the shortage had occurred .

first an ad - hoc interagency group formed by the departments of energy ( doe ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , and defense ( dod ) set policy , then that role passed to an interagency policy committee established by the national security staff .

the interagency policy committee developed a rationing scheme for allocating the available helium - 3 .

as a result , some federal and private - sector users received no allocation or an amount less than they had previously planned .

several federal agencies are investigating alternative sources of helium - 3 and ways to reduce the demand .

at present , helium - 3 is only produced as a byproduct of the manufacture and purification of tritium for use in nuclear weapons .

the commercial supply of helium - 3 therefore derives mostly , perhaps entirely , from two sources: the u.s. and russian governments .

other potential sources of helium - 3 do exist , but using these sources would present varying degrees of technical and policy challenges .

congress has several options for increasing the supply of helium - 3 , either from conventional sources or by encouraging the development of new sources .

among the important characteristics of all these potential sources are their likely cost and the amount of helium - 3 they could potentially supply .

the potential annual production of helium - 3 from alternative sources is uncertain .

this uncertainty results from incomplete characterization of the sources , variability in helium - 3 content , and other factors , such as the willingness of public or private entities to invest in infrastructure to enable production at a particular scale .

even for potentially large sources , producing helium - 3 from these sources may be impractical due to high costs .

the demand for helium - 3 has increased dramatically since 2001 .

prior to 2001 , the demand was approximately 8,000 liters per year , which was less than the new supply from tritium decay .

after 2001 , the demand increased , reaching approximately 80,000 liters in 2008 .

projections show demand continuing at above the available new supply for at least the next several years .

see figure 2 .

these projections contain many variables and therefore considerable uncertainty .

early estimates projected much higher non - governmental demand , perhaps more than 100,000 liters in fy2011 and fy2012 .

some estimates appear to measure helium - 3 quantities at nonstandard pressures .

because liters are a volume measure , and all gases change volume depending on their pressure , inconsistency in measurement has the potential to create confusion when amounts projected by different analysts are added .

perhaps most important , given such a large mismatch between supply and demand , users are likely to seek out alternative technologies , reschedule planned projects , and make other changes that reduce demand below what it would be in the absence of a shortage .

it is unclear whether the available estimates reflect ( or indeed , could reflect ) these likely changes .

similarly , it is unclear whether federal agencies and the private sector can reduce demand sufficiently to match the current helium - 3 supply and still meet priorities for security , science , and other applications .

as described above , nnsa extracts helium - 3 during the maintenance of the nation's tritium supply and transfers it to the doe office of isotope production and research .

that office disburses helium - 3 to users .

previously , it disbursed helium - 3 through two mechanisms: public auctions and interagency transfers .

at present , users can receive helium - 3 only if they have an allocation approved by the interagency policy committee ( ipc ) .

congress may wish to consider the criteria that the ipc uses to prioritize these allocations and set the allocated helium - 3 price .

alternatively , it could choose to move to a market - based system in which , as with other commodities , the market price of helium - 3 establishes the balance between supply and demand and determines the allocation of the limited supply .

in summary , congress could address the helium - 3 shortage in a variety of ways: oversight of the current situation , how it arose , and the processes currently in place for addressing it .

actions to increase supply: mandate or encourage increased tritium manufacture by the government or by the private sector through measures such as subsidies or tax incentives .

facilitate access to international sources , perhaps through support for international agreements .

seek alternative sources: commission studies , fund r&d projects or demonstration plants , provide subsidies or incentives .

mandate or facilitate recycling .

actions to reduce demand: fund or encourage the development of alternative technologies .

require or provide incentives for the use of alternative technologies .

choices about how the supply should be allocated: establish or modify a process and criteria for prioritized allocation by the government .

establish a market - based process for allocation .

