income in retirement comes from several sources .

most workers participate in the social security system , which pays retirement income as early as 62 years old .

retirement income security can also be provided by non - government sources , such as employer - sponsored pensions and participant - initiated retirement accounts .

about half of the u.s. workforce participates in one or both of two kinds of employer - sponsored pensions .

the two kinds of employer - sponsored pensions are defined benefit ( db ) and defined contribution ( dc ) pensions .

db pensions provide retirees with monthly benefits in which the amount is calculated using a formula based on the number of years of employment and final salary .

dc pensions , of which the 401 ( k ) plan is the most common , provide participants individual accounts in which contributions from individual employees — and often their employers — are placed in tax - advantaged accounts that accrue investment returns .

the accumulated contributions and investment earnings are then used for participants' retirement income .

although employers choose whether to offer dc plans , individual employees decide the contribution amounts ( subject to an annual limit ) and investment allocations of the contributions .

over the past 30 years , fewer employers have been providing db plans and instead have offered dc plans .

one consequence of this shift is that workers have had increasing responsibility for their retirement income security .

individual retirement accounts ( iras ) can play an important role by providing workers with tax - advantaged savings accounts in which to accumulate retirement savings .

although enrollment in a dc or db plan is contingent on employer sponsorship of such a plan , most individuals ( or married couples ) who have taxable compensation can establish and contribute to an ira .

similar to 401 ( k ) plans , iras are tax - advantaged accounts in which contributions and investment earnings accumulate , which are then used for retirement income .

depending on the type of ira , contributions may be made on a pre - or post - tax basis and investment earnings are either tax - deferred or tax - free .

this report provides an overview and a brief legislative history of iras , examines the tax - deductible contributions to traditional iras in 2007 , analyzes the characteristics of households that have iras , and compares ira owners who have pension coverage at work with those who do not have pension coverage .

the report concludes with a discussion of some of the policy proposals that some suggest might increase ira ownership rates among american households .

the two types of iras available to households in which either the head of the household or the spouse receives income from wages are traditional iras and roth iras .

traditional and roth iras differ in their eligibility requirements and the tax treatment of contributions and withdrawals .

individuals can also rollover lump - sum retirement assets from an employer - sponsored pension or an ira into a rollover ira .

rollover iras may be either traditional iras , in which investment earnings continue to accumulate tax - deferred , or roth iras , in which investment earnings continue to accumulate tax - free .

iras were first authorized in 1974 by the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ; p.l .

93-406 ) to encourage workers who did not have a pension plan at work to save for retirement .

prior to erisa , congress allowed self - employed individuals and their employees to make tax - deductible contributions to keogh accounts for the purpose of providing for income in retirement .

some keogh plan features , such as imposing penalties for withdrawing funds before the account owner reached the age of 59½ or for failing to take required withdrawals after the age of 70½ , were incorporated into the design of iras .

table 1 lists the major ira legislation since 1974 that has affected eligibility for and contributions to iras .

from 1974 to 1981 , only individuals who were not covered by an employer - sponsored pension plan could establish and contribute to iras .

from 1982 to 1986 , all workers regardless of pension coverage could make tax - deductible ira contributions ( up to the annual limit ) .

because of the revenue loss to the u.s. treasury , the tax reform act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-514 ) limited the tax deduction on ira contributions to non - covered workers and to covered workers with incomes under $25,000 .

since 1986 , workers without pension coverage and workers with pension coverage and who have incomes under prescribed limits can make tax - deductible ira contributions ( up to the annual limit ) while covered workers who have incomes greater than the prescribed limits may make non - deductible contributions .

less than 3% of taxpayers made tax - deductible ira contributions in 2007 .

as a percentage of all tax returns filed , fewer tax returns had ira deductions in 2006 and 2007 than in any year since 1977 .

figure 1 through figure 4 show historical tax - deductible ira contributions .

figure 1 shows the inflation - adjusted yearly amount of tax - deductible contributions to traditional iras from 1974 to 2007 .

figure 2 shows the inflation - adjusted average tax - deductible contribution .

figure 3 and figure 4 show the number and percentage of taxpayers who made tax - deductible ira contributions from 1974 to 2007 .

the total amount of ira contributions was nearly twice as much in 1981 compared with 1975 , although the average amount was more than 30% lower .

the large increase in 1982 both in the number and percentage of returns reporting ira contributions and the average amount of ira contributions is a result of the economic recovery tax act of 1981 ( p.l .

97-34 ) , which extended eligibility for iras to workers with employer - sponsored pensions .

the tax reform act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-514 ) that limited the eligibility for tax - deductible contributions beginning in 1987 sharply curtailed both the number of returns reporting ira contributions and the average ira contribution .

this suggests that tax - deductible ira contributions were largely made by workers with higher incomes and pension coverage .

the data suggest that since the mid - 1990s some taxpayers have responded to changes in the contribution limit .

the total and average value of ira contributions generally declined from 1990 to 2001 .

total tax - deductible ira contributions were 46% lower in 2001 compared with 1990 and the average contribution was 16% lower .

from 1987 to 2001 , neither the income limit for eligibility for tax - deductible contributions nor the contribution limit was increased , although in real ( inflation - adjusted ) terms these limits were more than 25% lower in 2001 than in 1987 .

the 5.5% increase in average ira contributions from 1996 to 1997 may be due to an increase in the contribution limit for non - working spouses from $250 to $2,000 .

the increases in the contribution limit from $2,000 to $3,000 in 2002 and from $3,000 to $4,000 in 2005 were accompanied by increases in the average contribution .

interestingly , there was not a corresponding rise in the number of returns reporting an ira contribution nor a rise in the percentage of returns reporting a contribution .

this suggests that the response to these changes was among taxpayers who were already contributing near the contribution limit and increased the amount of their contributions .

this is consistent with research that has shown that many individuals who make ira contributions contribute close to the statutory limit .

the introduction of roth iras beginning in 1998 appears to have had no effect on the total amount of the contributions to traditional iras nor on the average traditional ira tax - deductible contribution .

continuing the trend that began in 1990 , both total and average ira contributions were lower from 1998 to 2001 , the first four years of the existence of roth iras .

while it is possible that the decline in traditional ira contributions over this period is as a result of taxpayers making roth ira contributions instead , a more likely explanation is that decline in traditional ira contributions is a result of the decreased real value of the ira contribution limit .

roth ira contributions were likely not a result of individuals shifting their contributions from traditional iras to roth iras .

figure 4 shows that the percentage of taxpayers who make ira contributions was highest in 1985 at 15.9% ; declined sharply after 1986 as a result of the limitations on tax - deductible contributions by workers covered by a pension plan ; and gradually declined from 1989 ( 4.7% ) to 2007 ( 2.3% ) .

since 1999 , less than 3% of tax returns each year reported tax - deductible contributions to traditional iras .

although less than 3% of taxpayers made a tax - deductible contribution in 2007 , the average contribution was $3,902 , which suggests that many households made close to the maximum allowable contribution .

contributions to traditional iras were disproportionately made by households with higher incomes .

table 2 indicates that although households with adjusted gross incomes of less than $50,000 in 2007 filed 65.6% of all federal income tax returns , these households accounted for 41.1% of households claiming deductions for ira contributions and 32.0% of the total dollar amount of tax - deductible ira contributions .

higher - income households have an incentive to make tax - deductible ira contributions as they are in higher tax brackets and receive a greater benefit for each tax - deductible dollar contributed to a traditional ira .

both the percentage of households that made tax - deductible ira contributions and the average ira contribution amount increased with household income .

of the 93.8 million tax returns with incomes below $50,000 , approximately 1.4 million ( 1.4% ) claimed the ira deduction whereas of the 29.7 million tax returns with incomes above $75,000 , 1.2 million ( 4.1% ) claimed the deduction .

the average ira contribution among taxpayers with incomes above $100,000 was $5,440 , which was more than twice the average ira contribution among households with incomes below $25,000 .

the survey of consumer finances ( scf ) indicates that 28.2 million ( 32.7% ) working households owned an ira in 2007 .

among working households that had iras , 77.0% had a single ira and 23.0% had more than one ira .

table 3 indicates that more working households had traditional iras in 2007 ( 15.9 million ) than had roth iras ( 10.2 million ) or rollover iras ( 9.4 million ) .

roth iras have been popular .

although roth iras were authorized in 1997 — 23 years after traditional iras — table 3 shows that there were two - thirds as many roth iras as traditional iras in 2007 .

because roth iras have not had as long to accrue contributions and investment earnings , the median roth ira account balance was $10,000 , which was 63% lower than the median account balance of traditional iras ( $27,000 ) .

in 2007 , ira assets totaled $3.0 trillion .

a plurality of ira assets were held in rollover iras .

rollover iras held $1.4 trillion in assets in 2007 , which was 46.3% of all ira assets ; traditional iras held $1.3 trillion in assets in 2007 , which was 43.7% of all ira assets ; and roth iras held $306 billion in assets in 2007 , which was 10.1% of all ira assets .

the median rollover ira account balance was nearly twice as large as the median traditional ira account balance and more than five times as large as the median roth ira account balance .

this is likely because traditional and roth iras consist mostly of yearly contributions whereas rollover iras consist of large sums transferred from other retirement accounts , like 401 ( k ) plans .

most households that had traditional iras did not make taxable contributions to their iras in 2007 .

although 15.9 million households had a traditional ira in 2007 , only 3.3 million tax returns reported tax - deductible contributions to traditional iras .

although iras were authorized to encourage workers without pension coverage to save for retirement , ira ownership is greater among households with pensions than among households without pensions .

table 4 indicates that 38.7% of households with pension coverage had iras in 2007 , compared with 25.3% of households without pension coverage .

with regard to current policy , the data highlight that many individuals have not responded to the tax incentives designed to encourage ira ownership among households without pension coverage .

analysis of the data presented in this report suggests that pension plan coverage is an important factor for determining whether a household owns an ira .

ira ownership is not as widespread among households without pension coverage , yet these are the households that iras are targeted to help .

in fact , ira ownership rates are more than 50% higher among households with pension coverage compared with households without any pension coverage .

households with neither iras nor pensions are about 34% of all working households and disproportionately represent economically vulnerable populations , such as lower - income , less - educated , and minority households .

some policymakers have expressed concern that many workers have inadequate savings for retirement .

half of the working households with neither pension coverage nor iras have net worth less than $20,560 .

in some cases , these workers may have less wealth than they anticipated to enjoy retirement .

some of these households may have to rely on public assistance to meet their basic needs .

to formulate more effective retirement savings policies , policymakers need to be aware of how ira ownership is affected by factors such as pension coverage , education , income , and behavior ( eg , saver characteristics ) .

an issue for policymakers is how to encourage workers to better prepare for retirement , particularly when they may have other , more immediate financial concerns .

retirement security is often thought of as a three - legged stool: social security , private savings , and employer - provided pensions .

although participation in social security is mandatory for most workers , the other legs have traditionally been voluntary , though encouraged through tax incentives .

for example , employer contributions to pension plans are a tax - deductible expense ; participants' contributions to defined contribution plans are not included in current taxable income ; contributions to traditional iras may be tax - deductible ; and qualified distributions from roth iras are not taxed .

current tax incentives , however , may not be effective for some target populations .

several policy proposals have been suggested to help workers better prepare for retirement .

the retirement savings contributions credit ( the saver's credit ) is an additional incentive to encourage lower - income households to save for retirement .

this non - refundable tax credit of up to $1,000 was authorized by the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 ( p.l .

107-16 ) for eligible individuals who contribute to an ira or an employer - sponsored retirement plan .

the credit is available to single filers with incomes in 2011 up to $28,250 and married filers with incomes in 2011 up to $56,500 .

irs data indicates that 5.9 million households received the saver's credit in 2007 and that the average amount of the credit received was $167 .

table 10 indicates that the credit may not be widely used: 5.9% of households with adjusted gross incomes under $50,000 claimed the saver's credit in 2007 .

several factors may limit the effectiveness of the saver's credit: ( 1 ) it is non - refundable , so households with little or no tax liability receive little or no benefit ; ( 2 ) it is not available to individuals who file their taxes using form 1040ez ; and ( 3 ) the credit may be used by individuals who would have made retirement plan contributions in the absence of the credit .

thus , not all retirement plan contributions tied to the credit are "new" contributions .

because current tax and other incentives have not substantially increased voluntary participation in the retirement savings system , some policymakers believe that ira ownership rates could be raised through increased access to retirement accounts .

one of the challenges is determining how to comprehensively provide retirement accounts to workers who do not have employer - sponsored pension plans .

the success of automatic enrollment in 401 ( k ) plans has prompted calls for an automatic enrollment program for iras .

the automatic ira ( auto ira ) is a proposal for increasing workers' access to retirement accounts .

under such proposals , employers above a certain size that have been in business a certain number of years and that do not offer a pension plan would be required to establish iras for their employees .

the employer would direct a specified percentage of each employee's pay into the ira .

eligible employees would automatically be enrolled by their employers in the auto ira program , but could opt - out of participation or change the amount of their contribution .

employers could , but would not be required to , match their employees' contributions .

although approximately 39.1 million households work for employers that do not offer pension plans ( about 50% of u.s. working households ) , not all of these households would be covered by auto iras .

some households might work for employers that are small enough to be exempt from offering auto iras or some households might not meet job tenure requirements .

an auto ira program for most workers without pension coverage could be costly to implement and administer , as millions of individual accounts would likely need to be processed .

one goal of auto ira proponents is to minimize employers' administrative burdens and fiduciary obligations .

for example , there may be questions about which default investments are appropriate for workers that do not make active participation decisions .

in addition , auto iras would provide iras to some workers who already have traditional or roth iras .

among households that do not have an employer - sponsored pension plan , and therefore would be potentially eligible for the auto ira , 25.3% already own iras .

while individuals could opt out of the auto ira , the possibility exists that some individuals may inadvertently exceed the yearly ira contribution limit .

the tax penalty is 6% of amount of the excess contribution .

the treasury inspector general for tax administration noted that noncompliance with ira contribution limits is an area of concern and that the irs has inadequate procedures to ensure compliance .

it is estimated that 146,976 taxpayers exceeded the contribution limit in 2007 .

efforts to improve financial literacy may increase ira contributions and ownership rates by increasing knowledge of the benefits of iras , the saver's credit , and the option to have federal income tax refunds deposited directly to iras .

many government agencies , non - profit groups , and for - profit companies have ongoing campaigns aimed at improving financial literacy ( for example , increasing awareness of credit card fees ) .

in particular , some of these efforts focus on the importance of saving for retirement .

small differences in the amount of fees that financial institutions charge for managing iras can yield large differences in the account balances at retirement .

some policymakers have expressed concern regarding the fees that financial institutions charge 401 ( k ) plan participants .

legislation has been introduced that would increase 401 ( k ) plan sponsors' and participants' awareness of the fees that they pay .

however , legislation to increase fee transparency for ira owners has not been introduced .

the department of labor recently issued an interim final rule that would require greater transparency of fees paid in 401 ( k ) plans .

the final rule specifically excludes iras , noting that ira owners are solely responsible for managing their accounts and that ira fee disclosure requirements could be quite costly .

one difference between iras and 401 ( k ) plans is that ira owners have complete control over the choice of the financial institution and investments .

however , individuals may find the decisions associated with opening and maintaining iras complicated and perhaps overwhelming .

this suggests that opportunities may exist for financial institutions to charge higher fees than necessary .

a direct comparison of ira and 401 ( k ) fees is not possible because of the different structures of the plans .

iras are likely administratively costly , as each separate account requires separate record keeping , whereas 401 ( k ) plan administrators can take advantage of economies of scale .

