commemorative commissions are entities established to oversee the commemoration of a person or event .

these commissions typically coordinate celebrations , scholarly events , public gatherings , and other activities , often to coincide with a milestone anniversary .

for example , the christopher columbus quincentenary jubilee commission was created "to prepare a comprehensive program for commemorating the quincentennial of the voyages of discovery of christopher columbus , and to plan , encourage , coordinate , and conduct observances and activities commemorating the historic events associated with those voyages. .

this report examines commemorative commissions created by statute since the 96 th congress ( 1979-1980 ) and focuses on the content of typical legislative language used to create commemorative commissions and how commemorative commissions are funded .

this report does not address noncommemorative congressional commissions , nor does it address commemorative entities created by the president or statutory commissions tasked with designing and building monuments and memorials in washington , dc .

bills creating commemorative commissions are introduced regularly in congress .

for example , since the 112 th congress ( 2011-2012 ) , more than a dozen bills were introduced to establish commemorative commissions .

similar numbers of bills have been proposed in previous congresses .

most of these bills , however , are not enacted .

to compile a list of commemorative commissions created since the 96 th congress , a database search was conducted using the legislative information system ( lis ) .

each piece of legislation returned was examined to determine ( 1 ) if the legislation contained a commission , and ( 2 ) if the commission was commemorative in nature .

a total of 21 commemorative commissions were identified by this search .

table 1 lists the name , public law number , and date of enactment for each of these commissions .

nine of the commissions were created to commemorate individuals and coincided with a milestone anniversary of their birth .

the other 12 commissions were related to the commemoration of historical events and coincided with a milestone anniversary of the event .

statutes establishing commemorative commissions generally include language that states the mandate of the commission , provides a membership and appointment structure , outlines the commission's duties and powers , and sets a termination date for the commission .

a variety of options are available for each of these organizational choices , and legislators can tailor the composition , organization , and working arrangements of a commission , based on the particular goals of congress .

as a result , the organizational structure and powers of individual commissions are often unique .

commemorative commissions have been funded in two ways: through appropriations or through solicitation of nonfederal money .

at times , commissions are authorized both for appropriations and to fundraise or accept donations .

in addition , some commemorative commissions are not provided with explicit authorization to solicit funds or accept donations .

commissions without the statutory authority to solicit funds or accept donations are generally prohibited from engaging in those activities .

commemorative commissions approved since the 96 th congress ( 1979-1980 ) have also varied widely in the amount of funding authorized by the acts establishing the commissions , as well as in the manner in which the funding was authorized .

table 2 lists the authorizing language and the funding amounts authorized by each of the acts .

of the 21 commissions , five were authorized specific funding levels for each fiscal year ; two were authorized a lump - sum appropriation , which remained available to be expended over specified fiscal years ; four were not authorized specific levels of funding .

instead , the acts' language authorized "such sums as necessary" for an unspecified number of fiscal years ; one authorized a specific level of funding for the first fiscal year , and such sums as necessary for an unspecified number of subsequent fiscal years ; one was not specifically authorized any appropriation ; seven were specifically barred from using federal funds ; and one could only make expenditures from donated funds .

commissions created statutorily by congress may be funded directly by specific appropriation or through general agency appropriations .

for example , the commission on the bicentennial of the u.s. constitution was specifically funded in both regular annual and supplemental appropriations acts .

alternately , the women's progress commemoration commission was funded through general appropriations for the national park service ( nps ) in the department of the interior ( doi ) .

it is also possible for the funding structure to change during the life of a commission .

from fy1999 through fy2001 , the centennial of flight commemorative commission was funded through specific line - items in the federal aviation administration operations appropriations .

in subsequent years , the commission was funded through general agency appropriations .

several of the commemorative commissions received agency appropriations under the nps through the doi .

these appropriations have not appeared as specific line - items in appropriations acts .

instead , they have been budgeted within agency appropriations under the headings "operations of the national park system" or "national recreation and preservation. .

for example , the jamestown 400 th commemoration commission was funded in fy2005 under the "national recreation and preservation" heading of the nps appropriations , as part of a larger appropriation for related activities for the jamestown 2007 celebration .

in some cases , the operational expenses of the commission itself have been entirely funded through the appropriation of federal funds .

however , legislation has authorized most commemorative commissions to accept donations , including donations of money , property , personal services , memorabilia , or volunteer labor .

for example , p.l .

98-162 authorized the commission on the eleanor roosevelt centennial to "accept donations of money , supplies , and services to carry out its responsibilities. .

similarly , p.l .

106-550 authorized the james madison commemorative commission to accept donations of money , personal services , and property , both real and personal , including books , manuscripts , miscellaneous printed matter , memorabilia , relics , and other material related to james madison .

in some cases , the authorizing language placed specific limitations on donations .

for example , p.l .

98-375 authorized the christopher columbus quincentenary commission to accept donations of money , property , or personal services , except that the commission may not accept donations ( 1 ) the aggregate value of which exceeds $25,000 , in the case of an individual ; or ( 2 ) the aggregate value of which exceeds $50,000 in the case of donations from a foreign government , a corporation , a partnership , or any other person .

in at least one case , the authorizing language specified that only donated funds could be used to pay for commission expenses .

for example , p.l .

115-102 specified that "all expenditures of the [400 years of african - american history] commission shall be solely made from donated funds. .

statutory language for the majority of commemorative commissions does not mention the words "fund raise. .

instead , statutes commonly provide the commission with the authority to accept donations .

for example , the jamestown 400 th commemoration commission was authorized to "accept donations and make dispersions of money , personal services , and real and personal property related to jamestown and of the significance of jamestown in the history of the united states. .

examples of other commissions with similar language include the following: eisenhower memorial commission: ( b ) donations .

 – ( 1 ) the commission may accept , use , and dispose of gifts or donations of money , property , or personal services .

christopher columbus quincentenary jubilee commission: the commission may accept donations of money , property , or personal services .

bicentennial of the u.s. constitution: ( h ) ( 1 ) the commission is authorized to accept , use solicit , and dispose of donations of money , property , or personal services .

 ( 2 ) the commission shall prescribe regulations under which the commission may accept donations of money , property , or personal services .

commission on the eleanor roosevelt centennial: ( d ) the commission may accept donations of money , supplies , and services to carry out its responsibilities .

women's progress commemoration commission: ( b ) donations. — the commission may accept donations from non - federal sources to defray the costs of the operations of the commission .

commission on the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade: ... accept donations and gift items related to the transatlantic slave trade , the institution of slavery , and the significance of slavery to the history of the united states .

brown v. board of education 50 th anniversary commission: ( b ) gifts and donations. — ( 1 ) authority to accept. — the commission may accept and use gifts or donations of money , property , or personal services .

in addition , some commissions , such as the centennial of flight commission , are provided with the authority to accept only nonmonetary donations .

in that instance , the statutory language stated , donations. — the commission may accept donations of personal services and historic materials relating to the implementation of its responsibilities under the provisions of this act .

none of the 21 commemorative commission statutes discussed in this report contain language specifically authorizing fundraising .

commissions , however , could be provided with authority to fundraise .

to provide statutory fundraising authority , a commemorative commission could be given language similar to the authority given to commissions charged with creating monuments and memorials under the commemorative works act , which requires the commission to raise a certain percentage of the total costs from private sources of a monument or memorial before construction can begin .

for example , the national museum of african american history and culture plan for action presidential commission statute contains the following language authorizing fundraising: fundraising plan. — the commission shall develop a fundraising plan for supporting the creation and maintenance of the museum through contributions by the american people , and a separate plan on fundraising by the african american community .

congressional commission costs vary widely .

overall expenses for any individual commission are dependent on a variety of factors , the most important of which are the number of paid staff and duration of the commission .

many commissions have few or no full - time staff ; others employ large numbers .

additionally , some commissions provide compensation to members ; others only reimburse members for travel expenses .

many commissions finish their work and terminate within a year of creation ; in other cases , work may not be completed for several years .

secondary factors that can affect commission costs include the number of commissioners , how often the commission meets or holds hearings , and the number and size of publications the commission produces .

although congressional commissions are primarily funded through congressional appropriations , many commissions are statutorily authorized to accept donations of money and volunteer labor , which may offset costs .

