in 1998 , the u.s. supreme court was confronted with a question reminiscent of that posed in costco , although there is a factual difference between the cases .

in quality king distributors , inc. v. l' a nza research international , inc. , a california company ( l'anza ) manufactured and sold shampoo and other hair care products ; the products were manufactured in the united states , but were sold by l'anza both domestically and internationally .

l'anza had copyrighted the labels that it affixed to its products .

the prices that l'anza charged its domestic distributors were significantly higher than the prices charged to foreign distributors .

l'anza's united kingdom distributor had sold several tons of l'anza's products ( affixed with the copyrighted labels ) to a distributor in malta ; quality king distributors bought the products from the malta distributor and imported the products for resale in the united states through retailers who were not within l'anza's authorized chain of distribution .

l'anza sued quality king for infringement of its distribution and importation rights under the copyright act .

the district court rejected quality king's defense based on the first sale doctrine ; the ninth circuit court of appeals affirmed that judgment , noting that § 602's ban on importation would be "meaningless" if § 109 "were found to supersede the prohibition on importation in this case. .

the supreme court in quality king reversed the ninth circuit and held that the first sale doctrine endorsed in § 109 applies to copies of copyrighted works that are imported into the united states .

in reaching this conclusion , the court first observed that the copyright holder's distribution right granted by § 106 ( 3 ) is expressly limited by other provisions of the copyright act , including the first sale doctrine codified at § 109 ( a ) .

section 602 ( a ) provides that unauthorized importation is an infringement of the copyright holder's exclusive right to distribution under § 106 .

therefore , the court reasoned that the rights granted by § 602 must also be limited by the first sale doctrine .

according to the court , because § 106 ( 3 ) "does not encompass resales by lawful owners , the literal text of § 602 ( a ) is simply inapplicable to both domestic and foreign owners of l'anza's products who decide to import them and resell them in the united states. .

the court held that the owner of goods lawfully made under the copyright act "is entitled to the protection of the first sale doctrine in an action in a united states court even if the first sale occurred abroad. .

in a concurring opinion , justice ginsburg identified the issue left unresolved by the quality king opinion: this case involves a "round trip" journey , travel of the copies in question from the united states to places abroad , then back again .

i join the court's opinion recognizing that we do not today resolve cases in which the allegedly infringing imports were manufactured abroad .

in making this clarification , justice ginsburg cited without comment two treatises on copyright law: see w. patry , copyright law and practice 166-170 ( 1997 supp. ) .

 ( commenting that provisions of title 17 do not apply extraterritorially unless expressly so stated , hence the words "lawfully made under this title" in the "first sale" provision , 17 u.s.c .

§ 109 ( a ) , must mean "lawfully made in the united states" ) ; see generally p. goldstein , copyright § 16.0 , pp .

16:1-16:2 ( 2d ed .

1998 ) ( "copyright protection is territorial .

the rights granted by the united states copyright act extend no farther than the nation's borders .

" ) .

the facts of costco v. omega are relatively straightforward .

the swiss corporation omega manufactures wrist watches in switzerland and sells them through authorized distributors and retailers around the world .

omega engraves on the underside of its watches a small logo — an original artwork that it refers to as the "omega globe design," that omega had registered as a copyrighted work with the u.s .

copyright office .

costco obtained authentic omega watches from the "gray market" — from third parties that had purchased the watches from authorized omega distributors overseas .

costco then sold the watches to u.s. customers within its california warehouse stores .

while omega had authorized the initial foreign sale of its watches , it did not authorize their importation into the united states or costco's domestic sale of the watches .

omega sued costco for infringing its distribution and importation rights under §§ 106 ( 3 ) and 602 ( a ) of the copyright act ; costco defended itself by arguing that the first sale doctrine , § 109 ( a ) , precludes omega's infringement claims .

without explanation , the u.s. district court for the central district of california granted summary judgment to costco on the basis of the first sale doctrine .

because of the equal division of the supreme court in costco , the ninth circuit's decision remains the law in that circuit , while other federal circuits are free to issue opinions that agree or conflict with the ninth circuit .

the supreme court could revisit the legal question in a future case involving importation of gray - market goods .

also , congress could consider legislation to clarify the relationship between the copyright act's § 109 ( a ) first sale provision and the § 602 ( a ) ( 2 ) importation right .

a definitive judicial or legislative resolution of this legal question may continue to be of great interest to parties that are affected by the secondary markets of copyrighted goods — intellectual property owners , manufacturers , consumers , resale stores such as costco , and online marketplaces such as ebay , amazon.com , and craigslist .

