with the large federal deficit , some members of congress have become interested in institutional mechanisms that congress has used in the past in attempts to address one component of this issue — federal spending .

one of the mechanisms that has drawn interest is the joint committee on reduction of non - essential federal expenditures , which existed from 1941 to 1974 .

the joint committee on reduction of non - essential federal expenditures was established at the initiative of senator harry f. byrd by section 601 of the revenue act of 1941 .

 ( section 601 appears as appendix of this report. ) .

when the senate finance committee reported the revenue act of 1941 to the senate , it recommended a committee amendment to establish the joint committee .

the amendment was agreed to on the senate floor and retained in conference .

senator byrd chaired the joint committee from its inception until his retirement from congress in 1965 .

during the 91 st congress ( 1969-1970 ) , the joint committee was renamed the joint committee on reduction of federal expenditures .

its existence was terminated in the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 .

this report traces the history of the joint committee and describes the subject matter of some of its principal work products .

the report concludes with some considerations involved with the creation of a committee — the purpose of which is to assist congress in reducing federal spending — and with a brief examination of committee oversight authority extant in house and senate committees and of alternative mechanisms for cutting spending .

senator byrd initially introduced s.con.res .

5 to create a joint committee in february 1941 in the course of debate on a measure to increase the federal debt limit .

as proposed , the joint committee would have had a broader mandate than making recommendations on nonessential federal expenditures .

the joint committee under the concurrent resolution was to investigate and make recommendations on "[meeting] federal fiscal post - war problems from the current war" ; "impounding in the treasury … unexpended appropriations made for non - essential purposes" ; and "revision of the federal tax system as may be necessary in order to simplify and equalize the tax burden and to place the united states in such a sound financial condition as will enable it to make such imperative expenditures as may be necessary in order to adequately provide for the national defense. .

the concurrent resolution was referred to the committee on finance .

although war would not be declared until december 1941 , senator byrd was concerned with impending war costs .

he wanted to cut nondefense spending , reduce the public debt , and rationalize what he characterized as a "hodgepodge" tax system to make maximum resources available for national defense and to prepare for post - war economic adjustment .

later in 1941 , in an amendment to the revenue act of 1941 recommended by the senate finance committee , the duties and purposes of the joint committee were solely to "make a full and complete study and investigation of all expenditures of the federal government with a view to recommending the elimination or reduction of all such expenditures deemed by the joint committee to be nonessential. .

duties for the joint committee related to taxation and post - war planning were not included in the amendment .

the amendment was agreed to without debate or objection by the senate and retained in conference .

to accomplish its statutory objective , the joint committee was authorized to hold hearings , and to employ experts and staff to examine and assist the committee in order to make recommendations .

the joint committee was also authorized to utilize the resources of departments and agencies of the federal government to assist the joint committee in formulating its recommendations to congress .

an appropriation of $10,000 was authorized and subsequently appropriated .

the joint committee comprised 14 members: six senators from the committees on appropriations and finance , six representatives from the committees on appropriations and ways and means , the secretary of the treasury , and the director of the bureau of the budget .

the joint committee on reduction of non - essential federal expenditures was a study committee , without legislative authority .

its recommendations on cutting or reducing nonessential spending were reported to the house and senate and submitted to the committees on appropriations .

thereafter , the appropriations committees could use the work of the joint committee in their consideration of appropriations measures .

individual members might also have been interested in the joint committee's work and have based arguments or amendments on the committee's recommendations .

it is not possible to track the joint committee's influence over the course of its existence , although the provenance in 1974 of the budget committees' scorekeeping was the joint committee's scorekeeping reports .

the joint committee was terminated by section 202 ( e ) of the congressional budget and impoundment act of 1974 , and its functions and personnel were transferred to the congressional budget office ( cbo ) .

the report of the senate rules and administration committee explained: section 202 ( e ) transfers the duties , functions , and personnel of the joint committee on reduction of federal expenditures to cbo .

the work of this joint committee , although not widely publicized , has been of excellent professional quality and tremendously helpful in providing a scorekeeping record of congressional action and its impact on the nation's budgetary posture .

the committee's intent is to incorporate this expertise into the function of the cbo so that it can be further developed and highlighted as an essential part of the congressional budget process .

created to recommend potential savings in federal spending , the work of the joint committee on reduction of non - essential federal expenditures was characterized by a dual narrative — one of genuine interest in reducing federal expenditures , and another concerned with projecting legislative control over spending in government programs .

an example of the latter case is a 1947 report on postwar foreign assistance , which found that some foreign - aid spending had been "specifically defined and authorized , and that this ... may be compiled , verified , and estimated," but that other aid was not documented , could not be estimated , and was not monitored by congress .

in that report , and many others , the joint committee identified areas where government agencies were too autonomous from congressional control in determining how money was spent .

while neither narrative is necessarily exclusive of the other , being aware of each helps to understand the joint committee's interests .

on the eve of world war ii , the united states owed $55 billion to its creditors .

in two years , massive national defense requirements expanded the debt by nearly 50% to $80 billion , with the "prospect [of] a national debt of at least $200 billion by conservative estimates. .

while these figures may today seem modest , a $200 billion debt in 1942 represented 123% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , compared with current debt , which stands at 92% of gdp .

for many policymakers , the debt was so high and the prospect of war so certain that immediate action was required to strengthen federal finances .

this view was reflected on the pages of many of the nation's leading newspapers .

a 1940 chicago tribune headline warned: "america limps financially as arming starts. .

the los angeles times reported that the national chamber of commerce cautioned that even entering the war would bankrupt the country .

furthering the call for fiscal austerity was a quickly increasing inflation rate .

testifying before the senate committee on finance in 1941 , secretary of the treasury henry morgenthau warned that a "strong fiscal program" was required to counteract an accelerated increase in prices and the cost of living .

fears of inflation as a result of the fiscal situation ran so high that president franklin delano roosevelt considered price fixing to control rising prices .

marriner stoddard eccles , chair of the federal reserve , echoed these concerns in december 1940 in a special report to congress encouraging higher taxes and reduced federal expenditures as an alternative to deficit spending to finance the war in order to "forestall the development of inflationary tendencies. .

deficit reduction was seen as an essential component of war preparedness .

these fears were not lost on members of congress , who began to discuss the federal debt as a national security concern .

just three weeks after the attack on pearl harbor , senator byrd , the joint committee's chairman , capturing the sentiment of the time , noted , "[b]efore the war , economy in nonessential spending was important .

now it is vital. .

thus , the call for a reduction of nonessential federal expenditures served many purposes .

spending that was eliminated would save money that could be applied to the war effort .

additionally , it was argued , american taxpayers would be more willing to shoulder the high taxes needed to fund the war if they saw that the federal government was acting frugally .

finally , reduced federal deficit spending could help control potentially damaging rates of inflation .

for the duration of the war , the joint committee was fairly active in identifying potential savings in the federal budget .

the conclusion of the war , however , may have deprived both the joint committee and congress as a whole of such a strong sense of urgency to control spending .

the joint committee's interests narrowed as time passed , and senator byrd's retirement in 1965 further slowed the output of the joint committee .

the second purpose of this report is to briefly explain the creation of a new committee , should the house or senate , alone or together , wish to establish a new committee with a role in cutting federal spending .

the succeeding sections of the report examine some considerations involved with the creation of a committee — the purpose of which is to assist congress in reducing federal spending — and examine committee oversight authority extant in house and senate committees and of alternative mechanisms for cutting spending .

the house or senate may create a standing , select , or special committee by adoption of a simple resolution or as a provision of another piece of legislation that becomes law .

a joint committee may be created by adoption of a concurrent resolution or as a provision of another piece of legislation that becomes law .

a committee may be established as a permanent or temporary committee .

a committee may be given authority to report legislation — legislative authority — or it may be authorized only as a study or investigatory committee .

the congressional budget and impoundment control act or 1974 does not apply to the creation of a committee or to the parent chamber's grant of legislative or oversight authority to a committee .

many house and senate committees with legislative authority may report one or more types of legislation with budgetary impact — appropriations measures , revenue bills , direct - spending bills , or other measures .

these measures are considered on the house and senate floor within the framework of the congressional budget act , other budget laws and rules , and the annual concurrent resolutions on the budget , which are also adopted within the budget act's framework .

if a newly created committee is given legislative authority and not solely study authority , legislation that it reports and that has a budgetary impact would also be considered within the framework of the budget act and each chamber's rules .

if a committee is given authority only to study a matter and make recommendations , provisions of the budget act would not be triggered by the committee's work .

in creating a committee with legislative authority , the house and senate may alter budget or legislative procedures applicable to legislation that the committee reports or could exempt such legislation from certain chamber rules or from statutory provisions that operate as chamber rules .

the house and senate , in statute , chamber rules , or special rules or orders , might create expedited procedures that foreclose extended debate , restrain or curtail the amendment process , and restrict other procedures normally applicable to a chamber's consideration of measures .

for example , in their amendment , the bipartisan task force for responsible fiscal action act of 2010 , to a debt - limit bill considered by the senate in january 2010 , senators kent conrad and judd gregg included expedited committee and floor procedures for considering task force recommendations to "significantly improve the long - term fiscal imbalance of the federal government. .

currently , savings may be obtained through the appropriations process , the legislative process , or the reconciliation process .

appropriations measures are written pursuant to ceilings established in a budget resolution .

appropriations bills and resolutions can increase , cut , modify , or eliminate or not fund spending for federal programs and activities that receive budget authority through the appropriations process .

authorizations and spending measures other than appropriations are written in legislative committees .

these kinds of measures can make changes to a direct - spending program to increase or reduce its cost or to change or eliminate a program .

finally , congress may use , and has used , the reconciliation process , established in the congressional budget act , to cut spending , as well as to make changes to other laws with budgetary impact , such as tax laws .

under the reconciliation process , a budget resolution may contain instructions to named congressional committees to report legislation by a specific date to , for example , cut spending within their jurisdiction by specific amounts .

the respective house and senate budget committees normally bundle the reported legislation into a reconciliation bill , which the chambers may consider and come to agreement on pursuant to procedural limitations in the budget act .

in the first decade and a half of its existence , the joint committee on reduction of non - essential federal expenditures' work was oftentimes specific enough that one might surmise it could have had an impact on members and committees in their budget decision making , but crs research did not uncover instances that could be specifically attributed to a recommendation of the joint committee or documentation that attributed a specific cut in spending to a joint committee recommendation .

the joint committee shone a light on many federal programs and activities , but it was the responsibility of other committees to follow through .

the joint committee's role was solely oversight .

the joint committee's authority also duplicated the oversight authority of the appropriations committees and other committees , and it lacked legislative authority .

the joint committee was so synonymous with the interests and perspectives of senator byrd that its eponymous byname was the byrd committee .

the joint committee existed in the era of strong committee chairs , which may be part of the explanation for the committee's activities and recommendations .

its membership also comprised chairs and ranking minority members of other committees , who could exercise legislative authority in those roles without resorting to any power or influence that might reside in the joint committee , leaving it to senator byrd to define the joint committee's role .

senator byrd was an advocate for viewing the federal budget as a whole , rather than in its separate parts as the house and senate divided the president's budget for individual committees to act on .

senator byrd's idea , however , was not broadly embraced in congress during his tenure .

acceptance came later .

in addition , senator byrd's purposes generally aligned with a perspective favoring fewer federal commitments — a perspective congressional observers have noted was increasingly out of step with his party in the post - war era .

perhaps the most enduring legacy of the joint committee was senator byrd's desire to exert congressional control over all components of federal spending and to recapture congressional authority where the executive branch had managed to obtain discretion to make budget decisions .

many subsequent legislative enactments of the modern congressional era , including the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 , projected congressional budget authority .

senator byrd's views on congress's own consideration of the budget in its totality and representative mahon's scorekeeping reports live on as key components of the congressional budget act .

as indicated , with political support , it is a straightforward process to create a house , senate , or joint committee .

the challenge arises in assigning it a role .

standing committees are protective of their jurisdictions , and the house is protective of its constitutional prerogatives over budget decision making vis - à - vis the senate .

it can be difficult to carve out a unique role for a new committee , whether it is temporary or permanent .

if the committee is given only study authority , it may be difficult to obtain legislative results based on its recommendations .

if the committee is granted legislative authority , it may be difficult to avoid crippling conflict with standing committees .

the creation of a committee charged with a role in cutting federal spending could itself be challenging .

does federal spending include only appropriations or also entitlements and possibly even tax expenditures ? .

there are committees that could assume such a charge , and there are processes — appropriations , authorization , and reconciliation — that could be used to consider and pass legislation making cuts .

moreover , the objective of a new committee would be its role in cutting federal spending — cutting spending would be the desired end , not the means to the end .

attaining that objective responsibly and with public support would require one or more committees to examine federal programs and activities on the basis of some agreed - on criteria , for example , cost - benefit , effectiveness , duplication of similar programs or activities , constitutional authority , administrative controls and potential for corruption , national purpose , need for federal action and capacity of states and localities , market failure addressed , economic impact , demographic and socioeconomic impact , alternatives , or continuing need .

alternately , standing congressional committees have oversight power circumscribed only by constitutional limits , and legislative authority circumscribed only by chamber rules .

either chamber can direct one or more of its committees to undertake an activity or set of activities or series of activities , and party conferences can condition chairmanships on adherence to an oversight or legislative agenda .

coordination of many actors in a large legislative purpose , however , can be a complex exercise .

the first 25 years of the joint committee's existence preceded the modern era's expansion of the federal government's role and responsibilities , including the creation and growth of health - care entitlements .

in designing a new committee or harnessing congressional committees to scale back federal spending , the complexity of today's society , economy , and federal programs and activities would need to be taken into account .

 ( a ) there is hereby established a committee to investigate federal expenditures ( hereinafter referred to as the "committee" ) , to be composed of ( 1 ) three members of the senate committee on finance and three members of the senate committee on appropriations , to be appointed by the president of the senate ; ( 2 ) three members of the house committee on ways and means and three members of the house committee on appropriations , to be appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives ; and ( 3 ) the secretary of the treasury , and the director of the bureau of the budget .

a vacancy in the committee shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the functions of the committee , and shall be filled in the same manner as the original selection .

a majority of the committee shall constitute a quorum , and the powers conferred upon them by this section may be exercised by a majority vote .

 ( b ) it shall be the duty of the committee to make a full and complete study and investigation of all expenditures of the federal government with a view to recommending the elimination or reduction of all such expenditures deemed by the committee to be nonessential .

the committee shall report to the president and to the congress the results of its study , together with its recommendations , at the earliest practicable date .

 ( c ) the committee , or any duly authorized subcommittee thereof , is authorized to hold such hearings , to sit and act at such times and places , to employ such experts and such clerical and other assistants , to require by subpena or otherwise the attendance of such witnesses and the production of such books , papers , and documents , to administer such oaths , to take such testimony , and to make such expenditures , as it deems advisable .

the provisions of sections 102 to 104 , inclusive , of the revised statutes shall apply in case of any failure of any witness to comply with any subpena , or testify when summoned under the authority of this section .

 ( d ) the committee is authorized to utilize the services , information , facilities , and personnel of the departments and agencies of the government .

 ( e ) there is hereby authorized to be appropriated , the sum of the $10,000 , or so much thereof as may be necessary , to carry out the provisions of this section .

 ( f ) all authority conferred by this section shall terminate upon the submission of the committee's final report .

