each year , in october , the energy information administration ( eia ) publishes the short - term energy and winter fuels outlook ( stewfo ) .

the purpose of the stewfo is to provide estimates of expected average annual heating fuel expenditures in comparison to the previous year .

while the stewfo provides estimates of average annual expenses , individual expenses may vary regionally , as well as being dependant on local weather conditions , market size , the energy efficiency characteristics and size of homes , and thermostat settings .

average annual heating fuels expenditures depend on the price of fuel used , with natural gas , heating oil , propane , and electricity constituting the main heating fuels in the united states .

expenditures also depend on the quantity of fuel used , which is based on individual consumer decisions .

weather conditions , measured by heating degree - days , are the other key factor in determining expenditure levels .

the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) provides heating degree - day estimates to the eia for the stewfo .

the stewfo is not a forecast in the statistical sense , but a projection based on assumed values of key prices .

if the underlying price estimates prove to be incorrect , or the weather varies from forecast trends , actual average heating expenditures will reflect the changes .

noaa forecasts a 2.8% reduction in heating degree - days for the 2010-2011 heating season compared to the 2009-2010 heating season for the united states as a whole .

regional differences in weather , along with regional fuel specialization , can change the regional expenditure projections from the u.s. average .

in the northeast , heating degree - days are expected to increase by 5.5% , while in the west they are expected to increase by 0.4% .

estimated heating degree - days are expected to decline 14.9% in the south , and decline by 0.7% in the midwest .

on average the household expenditure on heating fuels is projected to be $986 this winter , an increase of $24 , or 2.5% , from last winter .

the average expenditure increase reflects generally higher fuel prices in all categories and the partially offsetting quantity effects of generally milder weather .

table 1 provides a summary of the percentage changes in the key components of average annual heating fuel expenditures by fuel .

regionally , the eia expects expenditures on natural gas to increase the most in the northeast , at 11.6% , and to increase by 5.6% in the midwest .

expenditures on natural gas are expected to decline by 3.1% in the west and by 2.5% in the south .

expenditures on heating oil are expected to increase by 13.3% in the northeast , 9.7% in the midwest , and 8.7% in the west , while declining by 3.5% in the south .

expenditures on propane are expected to increase by 14.1% in the midwest , 13.8% in the northeast , and 10.3% in the west , while declining by 5.6% in the south .

expenditures on electricity are expected to increase by 4.7% in the northeast and 0.4% in the midwest , while declining by 3.9% in the south and 0.4% in the west .

due to changing conditions in the fuel markets the prices assumed in the stewfo can differ from those observed .

for example , the stewfo calculations are based on a heating oil price of $3.06 per gallon , while the actual price of heating oil in august 2010 was $2.62 per gallon , almost 15% less .

unless heating oil prices rise during the course of the winter fuel season to average $3.06 per gallon , the stewfo will overstate expenditures by heating oil consumers .

the same type of effect is likely to be observed if the weather is colder , or warmer than forecast by noaa , or if consumers change their consumption habits at any given price , or in response to any given number of heating degree - days .

the u.s. natural gas market is part of a north american regional market .

the united states draws about 83.5% of its natural gas supplies from domestic sources , about 14% imported by pipeline , largely from canada , and 2% largely from trinidad , delivered in the form of liquefied natural gas .

consumers of natural gas include households and commercial customers that largely use natural gas for space heating .

electric power generators , especially those that satisfy peak demand loads , use natural gas as a raw material to power generators .

industrial consumers use natural gas as a raw material , for example in fertilizer production , and as a heat source in industrial processes .

household , commercial , and electric power generators are those consumers whose consumption is most likely to be affected by winter conditions .

table 2 presents average household natural gas consumption and price data for the winter heating seasons 2006-2007 through projected values for winter 2010-2011 .

on a per household basis , as presented in table 2 , winter consumption of natural gas has been relatively stable , with an observed variation of about 5% between the highest and lowest values over the five - year period .

similarly , consumer prices have been relatively stable , but falling in 2009-2010 , and increasing somewhat in the projection for 2010-2011 .

the price - consumption relationship suggests that natural gas demand is price inelastic for households , implying that consumption might not be expected to respond sharply to changes in price .

an inelastic relationship is likely because home heating is typically considered a necessity by consumers .

in addition , existing metering technology does not provide consumers easy access to quantity consumed and cost data .

income levels , along with the weather , may also be important in determining natural gas consumption .

approximately 52% of all u.s. households heat with natural gas .

on a national level , over all consumer groups , total natural gas consumption fell by about 2% from 2008 to 2009 .

only the electric power generating sector experienced rising consumption , an increase of about 3.3% .

residential , commercial , and industrial demands all declined from 2008 to 2009 .

the stewfo projects an increase in total natural gas consumption of 4.6% from 2009 to 2010 , and a further 0.1% increase in consumption for 2011 .

most of the increased consumption is expected to occur in the industrial and electric power generation sectors .

the stewfo projects an increase in u.s. natural gas production of about 3.5% in 2010 , to be followed by a decrease in production of 1.5% in 2011 .

the relative weakness of natural gas prices in 2010 , reflecting the additions to reserves in the form of shale and other non - conventional sources , has spurred production .

however , these lower prices , and the growing price spread between petroleum liquids and natural gas , have shifted exploration and drilling activity in the direction of liquid - rich deposits .

imports of natural gas are expected to increase by about 1.5% from 2010 to 2011 , mostly on pipeline imports from canada .

lower natural gas prices in north america than in asia and europe will continue to make liquefied natural gas a small component of the u.s. gas picture .

natural gas demand from households and commercial customers peaks in the winter , and to a lesser extent in the summer .

this leads to accumulation of natural gas in storage facilities in the off - peak seasons .

at the beginning of the winter heating season , october 1 , natural gas in storage was approximately 3.5 trillion cubic feet , about 5% above the five - year average storage amount .

home heating oil is a middle distillate , derived from the same part of the refining process as diesel fuel .

as a result , the price of home heating oil is closely related to the price of oil as well as the price of diesel fuel .

approximately 7% of u.s. households heat with oil , and most of these consumers are in the northeast , where 80% of u.s. heating oil consumption occurs .

eia expects average heating oil expenditures per household to increase by $218 , or 11.5% .

projected expenditure increases in the northeast are 13.3% , in the midwest 9.7% , and in the west 8.7% , while the south expects a decline of 3.5% .

diesel fuel , a product almost identical to home heating oil , has been more expensive than gasoline in 2010 , averaging about $0.20 per gallon higher .

about the same premium of home heating oil prices over the price of gasoline has been observed .

these price differentials result from u.s. refiners' emphasis on gasoline production and a relatively high level of world demand for diesel fuel .

the costs of gasoline , diesel fuel , and heating oil are all directly related to the price of crude oil on the world market .

the eia projects the price of crude oil to rise to $85 per barrel during the 2010-2011 heating season .

the spot price of west texas intermediate , a reference crude oil , averaged over $80 per barrel in the first half of october 2010 .

the key risk factor for home heating oil consumers is the price of crude oil .

oil prices can be volatile .

the economic recession , beginning in december 2007 , and accompanied by record high crude oil prices in 2008 , served to decrease demand .

overall liquid fuels consumption in the united states is projected by the eia to increase by 1.1% in 2010 and 0.6% in 2011 .

within these overall increases , gasoline consumption is expected to increase by 0.2% in 2010 , while distillate consumption is expected to increase by 2.7% .

the larger relative increase in distillate consumption is likely to maintain or increase the price premium of these fuels over gasoline , and create upside price risk over the stewfo projection .

propane provides primary home heating for approximately 5.6 million households in the united states , about 6% of total households .

propane consumers are projected to experience a $136 , or 8% , increase in heating expenses during the winter 2010-2011 season .

the number of households heating with propane has declined every year for the past five years , suggesting that propane is not a preferred fuel .

eia expects a decline of 3.1% in households using propane for 2010-2011 compared to 2009-2010 .

the eia sees propane expenditures rising by 14.1% in the midwest , 13.8% in the northeast , and 10.3% in the west .

only in the south is a decline in propane expenditures expected , at 5.6% .

the reduced consumption of propane in the south is due to milder expected weather in that region that more than offsets the expected increased cost per gallon .

propane is unique compared to the other fuels covered in this report in the sense that it is a by - product and not directly produced in its own right .

the production of gasoline and natural gas both give rise to propane supply .

as a result , when the availability of those fuels is high , so is the supply of propane .

complicating the propane outlook for the northeast is a leak that was found in the tepco propane pipeline in new york .

several terminals have been closed , and may be closed for part of the winter heating season .

the pipeline leak also threatens supplies of propane to new england , because even though the region is primarily supplied through imports , an early season cold weather episode could threaten the ability to draw additional supplies from the pipeline .

many of the same factors that affect natural gas and home heating oil prices influence expected propane prices .

however , in the propane case , the relationship is indirect because of the by - product nature of propane .

propane prices , unlike the other fuels covered in this report , are affected by distance and dispersion of the consumers .

this is because the distribution process usually requires the delivery , by truck , of relatively small quantities to individual consumers .

electricity prices are related to natural gas and coal prices as well as the availability of nuclear power and various alternative fuels .

in addition to electricity being generated by using natural gas , natural gas is also a competitor to electricity as a home heating source .

approximately 37% of u.s. households use electricity as their primary heating source .

in the northeast electricity use is lowest , at 13% , while it is highest in the south at 61% .

overall growth in the number of households using electricity is 2.9% year on year , driven by further expansion of market share in the south .

in comparison , the number of propane and heating oil customers is declining , by an expected 3.1% and 2.9% , respectively .

natural gas is the heating source used by an expanding number of customers , at an expected expansion of 1.2% in 2011 .

the eia projects relatively low heating expenditure increases for those heating with electricity .

in the northeast a 4.1% increase is expected , while the south is projected to see a decline in expenditures of 3.9% and the west is projected to see a decline of 0.4% , while the midwest will see a projected increase of 0.4% .

electricity prices have been relatively stable across the regions , with little price volatility .

the primary risk factors concerning the stewfo are the weather and economic conditions .

total household expenditures on home heating are equal to the price of the fuel times the quantity of the fuel used .

the weather , measured by the number of heating degree days , largely determines the quantity of fuel used .

conservation , in the form of reduced temperatures inside the home , can also reduce the quantity of fuel consumed , but for a given desired temperature inside the home , heating degree days are the key factor .

the 2010-2011 winter heating season is expected to be colder than last winter in the northeast , and warmer in the south , with the midwest and the west within 1% of last year .

the other component of total heating expenditures , the price of fuel , is determined by a complex web of related prices and other economic variables .

in a period of weak macroeconomic conditions , including high unemployment , the key relationship may be that between the level of economic activity , measured by the growth rate of gross domestic product and the price of crude oil .

at the beginning of the 2010-2011 heating season the price of crude oil is above $80 per barrel .

a higher price for crude oil directly increases the price of home heating oil and propane .

natural gas supplies are reduced as a larger spread develops between oil and gas .

electricity prices are directly affected by natural gas and coal prices .

natural gas prices are expected to increase by 5.7% during the 2010-2011 heating season .

the low income energy assistance program ( liheap ) is the primary federal government program to supplement home heating expenditures .

liheap is composed of two parts: funding for block grants to states and emergency contingency funds .

for fy2011 , the administration has proposed $2.51 billion for liheap regular funds and $790 million for emergency contingency funds .

in contrast , for fy2010 and fy2009 the totals were $4.5 billion in regular liheap regular funds and $590 million in emergency contingency funds ( p.l .

111-117 for fy2010 ) .

the administration's fy2011 plan also includes trigger mechanisms which would increase liheap funds when energy prices or participation in the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( formerly the food stamp program ) reaches pre - set levels .

at the start of the winter heating season 2010-2011 , the senate appropriations committee has reported its version of the departments of labor , health and human services , and education ( lhe ) appropriations bill ( s. 3686 ) , which provides $3.3 billion for liheap .

for fy2011 the house lhe subcommittee provides $5.1 billion for liheap .

a continuing resolution is currently funding the program at the fy2010 level ( h.r .

3081 , p.l .

111-242 ) .

citgo , the united states subsidiary of the venezuelan national oil company pdvsa , has its own low cost heating oil program , which operates without any connection to the u.s. government .

the program , operated in conjunction with a non - profit , the citizens energy corporation , began in 2005 .

during the 2009-2010 heating season , 25 states and the district of columbia participated in the program , which discounts the delivered cost of home heating oil by about 40% .

citgo estimates that 157,000 households , 245 homeless shelters , and 250 native american communities benefited from the program in 2009-2010 .

citgo has not announced whether the program will continue in the current year .

the stewfo projects that americans will generally face increased heating costs during the winter of 2010-2011 .

fuel prices are generally expected to be higher , which more than offsets lower expected consumption due to milder weather , and yields costs that are projected to rise by about 2.5% for what most consumers consider a necessity .

the impact of the cost increases may be accentuated by continuing high levels of unemployment .

uncertainty as to the funding levels for liheap , and concern as to whether the citgo program will continue in 2010-2011 , contribute to the burden of higher heating costs .

