widespread flooding in pakistan affected millions of people and caused a significant humanitarian disaster with widespread economic and security consequences for the country .

a stable , democratic , prosperous pakistan actively combating religious militancy is considered vital to u.s. interests .

the humanitarian effects of the flooding along with its security consequences generated considerable concern in the united states and many countries around the world .

the flooding in pakistan , which started in late july 2010 , reportedly affected over 20 million people .

over 1.9 million households were destroyed or damaged .

approximately 2,000 people died and over 3,000 were injured .

in terms of affected persons , the humanitarian impact of the 2010 floods in pakistan is estimated to be larger than other recent natural disasters experienced globally .

the estimated 20 million people affected by flooding in pakistan is more than the estimated number of people affected by the 2010 earthquake in haiti , the 2005 tsunami in the indian ocean littoral region , and the 2005 south asia earthquake combined .

the death toll increased after floodwaters receded in some areas , although specific number of deaths directly attributable to flooding is difficult to ascertain .

lost shelter and food staples , limited access to clean water , and unsanitary conditions from standing water and submerged lands are immediate humanitarian issues .

cases of malnutrition , gastroenteritis , diarrhea , skin infections , cholera , typhoid , malaria , and hepatitis have been reported .

the pakistan government established a national oversight disaster management council to improve the transparency in the distribution of flood relief .

however , humanitarian relief efforts were tempered by initially low levels of donations , difficulties in accessing victims , the large geographical extent of the disaster , and security concerns in some regions .

some medium and long - term consequences of flooding have been projected .

lost livelihoods for farmers ( eg , not being able to plant next season's crop ) and a diminished food supply is a key concern .

the flooding destroyed crops , food stockpiles , livestock , seeds , structures , and equipment .

food prices dramatically increased since the flooding , putting an economic strain on the entire population .

rebuilding damaged and destroyed housing is also expected to affect the return of displaced populations .

as tensions mount and the struggle to stabilize persists , public confidence in government efforts to provide assistance will be tested .

long - term consequences such as damaged infrastructure ( eg , bridges , roads , electrical plants , and schools ) are also expected to hamper recovery efforts and have a lasting effect on the country .

before the flooding , top - tier u.s. concerns regarding pakistan included regional and global terrorism ; stability in neighboring afghanistan ; domestic political stability and democratization ; nuclear weapons proliferation and security ; human rights protection ; and economic development .

the 2010 floods have exacerbated these concerns .

the effects of flooding on the stability of the pakistani government and its ability to suppress and contain militants within their borders is an issue of concern for the united states and others .

heavy rains associated with monsoons began around july 22 , 2010 , and led to flash floods in the northwest and east of pakistan .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

downpours continued for the rest of the month and persisted into august .

the runoff caused the indus river and its tributaries to breach levees and overflow into floodplains housing both rural and urban populations .

at times river flows reached 40 times their normal levels .

as floodwaters moved downstream , new areas of flooding emerged in southern provinces , such as sindh .

intentional levee breaks were made in attempts to protect urban centers ( eg , hyderabad ) ; nonetheless , levee breaches affecting populations clusters ( eg , thatta city ) were still occurring in early september .

the effects of the flooding covered a large geographical area in pakistan and affected several provinces .

 ( see table 1 for september estimates. ) .

the timing of the flooding effects varied for provinces .

for example , in many affected regions in the north ( eg , punjab and khyber pakhtunhwa provinces ) , affected populations have largely returned to their damaged communities and started rebuilding .

however , in the south , such as in the sindh province , stagnant floodwaters are preventing recovery , and significant displaced populations exist as of november 2010 .

it is reported that nearly 7.0 million people are affected by floods in sindh province , with thousands trapped by flood waters and in need of assistance .

areas inundated weeks after the onset of flooding suffered significant agricultural and property losses , and concerns about food , shelter , safe water , sanitation , health , and livelihood persist .

the response of the government of pakistan to the flooding is being organized at the federal , provincial and district levels .

the economic affairs division ( ead ) is coordinating donors and the pakistan national disaster management agency ( ndma ) is responsible for overall coordination of disaster response efforts by both the government and the international community .

the ndma works closely with federal ministries , government departments , the armed forces , un agencies and donors to mobilize , receive and deploy relief goods .

relief activities are also being coordinated by provincial - level and district - level governments .

the primary pakistani response to the flooding was initially and has continued to be from the military .

the military moved its forces and equipment into the flooded regions to evacuate people and distribute supplies .

the civilian government response was reportedly weak , due in part to the damage and destruction of local governmental assets and properties during the flooding .

some also blame coordination issues for a slow state response , such as the absence of civil - military coordination and ineffective civilian control over military - led efforts .

there were several reports of widespread criticism by the pakistani people of the civilian government response to aid flood victims .

some , however , have defended the agency by stating that it was not structured to cope with a disaster of this magnitude .

to help families rebuild , the pakistani government is distributing debit cards to affected families .

the pakistan national database and registration authority has distributed debit cards to over 900,000 families as of september 2010 .

they aim to provide $1,150 dollars to each head of household in three separate disbursements to help families recover from the floods .

steps are being taken to include female - head of households in the process for those females who lost their husbands .

the united states is the largest donor of funding for relief efforts related to the flooding in pakistan .

some funds are being converted from a portion of the civilian economic development assistance authorized by the enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2009 ( eppa 2009 , p.l .

111-73 ) , which is appropriated primarily within the fy2010 base and supplemental appropriations ( p.l .

111-117 and p.l .

111-212 respectively ) .

to date , the united states is providing a total of $561.9 million for pakistan relief and recovery , largely coming from international disaster assistance ( ida ) and food for peace ( ffp ) funds .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

in - kind civilian and military support , such as the pre - fabricated steel bridges , halal meals , and air transport , amounts to another $89.1 million , according to usaid .

prior to the flooding emergency , the united states provided humanitarian aid to pakistan to address the january 2010 landslides , conflict - affected displaced people ( referred to as complex emergency funds ) , and pre - 2010 earthquake expenses .

 ( see table 3 . ) .

a potential issue for congress is whether the purpose of these funds , as well as the authorized economic development funds from the eppa 2009 , should be changed to reflect flood relief efforts and changed circumstances caused by the flood .

if the funds are redirected , then there could be concerns as to how the original objectives of the funding will be met .

the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) is leading all u.s. government humanitarian response efforts to pakistan .

nearly 30 u.s. military helicopters and four c - 130 planes were involved in delivering humanitarian supplies .

these included emergency food supplies , plastic sheeting , inflatable rescue boats , concrete - cutting saw kits , shelters , blankets , water storage bladders , and water filtration units among other things .

twenty - six u.s. mobile medical teams were providing health care services , which were needed because about 450 health facilities were destroyed or damaged by the floods , according to ocha .

the humanitarian implications of the flooding in pakistan are vast .

humanitarian issues such as health , sufficient food , water , and shelter , and displaced populations exist .

various offices under the united nations are coordinating with the government of pakistan to address humanitarian needs in the country .

the united nations released the pakistan initial floods emergency response plan ( piferp ) on august 11 , 2010 , seeking approximately $460 million to respond to the immediate relief needs of flood - affected people .

the money is to be used to enable international partners ( u.n. and non - governmental organizations ) help the pakistani government address residual relief needs and recovery needs for the next year .

this plan covered 12 humanitarian clusters including water and sanitation , health , shelter , agriculture , food , community restoration , protection , education , nutrition , logistics , coordination , and camp management .

funding needs for each cluster are identified in the plan , and planned activities under each cluster are listed .

coordinating entities for each cluster are listed and range from the food and agriculture organization ( fao ) for agricultural needs to the united nations development program ( undp ) for community restoration needs .

monitoring and methods for evaluating progress are also included in the plan .

in november 2010 , a revised plan was issued by the u.n .

this plan seeks $1.9 billion for the above - mention sectors to be disbursed from august 2010 to august 2011 .

the following sections discuss the u.s. and pakistani government response to the flooding .

the floods are expected to have a long - term negative effect on the development prospects for pakistan .

there is considerable damage to infrastructure and agriculture , among other sectors .

the united nations , world bank , and asian development bank are conducting a needs assessment for pakistan .

initial reports state that the need for recovery and reconstruction could reach $9.7 billion .

this section discusses some potential implications of the flooding on selected sectors in pakistan including energy and infrastructure , the economy , and security .

pakistan has experienced severe and dangerous flooding in the recent past .

one source indicates that serious flooding has affected what is now pakistan at least 12 times since 1928 .

this is the fifth flood in pakistan affecting nearly 5 million or more people in less than 40 years .

extreme precipitation is the immediate cause of flooding , and is part of weather extremes spawned during the dominant climate condition for pakistan — the asian monsoon system .

rivers transporting floodwater from the north can pose flood risks to areas downstream .

while extreme precipitation is the flood hazard , development patterns and infrastructure choices affect the number of people and structures and the infrastructure at risk .

the relative frequency of significant flooding in pakistan raises questions about if and how efforts to rebuild can improve the nation's resiliency to future extreme weather events and how international experience and aid can inform resilient rebuilding .

the current flooding in pakistan is likely to prove the worst flooding disaster in the country's history , as far as the number of citizens affected , and the cumulative damage to the region's economy .

it is not yet clear to what extent the flooding itself , in terms of the flow , inundation duration , and land area affected exceeds previous flooding episodes , in part because of the paucity of instrumental data and lack of detailed analyses of recent past and paleo - flooding events in the region .

forthcoming studies are likely to shed light on whether the current flood fits within the historical range of extreme flooding events , or truly represents an outlier compared to the 1,000 year record of high rainfall events captured in tree - rings .

the flooding in pakistan is expected to have significant short - term and potential long - term effects on the country .

these effects will be exacerbated by existing problems in pakistan that range from poverty and depleted infrastructure , among other things .

the short - term effects of flooding are steadily being realized as displaced people start returning to their homes in northern areas where floodwaters have receded , and government officials and aid workers begin reporting issues from all affected areas .

the full extent of the long - term effects of the flooding are likely to present daunting challenges to the country .

the long - term effects are likely to manifest themselves in two ways that have significance to the united states and congress .

one aspect is the humanitarian toll that is likely to emerge from displaced people , disease , food security , and an economic decline .

another aspect is the strategic concerns that could result from a weakened government , and a dissatisfied and disenfranchised population .

the strategic implications involve u.s. interests in countering islamic militancy in the region , strengthening democracy in pakistan , and fighting the war in afghanistan .

