this report provides information concerning epa's maximum achievable control technology standards for boilers ( the boiler mact ) , an epa rule designed to reduce emissions of hazardous air pollutants , and three related rules .

the related rules set standards for small boilers ( "area sources" ) and boilers that use solid waste as fuel ( "commercial and industrial solid waste incinerators" ) , and they identify what materials epa considers to be solid waste .

because boilers are used as power sources throughout industry , and for power or heat by large commercial establishments and institutions , there has been widespread interest in the requirements of all four of these rules and their potential effects .

on december 20 , 2012 , epa finalized changes to the four rules , revising the standards that it had promulgated march 21 , 2011 .

owners and operators of affected boilers will have until 2016 to install equipment necessary to meet the new emission standards , with the possibility of an additional year if it is necessary .

under the march 2011 rules , major source boilers subject to the mact rule would have faced a may 2014 deadline for compliance .

on may 16 , 2011 , however , epa announced that it was staying the effective dates of the boiler mact and one of the related rules , in order to take additional public comment and reconsider what it had promulgated , leaving in doubt both the final form of the rules and when the standards might go into effect .

the federal district court for the district of columbia vacated the agency's stay on january 9 , 2012 , but the court's action had little effect , as epa subsequently issued a "no action assurance letter. .

the letter stated that the agency would exercise its enforcement discretion to not enforce certain notification deadlines in the march 2011 rule .

the agency also proposed , in its reconsideration of the rules , to extend the effective date ( and hence the required compliance date ) of the boiler mact until three years after completion of the rules' reconsideration .

in december 2012 , the agency finalized that decision .

thus , when the agency publishes the reconsidered rules in the federal register , it will have added about two years to the deadline for emissions sources to comply .

in addition , the preamble to the reconsidered rule notes that: ... the caa allows title v permitting authorities to grant sources , on a case - by - case basis , extensions to the compliance time of up to one year if such time is needed for the installation of controls... .

permitting authorities are already familiar with , and in many cases have experience with , applying the 1-year extension authority under section 112 ( i ) ( 4 ) ( a ) since the provision applies to all neshap [national emission standards for hazardous air pollutants] .

we believe that should the range of circumstances that commenters have cited as impeding sources' ability to install controls within three years materialize , then it is reasonable for permitting authorities to take those circumstances into consideration when evaluating a source's request for a 1-year extension , and where such applications prove to be well - founded , it is also reasonable for permitting authorities to make the 1-year extension available to applicants .

thus , the agency envisions up to a four - year compliance deadline if sources can demonstrate that extra time is needed for the installation of controls .

given the boiler rules' potential impacts , congress has taken a strong interest in them .

epa estimates that , as finalized on december 20 , 2012 , the boiler mact will affect about 14,000 boilers and process heaters .

in order to reduce emissions of a wide array of hazardous air pollutants , about 12% of the affected units would be required to install pollution control equipment .

the 12% include coal - fired , biomass - fired , and liquid - fired boilers .

the agency estimates the capital costs associated with the rule for existing boilers at $4.6 billion to meet the compliance deadline in 2016 ; annualized costs , which spread the costs of capital over the expected life of the equipment and include operating and maintenance costs as well , were estimated at $1.2 billion per year .

these cost estimates are less than half the estimated cost of epa's originally proposed version of the rule , for reasons that we will explore below .

as shown in table 2 , later in this report , most boilers — 84% of those affected by the rule — are fueled by natural gas or similar gases such as refinery gas , according to epa .

these gas - powered boilers would incur capital costs averaging a little less than $6,500 per unit , according to the agency .

through fuel savings , the agency expects a reduction in operating costs to more than compensate for the capital expenditures of most gas - powered units .

epa has developed regulations addressing boiler emissions because it has found , based on emissions data , that they are major sources of hazardous air pollutants ( haps ) .

section 112 of the clean air act , which requires controls on major sources of haps , defines a major source as any facility that emits 10 tons or more of a single listed hap or 25 tons of any combination of haps annually .

the haps themselves ( 187 substances ) were listed by congress in the 1990 clean air act amendments .

boilers emit at least 20 of the listed haps , including mercury , arsenic , chromium , cadmium , selenium , nickel , lead , manganese , phosphorous , antimony , beryllium , polycyclic organic matter , benzene , formaldehyde , acetaldehyde , dioxins , furans , hydrogen chloride , hydrogen cyanide , and hydrogen fluoride .

six of these 20 are classified as known or probable human carcinogens .

others affect the lungs , skin , central nervous system ( including adverse developmental effects ) , and / or kidneys .

by controlling boiler emissions , epa expects to avoid 3,100 to 7,900 premature deaths annually , as well as many other health effects , including 5,000 nonfatal heart attacks annually .

the boiler mact will replace a rule promulgated on september 13 , 2004 , and subsequently vacated and remanded to epa by the d.c .

circuit court of appeals .

the court vacated that rule in 2007 , saying epa had wrongly excluded many industrial boilers from the definition of solid waste incinerators , which have more stringent emissions requirements under the clean air act .

epa was under a court order to finalize replacement rules by february 21 , 2011 .

meanwhile , boiler emissions have been subject to state standards , which are generally not as stringent as what epa has proposed .

in early december 2010 , the agency petitioned the district court for the district of columbia for up to 15 months of additional time to complete the rulemaking .

the agency argued that in light of the extensive comments it received on the proposed rules , "epa believes that the overall public interest is best served by allowing epa to re - propose the rules so that [it] will be able to issue emission standards that are based upon a thorough consideration of all available data and reduce potential litigation risks. .

the court had issued a summary judgment against the agency in 2006 for failure to discharge fully its duty to promulgate standards for emissions of hazardous air pollutants .

on march 31 , 2006 , the court imposed a schedule under which epa was to have discharged all of the statutory duties at issue by june 15 , 2009 .

that deadline was subsequently extended by more than a year and a half .

on january 20 , 2011 , the court denied epa's request for a further 15-month extension , concluding that epa had engaged in discretionary delay in the face of a congressional directive ( i.e. , the 1990 clean air act amendments , under which the rules were to have been promulgated by november 2000 ) ; the court gave the agency one month to issue final rules .

having been denied the extension it sought , the agency issued a statement saying , "the standards will be significantly different than what epa proposed… .

the agency believes these changes still deserve further public review and comment and expects to solicit further comment through a reconsideration of the rules. .

true to its word , the agency issued a notice of reconsideration at the same time that it promulgated the final rule in march 2011 .

the notice listed 14 provisions for which the agency thought additional opportunity for public review and comment should be obtained , and it stated that the agency might seek public comment on other aspects of the rules .

the 14 provisions included such basic elements as the subcategories used to set standards in the boiler rule , the emission standards themselves , and the monitoring requirements .

this left numerous questions concerning not only the substance of the rule , but the schedule for implementation .

following promulgation , existing facilities would normally have three years to comply with the standards , but since the agency was reconsidering key aspects of the rules , one was left to wonder how regulated entities should determine what standards they would ultimately be required to comply with , and on what schedule .

by staying the effective date of the standards on may 16 , 2011 , the agency addressed this uncertainty , effectively giving itself and regulated entities an extension of time that the court had denied them .

in the end , the agency added almost two years to its deliberation process before finalizing the reconsidered rules in december 2012 .

among the existing boilers affected by the boiler mact rule , there are an estimated 955 units that burn liquids and 1,123 units that burn solids ( 621 of them coal - fired and the rest biomass - fired ) .

the rule also applies to other types of boilers , but the 2,078 liquid , coal , and biomass units , which account for 14.7% of the affected units , account for 97% of the compliance cost for existing units .

in general , the promulgated emission limits apply to boilers that have a designed heat input capacity of 10 million btu per hour or greater .

how big is this ? .

a coal - fired boiler subject to the mact would be one that is capable of burning roughly 1,000 pounds ( a half - ton ) of coal per hour .

wood has less energy per pound than coal: a biomass - fired boiler burning wood might require as much as 1,500 pounds of wood per hour to produce 10 million btus .

a boiler burning fuel oil would need to burn about 70 gallons per hour .

many of the boilers to be regulated are substantially larger than this .

an analysis released by the council of industrial boiler owners ( cibo ) , for example , used a 250 million btu / hour boiler as the base for its cost estimates .

for a boiler burning fuel oil , this would mean burning 1,750 gallons per hour .

in order to comply with the rule's emission limits , these facilities may need to install fabric filters ( also known as baghouses ) to achieve pm and mercury control ; wet scrubbers to meet the hydrochloric acid limits ; replacement burners , tune - ups , and combustion controls for carbon monoxide and organic haps ; and carbon injection for mercury control .

these are the available technologies for maximum control of the relevant emissions .

some observers maintain that , because epa weakened the standards as compared to what it originally proposed , the vast majority of facilities won't have to install these technologies .

the national association of clean air agencies ( nacaa ) , the association that represents most state and local air pollution control officials , surveyed its members in 2008 to determine what should be defined as mact .

using the data it obtained from state officials , nacaa concluded that epa's 2011 final mercury emission standard for coal - fired boilers was almost 16 times higher than the average of the best performing 12% ; the carbon monoxide standard was 213 times what the mact floor should be , according to nacaa .

the problem according to nacaa's executive director , is that "compliance test results provided by state and local permitting officials were not used [in setting the mact standards] ; instead epa relied on industry data. .

epa explained that some of the data that nacaa provided could not be used , because the test reports were incomplete .

the agency also noted that its process for setting a standard is more complicated than simply averaging the best test results .

specifically , the agency subjects the emissions data to what is called a "variability analysis. .

this type of analysis attempts to recognize that operating conditions and resulting emissions vary over time , yet facilities need to be in compliance with emissions limits at all times .

emissions can change for several reasons: there is variation in the amount of contaminants in fuel , for example ; the boiler will sometimes be operating at less than full load ; and statistical tests applied to the data are used to set the actual standard .

the agency first identifies the best 12% by ranking the units based on their best test results .

in the next step , they add all available test results for those units .

finally , using a statistical test , they calculate a standard that these units can meet 99% of the time , despite variability in operating conditions .

this results in standards that are less stringent than the straight average of the best 12% test results .

not surprisingly for a rule of this size , epa's cost estimate is not the only one available .

industry - funded studies of the originally proposed and subsequent versions of the rule , including one from the council of industrial boiler owners ( cibo ) , placed the costs of the rule substantially higher than epa's estimates .

an analysis by the american forest and paper association found especially high costs and potential job losses in the forest products industries .

by contrast , the national association of clean air agencies concluded that cibo's study exaggerated the potential costs .

epa itself maintains that clean air act rules have often proven less expensive than its own and affected industries' estimates have projected before they were promulgated .

given the short time since the reconsidered ( december 2012 ) rule was finalized , affected industries have not generally provided as much detail regarding their view of its effects , although cibo , for one , still believes the rule will be more costly than epa's projections .

cibo reduced its estimate of the rule's cost from $20.7 billion ( for the originally proposed rule ) to $11.7 billion for the reconsidered version , but still says the rule will put 187,00 jobs "at risk" of being eliminated .

as noted earlier , though , epa legally cannot take cost or economic impact into consideration in identifying the mact floor , and almost all of the numeric standards in the rule are based on the agency's determination of the mact floor .

the only exceptions , the pm emission limits for biomass - fueled units , would impose no additional cost , according to epa , because they rely on equipment installed to meet a mact - floor standard for mercury .

epa considered the feasibility of its standards indirectly , by establishing 19 subcategories of sources , but in setting mact floors for them , it cannot base its decisions on cost considerations .

according to epa , "emissions data collected during development of the proposed rule show that hydrogen chloride [hcl] emissions represent the predominant hap emitted by industrial , commercial , and institutional ( ici ) boilers , accounting for 61 percent of the total hap emissions. .

given the importance of hcl emissions , one of the key issues in considering epa's original proposal was whether the agency should have exercised its authority to set standards for hcl and other acid gases under section 112 ( d ) ( 4 ) , which gives the administrator flexibility to set standards less stringent than mact for haps that have a health threshold ( i.e. , substances that are not harmful to people exposed to levels below some threshold ) .

in developing and promulgating other regulations , including the vacated 2004 mact standard for boilers , epa established that hcl has a health threshold , that it is not classified as a human carcinogen , and that there is limited health risk associated with hcl emissions from discrete units .

nevertheless , in the june 2010 proposal ( and in the final standards ) , the administrator decided not to exercise her discretion to set less stringent standards for hcl emissions for several reasons , including 1. the agency lacked information on the peak short - term emissions of hcl from boilers and thus could not determine whether acute exposures will pose health concerns ; 2 .

hcl emissions from boilers mix with other emissions that are respiratory irritants , and epa has no studies explicitly addressing the toxicity of these mixtures ; 3. in considering whether to exercise her discretion under section 112 ( d ) ( 4 ) , the administrator must determine that a health - based standard in lieu of a mact will not result in adverse environmental effects .

hcl gas forms an acidic solution in the atmosphere and could exacerbate the impacts of acid deposition from sulfur and nitrogen oxides ; 4. the agency had limited information on facility - specific emissions that it would need to set a health - based standard ; 5. the agency would have needed to decide whether it would be appropriate to set 112 ( d ) ( 4 ) standards for each acid gas emitted by boilers , or a single standard as a surrogate for them all ; and 6. as proposed ( and as promulgated ) , the mact standard would result in significant reductions in emissions of other pollutants , most notably sulfur dioxide , particulate matter , other acid gases , mercury , and other metals .

these reductions would provide substantial public health benefits that would be foregone if the agency set a less stringent standard .

whether the agency should have set standards for hcl under section 112 ( d ) ( 4 ) was one of the key points raised in comments , including those submitted by 41 senators in a letter to the administrator , on september 24 , 2010 , and by 105 members of the house in a letter submitted august 2 , 2010 .

as the senate letter stated: to help reduce the burden of the rule in a manner that does not compromise public health and safety , … we ask that you carefully consider the extensive record that supported the agency's determination to include health - based emissions limitations for hydrogen chloride and manganese in the previous boiler mact rulemaking that was set aside by the reviewing court on wholly unrelated grounds .

in the march 2011 rule and in the december 2012 reconsideration , the agency did not change its mind on the use of section 112 ( d ) ( 4 ) , but it did significantly change the hydrogen chloride standards , presumably based on new data supplied by affected entities .

the changes , which are summarized in table 3 , allow more hcl emissions from all types of sources , especially from biomass - and gas - fired units .

smaller boilers ( those at facilities that emit less than 10 tons of an individual hap and less than 25 tons of all haps combined ) face regulations as well , but for the most part the clean air act allows them to meet a less stringent standard , termed "generally available control technology" ( gact ) .

most of these units are located at commercial and institutional ( as opposed to industrial ) facilities , according to epa .

a separate rule setting standards for these "area sources" was promulgated in march 2011 , on the same day as the mact standards for major sources , and these standards were also reconsidered , with final changes signed on december 20 , 2012 .

epa did not stay implementation of the 2011 version of the area source rule , and the reconsidered version contains a compliance deadline of march 21 , 2014 .

unlike the major sources discussed earlier , these facilities will not receive an additional two years to comply .

the area source rule distinguishes boilers that have a heat input capacity of 10 million btu per hour or more from those that are smaller .

the smaller units make up the overwhelming majority of the units covered by the area source rule ; they would be subject to gact .

under gact , these units would not be required to meet emission limits .

rather , they would be required to meet a work practice standard by performing a boiler tune - up every two to five years .

according to epa , "by improving the combustion efficiency of the boiler , fuel usage can be reduced and losses from combustion imperfections can be minimized .

minimizing and optimizing fuel use will reduce emissions of mercury and all other air toxics. .

some units under the area source rule would be subject to mact for at least some pollutants .

these are the coal - fired units that have a heat input capacity of 10 million btu per hour or more , but are at facilities that don't meet the major source definition because , even counting their boiler emissions , they emit less than 10 tons of any individual hap and less than 25 tons of any combination of them .

according to the agency , these larger boiler units at area sources would need to meet standards based on mact for some of the pollutants they emit: "the final standards for existing and new coal - fired boilers at area sources are based on mact for mercury and co , and on gact for pm .

the final standards for existing and new biomass boilers and existing and new oil - fired boilers at area sources are based on gact. .

the area source rule would affect approximately 183,000 existing boilers powered by oil , biomass , and coal , located at 92,000 facilities .

it would impose annualized costs of $490 million , according to epa .

after considering fuel savings from efficiency improvements that would result from the tune - ups required by the rule , the estimated annualized cost would be reduced .

epa also estimates that about 6,800 new boilers will be constructed at area sources in the next three years ; net costs for meeting the area source standards at these facilities are estimated by epa to be $48 million annually .

after accounting for fuel savings from improvements in combustion efficiency , epa estimates that new sources will experience cost savings of $3.6 million annually rather than incurring compliance costs .

epa's estimate of costs at area source boilers is summarized in table 4 .

the table displays epa data for the promulgated ( march 2011 ) version of the rule .

the preamble to the december 2012 reconsidered rule states , "... as compared to the control costs estimated for the march 2011 final rule , this final rule will not result in any meaningful change in the capital and annual cost due to the increase in emission limits and the decrease in burden on small facilities. .

gas - fired boilers , of which epa estimates there are 1.3 million , would not be affected by the area source rule .

because the costs of compliance are substantially less than for the mact rule , the area source rule has not been particularly controversial .

the boiler mact and the area source rule were two of four rules related to boilers that epa promulgated the same day .

the other two rules address boilers that use solid waste as fuel and identify what materials epa considers to be solid waste .

epa projects that these rules will have less impact than the boiler mact , but they address the issues that were at the heart of the court decision that overturned and remanded the boiler rules in 2007 .

as noted earlier , the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit , in natural resources defense council v. epa , found that epa had wrongly excluded many industrial boilers from the definition of solid waste incinerators , which have more stringent emissions requirements under section 129 of the clean air act .

thus , in addition to the boiler mact and area source rules , the agency promulgated a rule on the identification of non - hazardous secondary materials that are solid waste , and a rule that would set emission standards for commercial / industrial solid waste incinerators ( the "ciswi rule" ) .

the first rule identifies solid waste , and the second sets emission standards for the facilities that burn it .

on december 2012 , epa finalized amendments to both of these rules , as well .

epa's boiler mact has been controversial since its original proposal in june 2010 .

the version of the rule promulgated march 21 , 2011 , and the reconsidered version finalized december 20 , 2012 , are much less stringent than the rule as first proposed .

nevertheless , some stakeholders remain concerned about the potential impact of the rules ; challenges — in court , and perhaps in congress — are still possible .

members of congress have been active participants in epa's public comment process ( more than 100 members of the house and more than 40 senators wrote epa regarding the originally proposed rule ) and they have remained interested in these rulemakings .

in the 112 th congress , bills were introduced in both the house and senate ( h.r .

2250 and s. 1392 ) to change the clean air act requirements for these rules and the deadlines for implementation .

the bills would have provided additional time for implementation of standards and would have changed key aspects of the section 112 requirements as they apply to boilers and ciswi units .

they would have revoked the standards promulgated on march 21 , 2011 , and required promulgation of replacements for the boiler mact and related rules 15 months after the date of the bills' enactment ; and they would have required epa to set a compliance date no earlier than five years after the date of promulgation .

at a minimum , this would have given the affected units three years of additional time to comply with mact standards .

the bills would also have made substantive changes in the section 112 requirements as applied to boilers and ciswi units .

they would have removed the requirements that currently apply in the absence of epa regulation — what are called the "mact hammers": under current law , permits issued in the absence of mact regulations are required to include mact emission limits determined on a case - by - case basis .

the bills would have defined certain sources currently considered as "new" to be "existing" sources , which would be subject to less stringent requirements .

and they would have set less stringent requirements for the standards themselves , requiring epa to choose the "least burdensome" regulatory alternative , and requiring that standards can be met "consistently and concurrently with emission standards for all other air pollutants," which might prohibit epa's use of the "pollutant by pollutant" approach that it used in setting the currently promulgated standards .

h.r .

2250 passed the house , 275-142 , on october 13 , 2011 .

a senate version similar to h.r .

2250 was offered as an amendment ( s.amdt .

1660 ) to the surface transportation bill ( s. 1813 ) on march 8 , 2012 , but was not adopted on a vote of 52-46 ( 60 votes being necessary for adoption ) .

in the reconsidered rules , finalized december 20 , 2012 , epa took a number of steps in the direction of its critics , giving affected units an additional two years to comply and making many of the emission limits less stringent .

whether these changes will be sufficient to mollify the affected industries and the agency's other critics remains to be seen .

