the mexican economy experienced the most serious decline in economic growth in latin america after the global financial crisis began in 2008 .

mexico's dependence on manufacturing exports and strong ties to the u.s. economy have made the country very vulnerable to external events and changing economic conditions in the united states .

public sector revenues declined as a result of the crisis , and a number of estimates indicate that mexico's gross domestic product ( gdp ) contracted by 6.6% in 2009 .

though gdp is expected to grow in 2010 , some economists predict that mexico's economy will not return to its pre - crisis level for some time .

although mexico has done much to modify its economic policy over the last 20 years through trade liberalization , privatization efforts , and a floating exchange rate regime , these policies have not been enough to protect mexico from fluctuations in the u.s. economy .

many analysts argue that structural weaknesses in the mexican economy have prevented the country from experiencing higher levels of growth and decreasing its dependence on the u.s. economy .

mexico's economy is of interest to u.s. policymakers because of the strong economic linkages between the two countries , the proximity of mexico to the united states , and the implications that economic issues have on political and social stability in mexico .

the 111 th congress is likely to maintain an active interest in mexico on issues related to trade , economic conditions , migration , border issues , and counter - narcotics .

this report provides an overview of mexico's economy post - financial crisis , effects of the global economic downturn , structural and other challenges in the mexican economy , and implications for the united states .

this report will be updated as events warrant .

based on a nominal gdp of $1.7 trillion in 2009 ( at purchasing power parity or ppp ) mexico's economy is the 11 th - largest economy in the world and the second - largest in latin america , after brazil's .

mexico has an open market economy with a strong export sector , though for many years it had strong protectionist trade policies to encourage industrial growth in the domestic economy .

the global financial crisis that began in 2008 resulted in a deepening of the recession in the u.s. economy that began in 2007 .

the u.s. economic contraction resulted in lower consumer demand in the united states and , consequently , lower demand for goods from mexico .

this has adversely affected mexico's gdp growth , employment , production in the manufacturing industry , and investor confidence .

though real gdp growth has resumed in the united states , there is concern that the u.s. economy will not return to its pre - recession growth path or will even remain permanently below it .

this will likely continue to have effects on economic conditions in mexico .

mexico's past economic reforms have helped the country modify its macroeconomic policies and restore policy credibility since the 1995 currency crisis .

key reforms included measures to reduce public debt , the introduction of a balanced budget rule , an inflation targeting framework and a floating exchange rate policy .

the measures have been successful in stabilizing inflation , achieving balanced federal budgets , reducing public debt , reducing exposures to currency risk , and lowering current account deficits and foreign financing needs .

in addition , the government's actions to build up its foreign reserves helped the country to avoid the financial stress that other emerging markets experienced due to the 2008 global financial crisis .

despite these improvements , numerous political analysts and economists agree that mexico needs significant political and economic structural reforms to improve its potential for long - term economic growth .

the government's responses to the recent global financial crisis helped the country weather the 2009 recession and improve conditions in 2010 .

the government used a number of tools , including macroeconomic policies , targeted assistance to financial institutions , interventions by mexico's central bank to cut interest rates and maintain the country's liquidity , and actions to increase confidence by securing lines of credit .

mexico worked with the u.s. federal reserve and the international monetary fund ( imf ) to secure a $30 billion swap line from the u.s. federal reserve and an imf flexible credit line of $47 billion .

though mexico did not use the credit lines , the arrangements helped to improve confidence in the economy .

the government also took measures in the fy2010 budget by including substantive tax reforms to offset revenue losses from lower oil production .

mexico's key challenge over the next few years will likely be the issue of further reforms in the tax system to replace the declining share of oil revenues with tax revenues .

with its tax revenues representing only 10% of gdp , mexico has one of the lowest tax collection rates in latin america , and it is not viewed as being enough to meet the country's social needs .

though the government has already taken some steps to increase tax revenues , economists generally agree that mexico needs further tax reforms to broaden its tax base .

one of mexico's primary challenges in making its economy more efficient and increasing productivity is the issue of monopolies and limited competition .

a 2009 book co - published by the world bank and palgrave macmillan , as well as numerous reports and journal articles , report that special interest groups in business and labor have blocked changes in mexico that would introduce more market forces into the economy .

the publication no growth without equity states that "mexico seems to be caught up in a high - inequality , low growth state" and that reforms must be put into place in order for mexico to improve economic growth .

one key issue discussed in the world bank - palgrave macmillan book is the oil industry , which , according to the book , is controlled by the federal government and the oil industry labor union , whose own interests are not in balance with the interests of pemex .

the book notes that the "passivity" with which these groups have exercised their property rights with respect to pemex has hindered the performance of the oil industry and its capacity to grow .

the book argues that the influence and power of the federal government , the energy - intensive industrial firms , and the industry's labor union have prevented change from taking place in the oil sector because change would eliminate many of the benefits they have received for many years .

pemex's labor union has resisted change because thousands of jobs are at stake if the company were to be opened up to competition .

the large industrial companies that use large amounts of energy at subsidized prices do not want to lose these benefits under a more competitive environment .

the country's telecommunications sector is another area that is frequently mentioned as not having enough competition and being controlled by a monopoly .

teléfonos de méxico controls the telecommunications market in mexico and has successfully fought antitrust regulators in court .

as a result , mexico's telecommunications industry has probably not developed as fast as it could if more competition were introduced .

some also argue that another challenge to the mexican economy is the powerful labor unions .

mexico's labor unions have a monopoly on hiring , firing , and collective bargaining and exert a great deal of influence in the energy and healthcare industries and , most importantly , in education .

the national teacher's union , for example , is the biggest teachers' union in latin america and the most powerful in mexico .

analysts argue that the monopolist control over such a large portion of public and private sector activities in mexico is limiting economic growth in mexico and preventing the development of a "middle - class society. .

in september 2009 , president calderón delivered his third state of the union address to the mexican congress and proposed a number of reforms to address the economic and political challenges facing the country .

these reforms included the following: proposals to eliminate extreme poverty , introduce universal healthcare , and improve the quality of education for all children .

public sector finance reform .

transformation of state enterprises , which would privatize some parts of the state oil monopoly pemex .

telecommunications sector reform to increase coverage and allow more competition in this sector .

labor reform measures to bring more flexibility to the labor market by making it easier for companies to hire and fire .

regulatory reform , with the aim of reducing unnecessary government regulations and making the government less bureaucratic .

increase of government coordination and citizen participation in the war against organized crime .

fundamental political reform , which would allow re - election for some public offices .

the prospects for passage of president calderón's proposals by the mexican congress are not viewed as very likely .

some of the proposals are viewed as highly controversial and have deep - seated political implications , and efforts to restructure the energy sector or to adopt labor and fiscal reforms have been strongly opposed by the major political parties .

without the structural reforms necessary to bring about significant changes , mexico's potential to increase economic growth , boost development , and lower the poverty rate will likely be very limited .

however , there are signs that the population may be pushing for change , and much will depend on the outcome of the 2012 presidential election .

another serious economic challenge in mexico is related to the violence taking place in some regions of mexico after president calderón's campaign against organized crime and drug trafficking .

the escalation of violence has resulted in increased risk aversion , which has impacted foreign investment flows , particularly in the manufacturing industry .

the costs from the drug trade far outweigh any of the benefits that drug - trafficking and associated crime might bring in terms of increased cash flows or positive spill - over effects .

the costs associated with violence , investment losses , drug abuse , and other direct costs are estimated at $4.6 billion per year , or 0.5% of gdp .

costs could be even higher when taking into account the indirect costs of large numbers of violence - related outward migration , which lowers mexico's potential growth rate .

the city planning department of juárez estimates 116,000 homes were abandoned as of early 2010 because of the violence .

this could translate into a population of up to 400,000 people , one - third of the city , that has migrated .

violence has also had a severe impact on employment in juárez , with the city losing 23.9% ( 91,940 ) of it formal jobs .

some analysts believe that mexico must increase investor confidence to remain competitive because the drug violence is causing anxiety and uncertainty among investors .

ciudad juárez , which is close to the border with the united states and where much of the manufacturing industry is located , was , until recently , considered an attractive city for foreign investors and for doing business .

however , the border violence that has erupted since mexico's crackdown on organized crime has changed the business environment , and business leaders have been forced to take steps to increase security in manufacturing plants , such as abolishing overtime so that workers can go home before sunset .

the asociación de maquiladoras , a local trade group located in juárez , states that some foreign investors have passed on opening plants in juárez since 2008 , but that this was due to the recession and not to the increase in violence .

the relationship between the united states and mexico is important to policymakers from both countries because of the mutual interest in a number of key issues affecting the two countries , such as bilateral trade , economic competitiveness , and border security .

during his state visit to washington , dc , in may 2010 , mexican president felipe calderón emphasized the need for increased cooperation in north america in order to increase the competiveness of the region .

president barack obama hosted a meeting with president calderón where the two leaders discussed numerous key bilateral and hemispheric issues affecting the two countries .

the leaders reaffirmed the shared values in areas such as economic competitiveness , social and economic well - being , and the security of citizens in both countries .

one area of cooperation that was highlighted in a press release after the meeting was the need for mutual economic growth .

the two leaders vowed to enhance and reinforce efforts to create jobs , promote economic recovery and expansion , and encourage inclusive prosperity across all levels of society in both countries .

the two leaders discussed the following actions for bilateral cooperation to enhance competitiveness: ( 1 ) the creation of a twenty - first century border to facilitate the secure and efficient flow of goods and people and reduce the cost of doing business between the two countries ; ( 2 ) a commitment to continuing cooperation for safe , efficient , secure , and compatible modes of transportation ; ( 3 ) a commitment to significantly enhance the economic competitiveness and the economic well - being of both countries through improved regulatory cooperation ; and ( 4 ) the enhancement of intellectual property rights protection to promote innovation and investment in technology and human capital .

the two leaders also underscored the importance of human capital and touched upon the issue of immigration .

president obama underscored his commitment to comprehensive immigration reform in the united states while president calderón stated that his administration was committed to creating more job and educational opportunities in mexico .

both leaders acknowledged the importance of taking actions to address illegal immigration , border security , and human trafficking groups , and agreed to set priorities for the future .

the economic relationship between the united states and mexico is highly interdependent , with nafta playing a central role .

the mexican truck issue is the main trade issue related to nafta that has concerned policymakers over the past few years .

under nafta , mexican commercial trucks were to have been given full access to four u.s. border states in 1995 and full access throughout the united states in 2000 .

citing safety concerns , however , the united states refused implementation of nafta's trucking provisions , and the mexican government objected .

the 111 th congress terminated a cross - border trucking pilot program that was launched by the bush administration .

the program was terminated under the fy2009 omnibus appropriations act ( p.l .

111-8 ) .

on april 2 , 2009 , a trade association representing carriers in mexico's trucking industry filed a notice of arbitration under the investment chapter ( chapter 11 ) of nafta .

the notice of arbitration alleges that the u.s. department of transportation restricts mexican carrier operations in the united states and mexican investment in u.s. carriers , which is in violation of nafta articles 1102 and 1103 .

it also charges that the united states has failed to comply with a 2001 ruling by a nafta dispute resolution panel .

mexico retaliated on the termination of the trucking program by imposing tariffs on 90 u.s. products exported to mexico with an estimated value of $2.4 billion .

during his state visit to the united states , president calderón stated during a press conference that the trucking dispute impacts jobs , companies , and consumers in mexico and in the united states .

president obama has pledged to work with mexico to overcome the obstacles in implementing nafta trucking provisions .

u.s. transportation secretary ray lahood stated in june 2010 that the obama administration would be relaunching the cross - border trucking program with mexico and would present a proposal to congress soon .

another key issue that could have significant implications for the united states is mexico's declining oil production .

mexico is one of the united states' top three suppliers of crude petroleum oil .

if mexico is unable to continue oil production at the same level , the united states may no longer be able to rely on mexico as a source of oil imports .

however , there is a possibility that the mexican government will eventually pass reform measures to allow foreign investment for increased engineering capacity and exploration .

this could bring opportunities for u.s. companies in drilling and exploration services and could increase u.s. merchandise exports such as electrical apparatus , valves , pipes , pumps , electric motors and generators , and other related goods .

some proponents of improving the economic relationship between mexico and the united states recommend that the two countries work more closely on regulatory cooperation and deepen the economic relationship .

numerous analysts believe that the economic challenges that mexico is facing are contributing to poverty and organized crime , and that a prosperous and democratic mexico is in the best interest of the united states .

one suggestion is that mexico and the united states change the relationship from the current emphasis on anti - narcotic efforts and welcome a new stage in bilateral relations by focusing on other concepts such as immigration reform in the united states , energy reform in mexico , security concerns , harmonization of standards and regulations , and legitimate security and border issues across the region .

another observer contends that mexico's dependence on the u.s. economy diminishes its ability to diversify its markets and also limits the extent of mexico's long - term potential for economic growth .

he states that the two countries should work together to jointly improve their global competitiveness and in sectors where co - production is possible , but that this will not work if either of the two countries protects itself against imports from the other .

opponents of further north american integration contend that trade liberalization under nafta has been harmful to the u.s. economy and resulted in large job losses in the united states .

legislation was introduced in the 111 th congress for the united states to withdraw from nafta ( h.r .

4759 ) .

the bill would require the president to give written notice to mexico and canada of the u.s. withdrawal , which would occur six months after the bill's enactment .

the bill had 27 co - sponsors and was referred to the house ways and means committee .

supporters of the bill argue that nafta did not live up to its promises and that it has resulted in large job losses in the united states and mexico .

opponents of the bill contend that nafta has had overall positive economic effects in all three countries of north america and that withdrawing from nafta would diminish trade and investment flows across the region , hurting u.s. exports and economic growth and causing more job losses .

the higher tariffs , they argue , would hurt u.s. exports to mexico .

they point to the losses in exports that have occurred already from mexico's retaliatory tariffs due to the trucking dispute , and those exports represent only a small percentage of total u.s. exports to mexico .

