recent economic fragility in europe is again prompting concern that the united states may be about to experience a "double - dip" recession .

a double - dip or w - shaped recession occurs when the economy emerges from a recession , has a period of growth , but then falls back into recession , well short of a full economic recovery .

this prospect raises policy questions about the current level of economic stimulus and whether added stimulus may be needed .

the 2007-2009 recession was long and deep , and according to several indicators was the most severe economic contraction since the 1930s ( but still much less severe than the great depression ) .

the slowdown of economic activity was moderate through the first half of 2008 , but at that point the weakening economy was overtaken by a major financial crisis that would exacerbate the economic weakness and accelerate the decline .

when the fall of economic activity finally bottomed out in the second half of 2009 , real ( i.e. , inflation adjusted ) gross domestic product ( gdp ) had contracted by approximately 5.1% , or by about $680 billion .

at this point the output gap — the difference between what the economy could produce and what it actually produced — widened to 8.1% .

the decline in economic activity was much sharper than in the nine previous post - war recessions , in which the fall of real gdp averaged about 2.0% and the output gap increased on average to near 4.0% .

the economy , as measured by real gdp growth , began to recover in mid - 2009 .

however , over the next three years , the pace of growth has been slow and uneven .

during 2009 and 2010 , growth had been largely sustained by transitory factors , such as fiscal stimulus and the rebuilding of inventories by business .

in the first half of 2010 , economic growth showed signs of beginning to be generated by more sustainable forces such as consumer spending , business investment spending , and exports .

but the strength of those forces continued to be uneven , and they weakened by the year's end .

in the first quarter of 2011 , growth slowed sharply to a 0.4% annual rate , largely because of a deceleration of consumer and government spending .

this pronounced slowing of growth raised concern about the recovery's sustainability and the prospect of a second "dip" into recession .

however , over the remainder of 2011 the pace of economic growth improved .

propelled by stronger business investment spending and a positive contribution from net exports , the pace of growth increased to a 3.0% annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2011 , allaying concern about the return of recession .

in the first quarter of 2012 growth slowed again , falling to a 1.9% annual pace .

growth at less than a 2% annual rate may not be fast enough to close the output gap or to keep the unemployment rate from rising .

moreover , the persistence of economic weakness in the united states , the prospect of negative spillovers here from europe's return to recession , and a looming large dose of fiscal restraint ( under current law ) in early 2013 could increase the risk to the united states of an early return of recession .

a recent report by the federal reserve bank of san francisco estimates the chances of a second recession during the first half of 2013 at 1-in - 2 .

this report discusses factors suggesting an increased risk of double - dip recession .

it also discusses other factors that suggest economic recovery will continue .

the u.s. historical experience with double - dip recessions is also presented .

also examined is the role of deleveraging by households and businesses in the aftermath of the recent financial crisis in shaping the likely pace of economic recovery .

the report concludes with a look at current economic projections .

a double - dip recession in the united states is likely to be the consequence of a substantial negative economic shock to an already weak economy .

double - dip recessions are rare .

there are only two modern examples of a double - dip recession for the united states: the recession of 1937-1938 and the recession of 1981-1982 .

they both have the common attribute of resulting from a change in economic policy .

however , in the first case , recession was an unintended consequence of the policy change ; in the second case , recession was an intended consequence of the policy change .

both point to the importance of policy persistence in overcoming difficult economic circumstances .

for the u.s. economy , the annual rate of growth of real gdp in the early years of recovery from a recession has typically been above its long - term trend rate of growth ( real gdp advancing at a 2.5% to 3.0% annual rate ) .

historically , there has been what is termed a "snap back" relationship between the severity of the recession and the strength of the subsequent recovery .

in other words , a sharp contraction is followed by a robust recovery tracing out a v - shaped pattern of growth .

having deferred spending during the contraction , households and businesses have typically increased purchases quickly as economic conditions improved .

excess capacity and high unemployment generated during the recession typically means that for the near term the normal supply constraints do not apply , allowing the economy to grow faster than its long - term trend .

the more slack , the greater the possibility for above normal growth .

as the recovery matures and the economy approaches full employment and high rates of capacity utilization , growth slows to the economy's trend rate of growth that is governed by growth of the labor force and productivity .

prior to the recent recession , the three sharpest contractions , as measured by the cumulative fall of real gdp , occurred in the recessions of 1981-1982 , 1973-1975 , and 1957-1958 .

in 1981-1982 , the cumulative decline of real gdp was 2.7% and the increase in the first year of recovery was 7.7% ; in 1973-1975 , the cumulative decline was 2.8% and the subsequent increase was 6.1% ; in 1957-1958 , the cumulative decline was 3.7% and subsequent increase was 9.5% .

the current recovery has not followed this pattern , however .

the contraction was sharp , but recovery has been slow and uneven .

over an 18-month contraction , real gdp fell 5.1% , a post - war record .

in the recovery's first year , real gdp growth averaged 3.3% , slow in comparison to other post - war recoveries , but fast enough to slowly reduce the unemployment rate .

in the recovery's second year , growth decelerated to a much slower 1.6% average rate , a pace too slow to prevent the unemployment rate from rising .

as the recovery entered its third year in the third quarter of 2011 , growth of real gdp occurred at a relatively weak 2.0% annual rate .

given the large deterioration of the balance sheets of households and businesses , the possible reduction of the u.s. economy's level of potential output , and the weakened state of the global economy in the aftermath of the recent financial crisis , projections of the u.s. economy's near - term path carry a high degree of uncertainty .

as 2012 began , many economic forecasters , in light of the factors causing a deceleration of economic growth in 2011 , trimmed their growth projections .

the u.s. economic recovery , despite significant "headwinds" and recession risk , was expected to continue , albeit at a slower pace .

that general expectation has not changed in more recent projections .

the fed's open market committee projects real ( inflation adjusted ) gdp in 2012 to advance in a range between 2.1% to 3.0% and in 2013 in a range between 2.4% to 3.8% ( the current growth projection for 2012 and 2013 is unchanged from the january 25 , 2012 , projection ) .

the unemployment rate is projected to be in a range between 7.8% to 8.2% in 2012 and 7.0% to 8.1% in 2013 ( the range for the 2012 unemployment rate is 0.4 percentage points narrower than in the january projection. ) .

the imf projects real gdp in the united states to increase 2.0% in 2012 ( up 0.2 percentage points from its january 2012 projection ) and 2.6% in 2013 .

globally , the imf expects an unbalanced expansion .

for 2012 , growth of the advanced economies is projected to average 1.5% and growth in the emerging developing economies to average 6.3% .

global insight , an economic forecasting company , is currently projecting real gdp will advance 2.1% in 2012 and 2.3% in 2013 .

the unemployment rate is projected to be 8.0% in 2012 and 7.4% in 2013 .

forecasts are always subject to uncertainty .

that uncertainty is likely to be especially high at this time because forecasting the path of the economy near turning points in the business cycle is always difficult and because of the singular characteristics of the current business cycle ( i.e. , sharp financial crisis , greatly weakened balance sheets of households and businesses , and unusual and strong policy responses ) .

