in times of economic crisis , including the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 and ensuing economic downturn , congress often has debated on how best to promote u.s. commercial exports as a policy tool for economic growth and job creation .

congressional interest in u.s. export promotion policy has risen with president obama's announcement of a national export initiative ( nei ) in his 2010 state of the union address .

the nei is a strategy for doubling u.s. exports by 2014 in order to help generate 2 million new jobs in the united states through increased coordination and funding of federal export promotion activities ; greater financing for u.s. exporters ; increased government advocacy on behalf of u.s. exporters ; and negotiation of new trade agreements and stronger enforcement of existing u.s. trade agreements .

with the increased focus on export promotion efforts , some members of congress have placed greater priority on understanding the functions , coordination , and budgets of federal government agencies involved in export promotion .

such an understanding may support increased congressional oversight of u.s. export promotion policy and related legislative activity .

it also may assist members of congress in supporting the efforts of their constituents to learn about federal export promotion services and to become involved in exporting .

the 113 th congress could conduct oversight and legislate on a range of export promotion issues .

this report provides an overview of the federal agencies that participate in u.s. export promotion efforts and the issues that they raise for congress .

while this report focuses on the role of the federal government in promoting exports , it is important to acknowledge that state and local governments , as well as businesses , also have an important role in promoting exports .

the federal government conducts a wide variety of services that contribute to export promotion .

some of these services directly assist u.s. companies to overcome information and market entry barriers related to exporting .

export assistance services: the u.s. government provides export assistance services , such as distribution of trade - related information to exporters , foreign country market research , and counseling to both new and seasoned exporters .

the federal government also conducts business matchmaking services , including trade missions ( official business development missions led by senior u.s. government leaders to foreign countries ) and reverse trade missions ( bringing foreign buyers to the united states to meet with u.s. firms ) .

key agencies that offer direct export assistance include the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , department of commerce , department of state , small business administration ( sba ) , and trade and development agency ( tda ) .

feasibility studies: the u.s. government conducts feasibility studies , which evaluate the economic , financial , technical , and other aspects of proposed projects in foreign countries that may generate exports of u.s. goods and services .

usda and the tda both conduct such studies .

export financing and insurance: u.s. government agencies may finance and insure u.s. exports to foreign countries for a number reasons , including ( 1 ) to assume commercial and political risks that exporters or private financial institutions are unwilling or unable to undertake alone ; ( 2 ) to overcome maturity and other limitations in private sector export financing ; and ( 3 ) to counter officially backed export credit financing offered to foreign exporters by their governments .

usda takes the lead on agricultural export financing , while the export - import bank ( ex - im bank ) is the lead agency for providing financing and insurance for non - agricultural exports .

export financing for small business exporters is available from the ex - im bank and sba .

related to exports also is the role of the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) in financing and insuring u.s. private investment for projects overseas .

for example , opic - supported investment in infrastructure projects in developing and emerging markets may lead to the sale of u.s. goods and services for these projects and in these markets more broadly .

government - to - government advocacy: in many situations , u.s. companies face direct competition from foreign enterprises with access to greater foreign financing , subsidies , and other forms of support from their governments .

the united states may use diplomatic tools to advocate on behalf of u.s. companies to ensure that they can compete on a level playing field with foreign competitors in export markets .

key agencies involved in such efforts are the departments of commerce and state and the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) .

the federal government also promotes exports in broader ways , such as through negotiating new multilateral , regional , and bilateral free trade agreements ( ftas ) and monitoring the implementation and enforcement of existing trade agreements .

such efforts work to address constraints , barriers , and unfair trade practices faced by u.s. exporters , including foreign countries' tariff and other import policies , export subsidies , inadequate protection of intellectual property rights , barriers to exports of services and foreign direct investment , and anti - competitive practices .

they also help to develop foreign markets for u.s. goods and services .

the lead agency in such efforts is the ustr .

other agencies , including the departments of commerce and state , also play a role in fta negotiations and enforcement .

in addition , the u.s. government conducts activities that may help to promote exports indirectly .

government programs , such as opic , that are not charged directly with the promotion of u.s. exports may contribute to the expansion of exports through their activities .

the export promotion functions of the federal government are distributed across a range of agencies .

this section focuses on 9 key agencies involved in federal export promotion activities .

in previous years , the tpcc , in its national export strategy reports , published government funding levels for activities of federal agencies deemed to constitute "trade promotion. .

the individual agencies and the tpcc determine which programs or activities are considered to constitute trade promotion and therefore included in the annual report of trade promotion budget authority .

the tpcc does not have an independent budget , nor does it have any specific authority to direct member agencies' allocation of resources .

the tpcc secretariat does not review member agency budgets in relation to the annual national export strategy and its budgetary needs .

each federal agency has its own statutory requirements and budgets appropriated by various congressional committees .

as a result , each agency submits its annual budget request separately to the president .

the tpcc has not published trade promotion spending levels in the national export strategy reports for 2011 and 2012 .

in part , this may be because of difficulties in identifying trade promotion activities that have emerged in recent years .

although recent trade promotion spending levels are not available , the budgets for prior years in earlier reports may shed light on some trends in the federal government's trade promotion budget authority .

the 113 th congress could conduct oversight and legislate on a number of issues related to federal agencies involved in export promotion , including those discussed below .

the 112 th congress passed certain pieces of legislation related to federal agencies involved in export promotion , including the following: several bills were introduced related to the ex - im bank's reauthorization .

ultimately , congress passed h.r .

2072 , p.l .

112-122 , to extend the ex - im bank's authority through fy2014 .

the bill raised the ex - im bank's lending authority incrementally from the previous $100 billion limit to $140 billion in fy2014 , contingent on certain requirements .

among other things , it includes provisions related to the ex - im bank's domestic content policy and requirements to conduct international negotiations to reduce and eliminate official export credit activity .

h.r .

8 , p.l .

112-240 , the "fiscal cliff" bill , reauthorized all of usda's export market development , export credit guarantee , and export subsidy programs through fy2013 .

the 112 th congress also introduced other bills related to export promotion , including the coordination of federal export promotion activities and the authority of federal export promotion agencies , that generally did not advance beyond the committee stage .

they include the following: h.r .

4041 would have provided the tpcc with greater authority to assess current export promotion programs ; direct improvements , review , and approve annual export promotion budget submissions , taking into account recommendations of u.s. exporters ( especially smes and representatives of u.s. workers ) ; and direct the implementation of export promotion activities by other agencies .

the bill also would have provided for the redeployment of commercial service officers based on assessments conducted by the secretary of commerce on overseas markets with the greatest potential for increasing u.s. exports .

in addition , the bill would have required each chief of mission to develop a plan for effective diplomacy to remove or reduce obstacles to u.s. exports .

the house passed h.r .

4041 , as amended , and referred the bill to the senate .

the senate version of the bill was s. 2171 .

h.r .

2988 would have required the secretary of commerce to establish a public directory for foreign buyers to identify u.s. manufacturers and service providers prepared to export clean and efficient energy and environmental products and services ; required the secretary of commerce to establish a governmental database on foreign sales opportunities in such products and services ; required the secretary of commerce to monitor and evaluate u.s. export promotion activities with respect to such products and services ; and required the gao to submit reports to congress comparing the effectiveness of u.s. export promotion activities in this area with those of other major trade competitors .

h.r .

3976 would have , among other things , directed the sba office of international trade to compile and update annually a document for small businesses that contains tariff schedules of foreign countries and other trade and market data .

it also would have directed the oit to identify and advertise programs and services to small businesses , including federal assistance , that facilitate the matching of foreign customers to small businesses .

in addition , h.r .

3976 would have increased ex - im bank financing for small business exports and opic financing for small business investment .

h.r .

4221 was intended to create jobs in the united states by expanding u.s. trade and investment programs that increase u.s. exports to africa .

the bill would have expanded the role of federal agencies involved in export promotion , such as the department of commerce , the ex - im bank , and opic , with respect to africa .

among other things , the bill would have directed the ex - im bank to make more financing available for projects in africa and to use not less than $250 million of its total capitalization to counter concessional loans made by foreign governments .

an amended version of the companion bill , s. 2215 , was reported .

h.r .

2762 and s. 3627 would have reauthorized opic through fy2015 .

s. 3240 , the senate - passed 2012 farm bill and h.r .

6083 , the house committee - reported 2012 farm bill , would have reauthorized funding for the usda agricultural export market development programs and the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) export credit guarantee programs .

s. 3240 would have reduced the value of u.s. agricultural exports that benefit from export credit guarantees from $5.5 billion to $4.5 billion annually , while h.r .

6083 would have retained the $5.5 billion level of guarantees .

both bills would have authorized ccc fy2012 levels for map , fmdp , emp , and tasc .

 ( map had been targeted in a number of deficit reduction proposals for elimination. ) .

both bills would have repealed the deip program .

h.r .

6083 would have authorized the secretary of agriculture to establish the position of under secretary of agriculture for foreign agricultural services , while s. 3240 would have called for a study of the trade functions of usda , noting that in implementing the study , the secretary may include a recommendation for the establishment of an under secretary for trade and foreign agriculture .

the 112 th congress ended without enacting a new five - year farm bill to replace the expiring 2008 farm bill .

s. 3240 and h.r .

6083 , including their trade provisions , will likely serve as a starting point in the formulation of a new five - year farm bill in the 113 th congress .

