"libel tourism" describes the act of bringing a defamation suit in a country with plaintiff - friendly libel laws , even though the parties might have had relatively few contacts with the chosen jurisdiction prior to the suit .

libel tourism , like "forum shopping," may be negatively associated with plaintiffs who attempt to strategically manipulate legal processes to enhance the likelihood of a favorable outcome .

however , a "libel tourist" could also be described as a plaintiff seeking favorable law under which to obtain redress for a grievance which he perceives as legitimate .

regardless of the characterization , given the increasingly globalized market for publications , some have warned that the libel tourism trend will cause an international lowest common denominator effect for speech , whereby "every writer around the globe [will be subjected] to the restrictions of the most pro - plaintiff libel standards available. .

the practice has affected u.s. persons in several suits brought by litigants who wish to avoid the relatively high burden of proof necessary to win defamation claims in the united states .

u.s. courts interpret the first amendment to protect speech that would be considered defamatory under traditional common law and in many other countries .

for that reason , u.s. authors and publishers have been especially vulnerable to the possibility that a foreign libel judgment will impose penalties for speech that is protected in the author's home country .

although a committee of the english house of commons has recommended reforms , england has a long history of providing redress for reputational injuries .

modern english law appeals to potential libel tourists primarily because it offers a dual advantage to plaintiffs: plaintiff - friendly libel laws and a relatively low bar for personal jurisdiction in libel suits .

as a result , although england is not the only country with plaintiff - friendly libel laws , english courts have been an especially popular venue for defamation suits against u.s. nationals .

because obtaining a judgment and actually receiving the money awarded constitute two separate components of a successful lawsuit , winning a judgment in a foreign court does not end the discussion .

if a defendant chooses not to appear in a foreign court , the court will typically award a default judgment against the defendant .

in such circumstances , plaintiffs in foreign libel suits might involve u.s. courts when they seek to enforce judgments against u.s. defendants because foreign courts typically lack jurisdiction over assets located in the united states .

thus , the u.s. response to libel tourism has focused primarily on subsequent actions to recognize or enforce foreign court judgments in u.s. courts .

for example , the first federal law on point , the securing the protection of our enduring and established constitutional heritage act ( speech act ) , bars u.s. courts , both state and federal , from recognizing or enforcing a foreign judgment for defamation unless certain requirements , including consistency with the u.s. constitution and section 230 of the communications act of 1934 ( 47 u.s.c .

ยง 230 ) , are satisfied .

the 111 th congress considered several proposals to address libel tourism , and ultimately passed the securing the protection of our enduring and established constitutional heritage act ( or the "speech act" ) , which was signed into law on august 10 , 2010 .

the speech act avoided the constitutional questions that accompanied some of the other proposals .

for example , s. 449 and h.r .

1304 , which were collectively referred to as the free speech protection act , would have authorized counter - suits and a basis for exercising personal jurisdiction over a person who served documents related to a foreign defamation lawsuit on a u.s. person .

had this approach been adopted , it may have been viewed as authorizing federal courts to exercise personal jurisdiction beyond the boundaries permitted by due process , which requires the defendants to have "minimum contacts" in the judicial forum , such that the court's assertion of jurisdiction over them conforms with traditional notions of fairness .

for these reasons , as well as concern for international comity , the house committee on the judiciary indicated that this approach would be too aggressive .

accordingly , the speech act does not authorize counter - suits against plaintiffs in foreign libel cases .

instead , the speech act bars u.s. courts from recognizing or enforcing a foreign judgment for defamation unless certain requirements are satisfied .

however , advocates of a federal cause of action have argued that , without the threat of a counter - suit , bars on enforcement like the one created by the speech act are insufficient to prevent a chilling effect on the speech of u.s. persons .

the speech act prohibits domestic courts from recognizing or enforcing foreign judgments for defamation in any one of three circumstances: 1 .

when the party opposing recognition or enforcement claims that the judgment is inconsistent with the first amendment to the constitution , until and unless the domestic court determines that the judgment is consistent with the first amendment , 2 .

when the party opposing recognition or enforcement establishes that the exercise of personal jurisdiction by the foreign court failed to comport with the due process requirements imposed on domestic courts by the u.s. constitution , or 3 .

when the foreign judgment is against the provider of an interactive computer service and the party opposing recognition or enforcement claims that the judgment is inconsistent with section 230 of the communications act of 1934 ( 47 u.s.c .

ยง 230 ) regarding protection for private blocking and screening of offensive material , until and unless the domestic court determines that the judgment is consistent with those provisions .

moreover , in any of those three circumstances , a u.s. citizen opposing recognition or enforcement of the foreign judgment may bring an action in a federal district court for a declaratory judgment that the foreign judgment is repugnant to the constitution .

the speech act also permits any action brought in a state domestic court to be removed to federal court if there is diversity jurisdiction or one party is a u.s. citizen and the other is either a foreign state or citizen of a foreign state .

the speech act ensures that a party who appeared in a foreign court rendering a foreign judgment to which the act applies is not deprived of the right to oppose recognition or enforcement of that subsequent judgment .

if the party opposing recognition or enforcement of the judgment prevails , the act allows the award of reasonable attorney fees under certain conditions .

finally , the speech act appears to preempt state laws related to foreign judgments .

prior to the enactment of the securing the protection of our enduring and established constitutional heritage act ( speech act ) , concern existed over the effect the threat of foreign libel suits was having on the exercise of americans' freedom of speech rights .

although the u.s. constitution provides relatively strong freedom of speech protections , it did not prevent courts in countries with a less protective view of speech from entering libel judgments against u.s. persons .

the speech act is intended to address this libel tourism phenomenon and reduce or eliminate the potential "chilling effect" foreign libel suits may have on speech protected by the first amendment to the u.s. constitution .

accordingly , the speech act prohibits domestic courts from recognizing or enforcing foreign judgments for defamation that are inconsistent with the first amendment of the constitution , that were entered by a court that exercised personal jurisdiction in contravention of the due process requirements imposed on u.s. courts by the constitution , or that were inconsistent with section 230 of the communications of 1934 .

some have argued , however , that , without the threat of a counter - suit , this bar on enforcement will prove insufficient to prevent a chilling effect on the speech of u.s. persons .

there are several state libel tourism laws that predate the enactment of the speech act ; however , the speech act appears to preempt state lawmaking in this area .

although the speech act lacks an explicit preemption provision , it applies to all "domestic" courts and defines a "domestic court" to include both state and federal courts , notwithstanding any other provision of state law .

furthermore , the legislative history of the act indicates that congress believed , one , that the speech act would preempt state laws related to foreign judgments , and , two , that a uniform national approach towards foreign libel judgments was necessary .

the passage of the speech act may have implications for international comity .

a decision by a state or federal court in the united states not to enforce particular foreign libel judgments could have negative repercussions on the enforcement of u.s. libel or other judgments in foreign courts .

this will be particularly true in those countries that condition recognition of foreign judgments on the foreign country's reciprocal recognition of judgments of the same type .

similarly , in some areas , u.s. law is perceived as plaintiff - friendly , and the united states may find its diplomatic efforts to ensure that foreign countries recognize judgments pursuant to these plaintiff - friendly laws are opposed by countries' whose libel judgments are negatively affected by the speech act .

