the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) contains a number of separately authorized programs , which generally distribute funds by formulas that prescribe how funds are to be allocated among state educational agencies ( seas ) or local educational agencies ( leas ) nationwide .

the esea raises a number of legal issues , particularly relating to the first amendment , regarding state assistance or involvement in issues of religion or religious schools .

as congress considers whether to reauthorize the esea , it may be concerned with the current first amendment rules with respect to church - state issues in education .

several points of the analysis that follow stem from concerns that government assistance is improper for private religious schools , or that government involvement in particular issues may be construed as support for a religious purpose .

these issues generally are governed by the establishment clause of the first amendment , which provides that "congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion...." the supreme court has addressed a number of first amendment issues arising in the education context , as discussed below .

these cases indicate a general rule that the first amendment prohibits a state from utilizing "its public school system to aid any or all religious faiths or sects in the dissemination of their doctrines and ideals. .

this report will highlight the legal and policy issues that arise in the context of elementary and secondary education programs .

in particular , it will address a variety of topics in which first amendment concerns may be raised in education - related legislation , including teaching of creationism , school prayer , civil rights protections in schools , funding for faith - based organizations ( fbos ) and school vouchers , supplemental services , and title i reimbursement for religious schools .

one of the controversial church - state issues in educational contexts in recent years has been the permissible restrictions that may be placed on curriculum in schools .

the establishment clause requires that the government remain neutral in matters related to religion and not endorse one particular religion over another , or endorse religion generally .

this rule extends to curriculum decisions made for public schools .

the issue of curriculum restrictions is highlighted in debates regarding creationism , evolution , and intelligent design in science curricula and has been a source of debate for decades .

in 1968 , the u.s. supreme court considered whether the first amendment permitted schools to place limitations on teaching evolution in public school curriculum .

in that case , epperson v. arkansas , a public high school teacher challenged a state statute that prohibited the state's public schools and universities from teaching evolution theory — "that mankind ascended or descended from a lower order of animals. .

the court relied on what has become one of its central rules of establishment clause jurisprudence — that "the first amendment mandates governmental neutrality between religion and religion , and between religion and nonreligion. .

although the court noted that the operations of public schools were generally left to state and local governments , they nevertheless were subject to constitutional limitations , including the first amendment .

because the court found that arkansas' motivation in enacting the challenged statute was "to suppress the teaching of a theory which , it was thought , 'denied' the divine creation of man," it held that the statute violated the requirement of neutrality .

according to the court , "arkansas did not seek to excise from the curricula of its schools and universities all discussion of the origin of man .

the law's effort was confined to an attempt to blot out a particular theory because of its supposed conflict with the biblical account , literally read. .

two decades after the court held that schools could not ban the teaching of evolution , it considered whether a school in turn could mandate that "creation science" be taught in addition to evolution .

in edwards v. aguillard , the challenged louisiana statute prohibited "the teaching of the theory of evolution in public schools unless accompanied by instruction in 'creation science.' .

the court relied on its lemon test , which requires that a law ( 1 ) must have a secular purpose ; ( 2 ) must have an effect that neither advances nor inhibits religion ; and ( 3 ) cannot cause excessive entanglement of government and religion .

according to the court , the statute violated the first prong of that test , noting that , although the stated purpose was to protect academic freedom , the legislative history indicated an intent to ensure that if evolution was taught , so would creationism .

the court was critical of the statute's stated purpose , explaining that the statute did not allow teachers freedom to determine the curriculum or provide a more comprehensive curriculum .

rather , the court found its usual deference to the stated purpose was not warranted because that deference required "that the statement of such purpose be sincere and not a sham. .

the court concluded that "in this case , the purpose of the creationism act was to restructure the science curriculum to conform with a particular religious viewpoint," which violated the first amendment .

the debate over curriculum restrictions has continued over the years .

as recently as 2005 , a federal district court held that a pennsylvania school district policy that mandated teaching "intelligent design" as an alternative explanation to the theory of evolution violated the first amendment .

the court found that the policy communicated a message of endorsement of a particular religious belief in violation of the establishment clause because , according to the court , the theory of intelligent design was an outgrowth of creationism and was not science .

the court explained that the school district implemented the policy to advance religion , relying on the policy's plain language , its legislative history , and the historical context of intelligent design .

as mentioned earlier , curriculum decisions are typically within the purview of state and local governing bodies , not congress .

however , in the congressional debate over reauthorization of esea in 2001 , the senate passed what is often referred to as the santorum amendment , which stated that: it is the sense of the senate that —     ( 1 ) good science education should prepare students to distinguish the data or testable theories of science from philosophical or religious claims that are made in the name of science ; and     ( 2 ) where biological evolution is taught , the curriculum should help students to understand why this subject generates so much continuing controversy , and should prepare the students to be informed participants in public discussions regarding the subject .

worded generally to express the senate's policy perspective , the amendment did not introduce any requirements for curriculum choices in schools .

as such , it does not have a binding effect on school curricula .

constitutional rules governing prayer in public schools vary depending upon the context of the particular religious expression at issue .

generally , schools , administrators , and teachers may not require or lead students in religious activities , but students may engage in private religious observances while in school .

that is , the court has made explicit a constitutional distinction between the sponsorship of religious activities in the schools by government and the conduct of such activities by students on their own initiative .

accordingly , the court has imposed restrictions on school prayer , but it has also found broad constitutional protection for private religious expression in decisions concerning moments of silence and equal access policies for student religious groups at the secondary school level .

the u.s. supreme court has construed the establishment clause , in general , to mean that government is prohibited from sponsoring or financing religious instruction or indoctrination .

in the context of public aid to religious schools , the court has drawn a constitutional distinction between aid that flows directly to sectarian schools and aid that benefits such schools indirectly as the result of voucher or tax benefit programs .

it is important to note that these rules have been applied differently in some cases , depending on the nature of the educational institution ( i.e. , elementary and secondary schools versus colleges and universities ) .

congress has provided several statutory protections to prevent discrimination based on religion in the education context .

some protections apply specifically to educational programs , while others apply more generally .

for example , the no child left behind act of 2001 specifically provided that nothing in the elementary and secondary education act shall be construed to permit discrimination based on religion .

the civil rights provision in that act did not provide any specific guidance on implementation or the scope of protection , but rather indicated a rule of construction for challenges of discriminatory practices that may be raised in the various programs authorized under esea .

civil rights protections for religious schools and teachers may be better understood through the broadly applicable nondiscrimination protections in the civil rights act of 1964 .

title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 generally prohibits employers from discriminating against employees on the basis of religion .

specifically , title vii prohibits employers from using religion as a basis for hiring or discharging any individual .

it further prohibits employers from discriminating "with respect to his compensation , terms , conditions , or privileges of employment" because of the individual's religion .

religious organizations ( including educational institutions ) , however , may be exempt from some of the prohibitions of title vii .

title vii's prohibition against religious discrimination does not apply to "a religious corporation , association , educational institution , or society with respect to the employment [i.e. , hiring and retention] of individuals of a particular religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by such corporation , association , educational institution , or society of its activities. .

another exemption applies specifically to religious educational institutions .

that exemption allows such institutions "to hire and employ employees of a particular religion if [the institution] is , in whole or in substantial part , owned , supported , controlled , or managed by a particular religion or by a particular [organization] , or if the curriculum of [the institution] is directed toward the propagation of a particular religion. .

courts have held that these exemptions protect religious schools' ability to maintain hiring preferences for individuals with the same religious beliefs .

exemptions for religious organizations in the context of title vii are not absolute .

once an organization qualifies as an entity eligible for title vii exemption , it is permitted to discriminate on the basis of religion in its employment decisions .

the exemption does not allow qualifying organizations to discriminate on any other basis forbidden by title vii .

thus , although a religious organization may consider an employee or applicant's religion without violating title vii , the organization may still violate title vii if it considers the individual's race , color , national origin , or sex .

in some cases , an employer may claim that it had a valid discriminatory reason for the discharge based on religion under the title vii exemption , while the employee claims the discharge is based on some other title vii prohibition and therefore improper .

for example , in several cases , employees of private religious schools have been discharged after becoming pregnant .

in one of these cases , the employer claimed that the termination was based on a violation of an organization policy against extra - marital sex , stemming from the religion's teachings .

the employee claimed that the action was unlawful sex discrimination based on her pregnancy .

if the court determines that the employer's action was taken in response to the resulting pregnancy , rather than because of a violation of the faith - based policy , the organization may be held in violation of title vii's prohibition on sex discrimination .

in such cases , if the court determines the discharge was based on religious teachings , the organization can claim title vii exemption .

furthermore , the exemptions in title vii appear to apply only with respect to employment decisions regarding hiring and firing of employees based on religion .

once an organization makes a decision to employ an individual , the organization may not discriminate on the basis of religion regarding the terms and conditions of employment , including compensation , benefits , privileges , etc .

in other words , religious organizations that decide to hire individuals with other religious beliefs cannot later choose to discriminate against those individuals with regard to wages or other benefits that the organization provides to employees .

under the elementary and secondary education act , services are provided to private school students according to the "child benefit" model .

accordingly , children enrolled in private schools may benefit from publicly funded services , yet funding for and the provision of these services remain under public control .

that is , the funds are not provided directly to private schools .

children enrolled in private elementary and secondary schools have been eligible to be served under the esea in some capacity since its inception in 1965 .

private school students are eligible to be served under the following esea programs: title i - a ( education for the disadvantaged ) , title i - b - 1 ( reading first ) , title i - b - 3 ( even start family literacy ) , title i - c ( migrant education ) , title ii - a ( teacher and principal training and recruiting fund ) , title ii - b ( mathematics and science partnerships ) , title ii - d ( enhancing education though technology ) , title iii - a ( english language acquisition , language enhancement and academic achievement ) , title iv - a ( safe and drug - free schools and communities ) , title iv - b ( 21 st century community learning centers ) , title v - a ( innovative programs ) , and title v - d - 6 ( gifted and talented students ) .

all of these programs , except title i - a , title v - a , and title v - d - 6 , are governed by equitable participation requirements included in title ix - e - 1 ( sections 9501-9506 ) .

neither the reading first program nor the innovative programs ( title v - a ) is currently funded .

in addition , funds are no longer provided for the state grant portion of the safe and drug - free schools and communities program , which was subject to equitable participation provisions .

in addition to statutory language addressing the equitable participation of private school students in esea program , the u.s. department of education ( ed ) has issued regulations and non - regulatory guidance regarding the section 9501 provisions , as well as the equitable participation requirements that pertain specifically to title i - a .

non - regulatory guidance was also produced on the provision of services under title v - a .

the discussion in this report of equitable participation requirements under section 9501 and under title i - a is based on statutory requirements and the aforementioned regulations and non - regulatory guidance promulgated by ed .

the first section of the discussion focuses on the equitable participation requirements under section 9501 .

this is followed by a discussion of the equitable participation provisions that specifically apply to title i - a .

the equitable participation requirements that apply specifically to title v - a and to title v - d - 6 are not discussed .

the section concludes with a brief examination of other provisions included in the esea that do not apply to private schools based on funds provided through equitable participation requirements .

in addition to providing funds for disadvantaged students , title i - a of the esea contains numerous accountability requirements with which schools and leas in states that accept title i - a funds must comply .

each state's accountability system must be based on the academic assessments and other academic indicators it uses to measure academic progress .

leas are required to annually review the status of each public school in making adequate yearly progress toward state standards of academic achievement ; and seas are required to annually review the status of each lea in making ayp .

when schools receiving title i - a funds do not make ayp for two or more consecutive years , they become subject to a range of increasingly severe sanctions , including the requirement to provide supplemental educational services , which are coupled with technical assistance provided by the lea .

after not making ayp for two consecutive years , a title i - a school is identified for school improvement .

being designated for school improvement carries with it the requirement to develop or revise a school plan designed to result in the improvement of the school and use at least 10% of their title i - a funding for professional development .

all students attending title i - a schools identified for school improvement also must be offered public school choice — the opportunity to transfer to another public school within the same lea .

leas are required to provide students who transfer to different schools with transportation and must give priority in choosing schools to the lowest - achieving children from low - income families .

if , after being identified for school improvement , a school does not make ayp for another year , it must be identified for a second year of school improvement by the end of that school year .

all students attending a school identified for a second year of school improvement must continue to be offered the option of attending another eligible public school within the same lea .

in addition , students from low - income families who continue to attend the school must be offered the opportunity to receive supplemental educational services .

supplemental educational services are educational activities , such as tutoring , that are provided outside of normal school hours and which are designed to augment or enhance the educational services provided during regular periods of instruction .

supplemental educational services may be provided by a non - profit entity , a for - profit entity , or the lea , unless such services are determined by the sea to be unavailable in the local area .

students from low - income families who attend schools identified for improvement are eligible to receive ses which could be provided by faith - based organizations ( fbos ) .

fbos , including private schools , are eligible to provide ses on the same basis as any other private entity , provided the fbo meets applicable statutory and regulatory requirements .

an sea is prohibited from discriminating against potential ses providers based on the provider's religious affiliation .

conversely , an fbo providing ses may not discriminate against students based on their religious affiliations .

by becoming an ses provider , fbos do not have to give up their "independence , autonomy , right of expression , religious character , and authority over its governance. .

fbos are prohibited , however , from using title i - a funds or other federal funds to support religious practices .

