in 1998 , al qaeda ( aq ) conducted its first u.s. - documented terrorist attacks against u.s. interests , killing 224 people , including 12 americans , and injuring over 4,500 in the bombings of the u.s. embassies in kenya and tanzania .

al qaeda and related groups have executed subsequent terrorist attacks in east africa , including the first known attack by an american suicide bomber in somalia in october 2008 .

on july 11 , 2010 , 76 people , including one american , were killed in near simultaneous bombings in kampala , uganda .

al shabaab , a somali islamist insurgent group with ties to al qaeda , claimed responsibility , marking the group's first successful attack outside somali territory .

al shabaab has threatened attacks in uganda and burundi , which have deployed troops to the african union ( au ) peacekeeping mission in somalia ( amisom ) , and has threatened other countries and western targets in east africa .

al shabaab's threats mirror those issued by al qaeda .

in an audio message addressed to somalis released in april 2009 , al qaeda leader osama bin laden stated , "the war which has been taking place on your soil for these years is a war between islam and the international crusade," and called on somalis "to continue their steps on the path of jihad. .

according to the u.s. state department , the continued presence of al qaeda operatives in the region and islamist militants in somalia poses the greatest threat to u.s. and allied government interests in the region , where porous borders remain vulnerable to the movement of terrorists and illicit materials .

the reported recruitment efforts of al shabaab in the united states have also raised concern regarding threats to the homeland and the involvement of u.s. citizens in terrorism activities overseas .

east african countries have faced threats from a variety of groups that employ terrorist tactics .

u.s. counterterrorism policy is focused on transnational aq operatives in the region and on those local groups , like al shabaab , that share a common extremist ideology with al qaeda and whose success may benefit al qaeda's aims .

the united states implements a range of overt , covert , and clandestine programs to counter the transnational terrorist threat in this region .

these efforts are part of what the bush administration referred to as the "global war on terror," and what the obama administration calls "a global campaign … to disrupt , dismantle and defeat al qa'ida and its affiliates. .

debate over their focus , guiding strategy , tactics , and effectiveness continues .

this report explores u.s. measures to prevent , deter , and preempt terrorism in east africa , focusing on the response to threats posed by violent islamist extremist groups such as al qaeda and al shabaab .

it briefly examines the evolving threat posed by these groups in the region , and discusses the evolution of policies guiding the u.s. response .

the report describes both regional and bilateral programs designed to counter the influence and activities of violent extremist organizations .

these include not only security assistance and efforts to build regional capacity to counter terrorist financing and transit , but also efforts to address the root causes of extremism .

as congress continues to monitor these programs , questions for potential oversight may include the following: what is the context , focus , and scope of u.s. co unterterrorism programs in east africa ? .

how serious is the threat posed by violent extremist organizations in east africa to u.s. interests ? .

in what countries are u.s. and host nation targets most vulnerable to terrorist attack ? .

how are u.s. resources matched against the threat ? .

given finite u.s. resources , how much should be devoted to countering terrorist threats in east africa compared to those elsewhere in the world ? .

what are the drivers of violent extremism in east africa ? .

how might they differ from those in other regions that have experienced increased terrorist activity ? .

to what extent are u.s. counterterrorism programs in east africa designed to address the specific context of the countries in which they are implemented ? .

how are counterterrorism programs coordinated ? .

which agencies currently implement counterterrorism programs ? .

are they best placed to do so ? .

how has interagency coordination of these programs evolved ? .

what challenges remain ? .

to what extent are counterterrorism programs accompanied by effective communications and public affairs strategies to explain their aims ? .

how are u.s. counterterrorism efforts perceived by host country populations ? .

is there a comprehensive counter - radicalization strategy guiding counterterrorism - related development and civil affairs interventions ? .

how are counterterrorism programs balanced between military and law enforcement or judicial assistance , and between security assistance and "development" programs , such as efforts to counter extremist ideologies ? .

are these programs effective in countering or preventing extremism ? .

could they be improved ? .

what metrics are used to evaluate these programs ? .

how effective are partner nations' efforts in disrupting or reducing the terrorist threat posed by al qaeda and its affiliates in east africa ? .

to what extent have partner governments conducted operations that demonstrate enhanced counterterrorism capabilities attributable to u.s. training or assistance ? .

to what extent , if at all , should efforts to counter violent extremism in the region incorporate initiatives to reach out to non - violent islamists to marginalize violent extremists ? .

what are the potential costs or dangers of such a strategy ? .

to what extent do counterterrorism programs potentially conflict with other u.s. regional policy goals , such as the promotion of human rights and democracy ? .

in november 2001 , the chairman of the house subcommittee on africa declared in a hearing on africa and the war on global terrorism , "it is clear that in the fight against terrorism , no region can be ignored , especially not africa. .

in that hearing , former assistant secretary of state for african affairs susan rice , who is now the u.s .

ambassador to the united nations , testified that africa was "the world's soft underbelly for global terrorism. .

congress has maintained an active interest in terrorist threats over the past decade , and has focused increasingly on the growing capabilities of aq affiliates .

during the past year , multiple committees held hearings on the evolving threat of al qaeda and its global network , and witnesses have drawn attention to the activities of al shabaab and its relationship with al qaeda ( hearings are listed in appendix c ) .

congress has also focused on al shabaab's recruitment efforts in the united states .

in january 2009 , the senate foreign relations committee produced a majority staff report on al qaeda in yemen and somalia , which warned , "the potential threats from yemen and somalia pose new challenges for the united states and other countries fighting extremism worldwide. .

political instability and terrorist activities in and emanating from somalia have been the subject of increasing focus .

members have expressed concern with the ongoing humanitarian crisis and security situation , and in 2010 the chairman of the senate africa subcommittee voiced his concern that "we still do not have an overarching strategy for somalia that ties our programs and policies together .

as a result , we appear to be grasping at straws to 'do something' while our national security increasingly hangs in the balance. .

he introduced s.res .

573 , calling for the development of a comprehensive strategy to address somalia's multiple crises .

several bills were introduced in the aftermath of the 2010 kampala bombings: h.con.res .

303 , which calls upon the administration to formulate a comprehensive strategy and work with african partners to address the terrorist threat in the region ; h.res .

1538 , which condemns the bombings and calls for the administration to work with partners to address the security threat emanating from somalia ; and h.res .

1596 , which condemns al shabaab for its conscription of child soldiers .

related legislation , h.res .

1708 , introduced in september 2010 , calls for eritrea to be designated a state sponsor of terrorism for its alleged ties to al shabaab .

congress has explored the u.s. response to terrorist threats , including those in east africa , through a range of hearings and oversight activities .

the armed services committees have examined the various strategies and programs to counter violent extremism , and the senate has scrutinized u.s. outreach to muslim communities overseas .

in its most recent defense authorization , h.r .

5136 , the house armed services committee expressed concern that the department of defense ( dod ) had not focused sufficient effort on messaging programs aimed at delegitimizing violent extremism , and that despite a number of programs focused on the mission , they were not well coordinated or supported .

the committee found that "the department must first understand the ideological environment , including how these groups leverage digital media," and recommended increased funding .

the committee has also sought to expand or enhance several counterterrorism authorities , including the "section 1208" program , which allows dod to provide assistance to foreign forces facilitating u.s. special operations forces operations to counter terrorism ; various counter - ideology initiatives , including efforts to facilitate dod understanding of the cultural and ideological contexts of radicalization ; and the "section 1206" train and equip program , which has been used to build capabilities in east africa .

members of congress have also expressed concern that the u.s. government may not be adequately assessing long - term risks associated with providing training and military equipment for counterterrorism purposes to countries with poor records of human rights , rule of law , and accountability .

u.s. military and security assistance efforts in east africa have drawn the attention of the 111 th congress .

the house oversight and government reform committee has investigated the activities of u.s. africa command ( africom ) and its sub - regional presence in djibouti , the combined joint task force – horn of africa ( cjtf - hoa ) .

senate committees have expressed support for the task force's regional engagement activities , but have requested clarification on cjtf - hoa's future role in africa ( see " regional programs " ) .

the house of representatives , in its fy2011 defense authorization act ( h.r .

5136 ) has requested a report on activities implemented by africom and cjtf - hoa to counter violent extremism in africa .

congress also continues to conduct oversight of security assistance to regional counterterrorism partners .

al qaeda and affiliated groups have had a presence in east africa for almost 20 years , although the extent of their operations there has varied over time .

the region's porous borders , proximity to the arabian peninsula , weak law enforcement and judicial institutions , pervasive corruption , and , in some cases , state complicity in terrorist activities , combined with the almost 20-year absence of central authority in somalia , have provided an enabling environment for al qaeda and other violent extremist groups .

some countries in the region have served at various times as terrorist safe havens , staging areas , or transit points .

u.s. and allied interests have been periodically targeted , prompting the united states to enhance security measures in the region and engage regional partners to strengthen their own counterterrorism capabilities .

the u.s. government views the threat posed by al qaeda and its affiliates to be of increasing concern .

the national security strategies ( nss ) of the clinton , bush , and obama administrations have each repeated concerns about terrorist activities in africa , and the most recent national security strategy , released in may 2010 , identifies three areas on the continent — somalia , the maghreb , and the sahel — as places where aq affiliates have attempted to establish safe havens .

while the state department has consistently over the last decade classified the terrorist threat in east africa to be the most serious in africa , official assessments of the severity of the threat to u.s. interests have varied over time .

in february 2008 , director of national intelligence ( dni ) john mcconnell testified before congress that while al qaeda had , in late 2006 , established "a footprint in somalia that had the prospects of being formidable," ethiopian operations and related u.s. efforts had subsequently kept the group "tamped down or on the run. .

he did not address allegations that the ethiopian military intervention could strengthen islamist insurgents by providing an example of u.s - supported military intervention in a muslim country .

one year later , the new dni , dennis blair , testified that the capabilities of terrorist groups in east africa were increasing , and in early 2010 he suggested that al qaeda in iraq veterans might be redeploying to yemen and east africa .

blair expressed the view that while most al shabaab and al qaeda operatives in the region would remain "focused on regional objectives in the near - term," some might try to "redirect to the homeland some of the westerners , including north americans now training and fighting in somalia. .

according to the state department's country reports on terrorism , the threat these groups pose remains largely focused on targets in the region: al - shabaab's leadership was supportive of al - qa'ida ( aq ) , and both groups continued to present a serious terrorist threat to american and allied interests throughout the horn of africa… .

somalia remained highly unstable , and a permissive environment for terrorist transit and training .

foreign fighters , a small number of aq operatives , and likeminded indigenous islamic extremists continued to pose a threat to regional security .

the state department warns , however , that the attempted bombing of a u.s. airliner on december 25 , 2009 , by a nigerian national trained in yemen "underscored that we cannot expect al - qa'ida affiliates to be focused solely on the near enemy — the governments in their own countries and regions — or american facilities in their immediate surroundings. .

the head of british intelligence has called somalia a "seedbed for terrorism," comparing it to afghanistan in the 1990s and suggesting that suspected aq plots targeting britain are increasingly originating in somalia and yemen , rather than pakistan .

interpol's secretary general has expressed similar concerns , noting the number of somali militants who have trained in afghanistan and pakistan .

the u.s. government provides counterterrorism assistance to foreign countries through a range of bilateral initiatives , both civilian and military .

most are coordinated by the state department's bureau of african affairs and the office of the coordinator for counterterrorism , and are designed to meet the specific needs of the recipient country .

they include traditional security and justice sector capacity building programs , as well as other programs tailored to deny terrorists transit , financing , or sanctuary .

some , but not all , of these programs are described in the state department's annual congressional budget justification for foreign operations .

a brief overview of u.s. counterterrorism efforts in the region by country is provided in appendix a .

the united states does not provide security assistance to the government of eritrea , which it has accused of providing support to extremist elements in somalia , some with links to al qaeda .

assistance to sudan for counterterrorism efforts is also limited , based on legislative restrictions .

in the aftermath of the 9 / 11 attacks , the state department shifted the focus of its signature counterterrorism effort , anti - terrorism assistance ( ata ) , to newly identified "frontline" nations in the war on terrorism , including — in africa — djibouti , ethiopia , and kenya .

ata assistance to africa has increased substantially , from $3.5 million in fy2000 to an estimated $25 million in fy2010 ; $23 million has been requested for fy2011 .

kenya has consistently been one of the largest ata recipients in the world , ranking only behind afghanistan , jordan , and pakistan in fy2010 .

ata assistance there has focused on strengthening interagency collaboration , improving prosecutorial capabilities , and improving the maritime interdiction capability of the police and navy , particularly in waters near the somali border .

the state department requests a significant portion of its ata assistance for africa from congress regionally , rather than bilaterally .

the department only requested bilateral allocations for kenya and south africa for fy2011 ( $8 million and $1 million respectively ) ; the bureau requested $14 million regionally , to be dispersed based on needs during the year .

in fy2010 , in addition to bilateral ata funds for kenya , east african countries received $7.6 million in regional funding through earsi and additional funds for fbi training in uganda .

fy2009 ata for east african countries included a regional initiative to bring police from heavily ethnic somali precincts in the united states together with their counterparts in kenya , djibouti , somalia , and south africa to share best practices and cultural tips for community policing and police outreach .

funding for counterterrorism financing ( ctf ) , export control and related border security assistance ( exbs ) and the terrorist interdiction program ( tip ) is requested both bilaterally and regionally .

ct engagement with allies ( cte ) and countering violent extremism ( cve ) fundsare budgeted globally .

the department of defense does not generally request security cooperation programs funded through dod authorities from congress on a bilateral basis , and country funding levels are often not available until the end of the fiscal year in which they are programmed .

dod's primary counterterrorism capacity building program , section 1206 , is designed to meet urgent and emerging threats , and consequently programs are identified , prioritized , and chosen by dod , with concurrence from the state department , throughout the fiscal year .

kenya , ethiopia , and djibouti are , to date , the largest recipients of section 1206 funding on the continent ( see table b - 2 ; yemen , the largest global recipient , has received over $250 million in section 1206 aid ) .

section 1206 programs for fy2011 are now under consideration , and africom officials suggest that east african countries will remain a high priority for funding .

africom also provides counterterrorism assistance to foreign partners through the ctfp program .

in 2009 , africom hosted its first annual month - long military intelligence professionals courses ( mipc ) for mid - to senior - level east african military officers and their civilian counterparts .

east african security officials benefit from a range of other ctfp courses held both in africa and the united states .

the state department and usaid conduct a number of other bilateral programs that aim to contribute to counterterrorism goals .

the state department has used incle funds in east africa to build law enforcement and judicial capabilities to investigate and prosecute suspected terrorists .

the state department has also used the so - called "section 1207" program , through which dod transfers funds under section 1207 of the ndaa for fy2006 ( p.l .

109-163 ) for programs that support reconstruction , stabilization , and security activities , to support a range of counterterrorism - related efforts in kenya and somalia , including police training , youth programs , and , in somalia , a range of economic growth projects that in part aim to counter recruitment efforts by al shabaab .

usaid has used esf funds in several east african countries to support youth and education projects that aim to delegitimize terrorism .

broader good governance programs may also contribute to a less hospitable environment for terrorist groups like al shabaab .

efforts designed to broaden the political dialogue in somalia and empower local authorities , for example , as well as programs to improve government effectiveness , may contribute to an increase in the perceived legitimacy of the tfg and reduce support for insurgent groups .

moreover , assistance that addresses non - terrorism concerns , such as health , education , and basic crime , may also serve to undermine the narrative of violent extremist groups .

appendix a .

country counterterrorism profiles the profiles below provide an overview of u.s. counterterrorism priorities and related strategic concerns in east african countries , briefly describing u.s. efforts to counter terrorism and radicalization .

programs that aim broadly to foster peace and stability but which may also contribute to counterterrorism goals are included .

program funding information gives a profile of relative u.s. government spending on programs and priorities discussed in the preceding report .

for each country , two tables are provided .

the first table presents annual funding levels for the state department's five overarching objectives for foreign assistance identified in the department's foreign policy framework .

it is included to provide context for the counterterrorism and related security assistance listed in the second table .

funding identified by the state department under the "peace & security" objective sub - category "counterterrorism" is also included in the first table , but those figures may not reflect all regional or global funding allocated by the department to a given country for counterterrorism programs .

this table does not include funding provided by the department of defense .

the second table provides funding information for various u.s. counterterrorism and related assistance programs , including security assistance , to the countries in the region .

it includes both bilateral , regional , and global funding allocated by the state department and usaid to individual countries in a given fiscal year .

funds identified as "regional" are budgeted regionally or globally by the state department , rather than bilaterally .

country funding levels for these accounts are usually reported after the close of the fiscal year .

regional funding provided to a countrty through nadr sub - accounts may or may not be included in the bilateral nadr funding figures .

not all of the security assistance listed is primarily aimed at countering terrorism , but programs funded by these accounts may contribute to partner professionalization , readiness , and capacity to counter a range of security threats , including terrorism .

information on dod - funded counterterrorism programs , including section 1206 train and equip assistance and the combating terrorism fellowship program , as well as dod counternarcotics assistance which may have a counterterrorism component , is also indicated in the table .

djibouti as host to the only u.s. military base in africa , the state department describes djibouti as a "strategic u.s. partner located in a volatile region," and "one of the most forward - leaning arab league members supporting ongoing efforts against terrorism. .

djibouti also hosts a sizable french military presence , serves as a base for international counter - piracy operations , and is a regional logistics hub for the united nations and other humanitarian organizations .

djibouti sits about 20 miles from yemen across the bab al mandeb strait , a critical chokepoint between the gulf of aden and the red sea .

the djiboutian government faces an array of regional threats , including ongoing instability in neighboring somalia and yemen , a border dispute with eritrea , and maritime piracy in the gulf of aden .

according to the state department , aid to djibouti aims "to ensure that this strategic gateway to internal african markets and to the gulf of aden remains safe , secure and stable , both for the benefit of the people of djibouti , and for the entire horn of africa and the rest of the world. .

the state department reports that djibouti , which has established a financial intelligence service , has been cooperative with u.s. counterterrorist financial measures .

the country has amended its laws to comply with the international conventions related to terrorism that djibouti has ratified , and has laws in place that permit extradition and mutual legal assistance on terrorism investigations .

the united states has provided djibouti with assistance to improve its ability to process machine - readable travel documents at its air , land , and sea ports to constrain terrorist mobility .

security sector assistance u.s. security cooperation efforts with djibouti include border and coastal security and related counterterrorism initiatives , which aim to protect both the host country and the u.s. forces stationed there , as well as efforts to promote general military professionalization .

djibouti has been a recipient of significant section 1206 security assistance from dod , totaling almost $28 million to date , to secure its land and maritime borders against terrorist threats or transit .

such assistance has included maritime domain awareness ( mda ) training and equipment , including navigation radar , a vessel communications and tracking system , as well as border security equipment , including night vision goggles , global positioning systems , and ammunition .

u.s .

naval staff have provided coastal security training on planning , intelligence , operations , logistics , and command / control with section 1206 assistance .

the united states has also provided imet and fmf to help djibouti protect its borders and address terrorist threats , and the country receives a large fmf allocation given its size , roughly $2 million annually in recent years .

the united states has supported the construction of facilities for the djiboutian navy and road improvements between border posts near somalia .

in july 2009 , the u.s. and the djiboutian navies established a new harbor security force to ensure protection of vessels transiting through djibouti's port and to provide training opportunities between u.s. and djiboutian personnel .

with ctfp funding , djiboutian security officials have participated in counterterrorism - related events at the african center for strategic studies and the national defense university , as well as the defense institute of international legal studies ( diils ) legal aspects of combating terrorism course .

djibouti has also received seaport security training through ctfp .

according to dod , djibouti's ability to control its borders has a direct effect on the department's strategic objective of countering the spread of terrorism in the horn of africa .

the state department is providing over $2 million in fy2010 earsi pko funds to train and equip djibouti's counterterrorism force , the national gendarmerie ; over $2 million for the djiboutian republican national guard , which provides security to prevent terrorist incidents ; and $1 million to improve djibouti's maritime response capabilities .

the state department reports that the national police are playing an increasing role in border monitoring and internal security .

the united states provides djibouti with incle funding to enhance police professionalization , and to counter threats from criminals and extremists in neighboring countries .

nadr funds support improved port and airport security , and have contributed to the refurbishment of border posts .

djibouti is a focus country under the coast guard's international port security initiative .

efforts to mitigate extremism and foster peace through development security assistance to djibouti has significantly outweighed humanitarian and development assistance in recent years .

djibouti's human development indicators are low , and its unemployment rate is exceptionally high .

the state department has labeled the djiboutian government's human rights record as poor , and perceptions of state corruption and official impunity remain a problem .

u.s. bilateral aid aims to address some of these issues , including through governance programs that seek to encourage greater pluralism and political participation .

other u.s. aid has focused on education and health initiatives , including efforts to reduce child mortality , to "ensure continued internal stability in djibouti. .

education programs include skills development for out - of - school youth and efforts to increase girls' school enrollment and attendance .

some argue that u.s. efforts to address some of djibouti's socioeconomic challenges may in turn mitigate some of the social and political frustrations that could lead to radicalization .

given a constrained budget , usaid has worked with cjtf - hoa , along with the djiboutian ministry of health , to realign its civil affairs program in djibouti to meet still - urgent maternal and child health needs by building or rehabilitating health clinics .

whether this effort has had an impact on countering radicalization is unknown , but usaid suggests that cjtf - hoa's efforts , provided in a targeted manner , have supported the host government's target of providing health care access to 100% of the country .

ethiopia with one of the largest standing armies in sub - saharan africa , ethiopia's relative strength and its active counterterrorism role have led the u.s. government to view it as a key ally in a turbulent region .

ethiopia hosts the african union headquarters , and over 2,000 ethiopians serve in u.n. peacekeeping operations .

ethiopia is home to over 50,000 somali refugees and over 40,000 refugees from neighboring eritrea and sudan .

ethiopian authorities face multiple ethnic insurgencies , and there have been several terrorist bombings in the capital , addis ababa .

ethiopia has a long history of involvement in somalia .

the two countries fought a war over ethiopia's ogaden region — where a majority of inhabitants are ethnically somali — in the late 1970s , and ethnic somali irredentism continues to threaten ethiopia's internal cohesion .

ethiopian intervention in somalia in late 2006 led to a prolonged military engagement there , and although ethiopian forces officially pulled out in january 2009 , there have been subsequent reports of periodic incursions .

ethiopia reportedly continues to provide military support and training to armed factions the country .

aside from somalia , the ethiopian government's main strategic concern is its volatile relationship with eritrea .

ethiopia has accused eritrea of supporting ethiopian rebel groups and islamist militants in somalia , and eritrea has accused ethiopia of supporting its opposition groups .

promoting regional stability is a top priority for the united states in its relations with ethiopia .

the state department office of the inspector general suggests that the relationship has lacked policy guidance and the u.s. embassy "has a quiver of carrots but no sticks as it seeks to rein in a government whose political direction may be putting u.s. strategic interests at risk. .

state department reports suggest that ethiopia has been cooperative in shutting down avenues of terrorist funding , but that it remains vulnerable to money laundering activities .

the treasury department provided technical assistance to ethiopia for the drafting of its new anti - money laundering and counterterrorist financing legislation , which parliament passed in late 2009 .

human rights advocates have raised concerns with ethiopia's new anti - terrorism proclamation , which passed prior to the 2010 parliamentary election .

security sector assistance ethiopia's military , the ethiopian national defense force ( endf ) , emerged from a coalition of rebel groups that overthrew the derg regime in 1991 , and the united states has assisted with the endf's ongoing transition to an all - volunteer professional military force since military ties with ethiopia resumed in 2001 .

ethiopia is one of the largest recipients of u.s. security assistance in sub - saharan africa , and assistance has increasingly focused on the country's capacity to counter insurgencies , improve regional security , and deter terrorism .

ethiopia is also one of the largest troop contributors for u.n. peacekeeping operations and has received support through the acota program .

ethiopia has received significant dod section 1206 assistance , totaling almost $35 million to date .

initial assistance included c - 130 engines and spare parts , and later programs supported the development of combat engineering , command and control , and night vision capabilities for the endf and its counterterrorism units .

section 1206 and fmf assistance has provided communications equipment to support ethiopia's deployment and counterterrorism capabilities .

under eacti , ethiopia received $13 million in pko and fmf funds for border security training and related equipment , including c - 130 parts and communications gear .

the united states has provided subsequent support to improve the country's tactical airlift capacity .

imet courses for ethiopia focus on counterterrorism , intelligence , english language instruction , and senior - level professional military education .

fmf funds have supported u.s. trainers at the ethiopian defense command and staff college .

the ethiopian government values these training opportunities , which includes such topics as the role of the military in a democratic society , as essential to developing a more professional force .

congress has restricted military assistance to ethiopia in various legislation based on concerns over reports of serious human rights abuses committed against civilians .

fy2009 section 1206 assistance was temporarily suspended due to leahy vetting concerns ; a different unit was later chosen , vetted , and approved .

the state department has requested incle funding for fy2011 to develop investigative techniques and information sharing among law enforcement and border agents to enhance ethiopia's ability to counter both trafficking and terrorism .

this request would also aim to increase the professionalism and responsiveness of the ethiopian federal police , which have been accused of corrupt practices , impunity , and various human rights abuses .

according to the state department , the federal police have acknowledged that many of its members lack professionalism and has sought human rights training from the international community .

earsi funds continue to support efforts to improve ethiopia's airport security and border control capabilities .

efforts to mitigate extremism and foster peace through development u.s. aid to ethiopia includes programs that aim to mitigate conditions that may lead to violent extremism , or that may indirectly contribute to such ends .

in addition to food aid , ethiopia receives significant u.s. assistance for education , health , and agriculture programs , including primary and adult education initiatives in predominantly muslim areas .

under eacti , the state department provided community assistance and self - help projects , as well as education programs , to underserved communities in these areas .

cjtf - hoa conducts civil affairs projects , including school renovation and health projects .

the state department and usaid support conflict management programs and efforts to improve service delivery among muslim communities .

earsi funds messaging programs aimed at media and religious and civic leaders .

the state department reports that ethiopia's press restrictions make public diplomacy efforts difficult .

kenya the united states has a long history of security cooperation with kenya .

instability in neighboring countries , combined with concerns over possible terrorist movement across kenya's porous border with somalia and along its coastline , has caused kenya , a regional hub for trade and finance and a top tourism destination , to take an increasingly active role in regional security .

kenya is home to over 400,000 refugees , including over 350,000 somalis that live in crowded camps near dadaab in eastern kenya .

according to some reports , kenyan security forces have clashed with al shabaab fighters in kenyan territory .

u.s. and kenyan officials have expressed increasing concern that al shabaab may try to conduct attacks in kenya , although some analysts suggest that the group's reliance on eastleigh as a financial and logistics hub may reduce the likelihood of attack .

the proliferation of small arms and light weapons in the region poses a significant threat .

piracy in the waters off the coast is also of continuing concern , and ship traffic to and from the port of mombasa is particularly vulnerable .

coastal kenya is considered to be the "decisive arena in the fight against al qa'ida and associated movements in the horn. .

al shabaab has targeted ethnic somalis and african muslims for recruitment , and many of its foreign fighters reportedly come from disadvantaged communities along the south coast .

many kenyan muslims distrust the government and view its counterterrorism efforts as discriminatory .

the kenyan government has faced opposition in its efforts to pass anti - terrorism legislation , first introduced in 2003 , and the rendition of suspects in the 2010 kampala bombings to uganda has been challenged in the kenyan courts .

security sector assistance the state department reports that "post - election violence , ongoing chronic insecurity in several regions , and significant refugee flows from somalia place competing demands on kenya's national security resources , and on kenya's ability to focus on specific counterterrorism initiatives .

by building capacity to enhance overall security , u.s. assistance will also contribute significantly to improving kenya's ability to combat terrorism. .

kenya is one of the largest recipients of u.s. security assistance in sub - saharan africa .

assistance has increasingly focused on improving kenya's capabilities to control its land and sea borders and counter terrorism .

kenya has received over $4 million in imet since fy2000 , and over $25 million in fmf .

foreign military sales ( fms ) to kenya have included fighter aircraft , helicopters , and air force computer systems , and have totaled over $20 million since fy2008 .

fmf and fms deliveries contribute to the military's 10-year modernization program .

through eacti , kenya received $12.5 million in coastal and border security assistance with fmf and pko funds , through which the united states provided training , patrol boats , and equipment for a special operations company and a motorized infantry battalion .

kenya has also received support through earsi pko funds to build various counterterrorism capabilities .

kenya is the largest african recipient of dod section 1206 programs , totaling over $37 million to date .

the kenyan military also benefits from both bilateral and multilateral exercises with u.s. forces , including through jcets and through military - to - military exchanges .

cjtf - hoa civic affairs teams have worked in cooperation with kenya ministry of defense water well and medical teams to forge a cooperative relationship and exchange technical knowledge .

earsi fy2010 funds are supporting further civil - military operations training .

the kenyan military has requested assistance from africom for the establishment of an independent inspector general office .

kenya is one of the largest global recipients of ata funding , which supports border and coastal security efforts and law enforcement programs .

this assistance includes training and equipment for a multiagency coast guard - type unit to patrol the waters near somalia ; and efforts to improve security at the port of mombasa .

kenya is a focus country under the coast guard's international port security initiative .

cjtf - hoa also provides naval training and collaborates with ata trainers on some of their programs .

dod has provided section 1004 counternarcotics assistance to support maritime training and to provide anti - corruption training to law enforcement authorities .

ata assistance also supports counterterrorism training for the kenyan police , including the provision of equipment in 2009 for a new cyber forensics lab .

human rights reports suggest that corruption and impunity remain significant problems within the country's police force , and there have been credible allegations of serious abuses , including extrajudicial executions .

some reports also suggest that the police , including the u.s. - trained anti - terrorism police unit , have reportedly mishandled critical evidence efforts to mitigate extremism and foster peace through development u.s. efforts to counter violent extremism in kenya have largely focused on education and youth programs .

beginning in 2004 , eacti funds contributed to a usaid program , education for marginalized children in kenya , concentrating on the predominantly muslim north eastern and coast provinces , which have the lowest education statistics in the country .

school infrastructure projects were a part of the program .

in 2008 , usaid has also began supporting a higher education scholarship program in collaboration with the ministry of education focused on improving access to kenya's public universities for students from north eastern province .

with fy2009 esf funds , usaid has allocated $3 million to a program designed to empower youth in the northeast city of garissa and the nairobi suburb of eastleigh .

dod has provided over $8 million in section 1207 assistance to kenya , with $2 million allocated to the garissa program .

u.s. assistance in fy2011 is expected to include new efforts to target informal urban settlements in nairobi and mombasa that are aimed at mitigating potential conflict and extremism .

somalia according to the state department , "the lack of security and the looming humanitarian crisis are the most critical challenges facing somalia today. .

the tfg faces multiple security threats , not only from al shabaab , but from other insurgent groups and clan - based militias .

the government controls only limited areas of mogadishu secured by amisom .

al shabaab and other insurgent groups control most of southern and much of central somalia , including port cities like kismayo , which serve as supply lines and valuable sources of revenue .

various criminal organizations , including pirate networks , operate on the coast .

some speculate that al shabaab may have ties with pirate gangs , but clear linkages have yet to be made .

al shabaab has threatened u.n. and foreign aid agencies ; most have suspended operations in southern and central somalia .

the semi - autonomous regions of somaliland and puntland have maintained relative stability , but also face threats from al shabaab and other destabilizing factors .

security sector assistance the u.s. government and other donors have placed increasing priority on building the capacity of the somali security forces to reduce the current level of violence in mogadishu and create an environment in which the tfg can deliver services to the population .

the state department asserts that amisom cannot conduct counterterrorism operations under its current mandate and thus that support for the emerging tfg military is critical for fostering long - term stability in somalia and "diminishing reliance on amisom forces for peacekeeping and security. .

the state department initiated its security sector reform effort for somalia in september 2007 , using pko funds to finance ugandan and ethiopian trainers .

given security concerns , training has taken place in uganda and other countries , with the united states providing logistics support and , in some cases , equipment .

u.s. assistance was limited to support for third - country training efforts ( eg , training equipment , refurbishment of training facilities , and trainee transport ) until fy2009 , when the united states began providing operational support to the tfg forces in mogadishu , including salaries , rations , spare parts , radios , and cash transfers for weapons and ammunition , after securing waivers from the u.n. sanctions committee .

the united states continues to support third - country training , and has spent over $30 million since fy2007 on assistance to the tfg forces .

amisom also provides training for tfg forces under its mandate , and its police component provides training and mentors for the somali police force ( spf ) .

other donors , including the eu , also provide support and training .

a september 2010 u.n. report noted a sharp decline in the number of tfg and amisom casualties in recent months , despite an upsurge in violence in mogadishu , and attributed the decline to improved security measures and counter - ied procedures .

the state department conducted an assessment of the somali security sector in december 2009 , in collaboration with the tfg , the u.n. , the au , european donors , and civil society groups to examine existing capabilities and donor activities , and to prioritize areas for capacity building and reform .

the absence of a u.s. diplomatic presence in somalia poses challenges in monitoring security assistance there .

somali forces have suffered from a lack of pay , clan favoritism , and cronyism , which have lowered morale .

this has contributed to concerns over defections or the possible transfer of intelligence or military assistance , particularly equipment , to insurgents .

in addition to the tfg's official security forces , several independent armed factions periodically align themselves with the tfg against al shabaab and other islamist militias .

some reportedly received support from ethiopia .

somaliland and puntland also maintain their own security forces .

reported u.s. assistance to somali "security forces" in the past has been controversial .

alleged assistance provided to security institutions in puntland was linked in the media to the "extraordinary renditions" of ethiopian rebels and islamist militants to ethiopia , which , according to some analysts , eroded public support for the puntland regime and increased anti - western sentiment in the region .

the state department reports that somali police have been "generally ineffective , underpaid , and corrupt," but that there were fewer allegations of abuses in 2009 than previous years .

in fy2007 , somalia received $25 million in section 1207 assistance , focused on security sector reform activities , including efforts to foster national civilian police reform through existing undp rule of law programs , as well as security and justice infrastructure rehabilitation , youth employment and income generation activities .

the 1207 assistance also included $7.5 million in regional assistance to enhance community - police coordination for cross - border security and to establish neutral zones .

the regional program focuses on capacity building for the transitional federal institutions , security sector reform , quick impact stabilization programs and peace and reconciliation programs in somalia's strategic border areas , kenya and ethiopia .

efforts to mitigate extremism and foster peace through development the tfg is viewed by many somalis as corrupt and divided .

some analysts suggest that donor support for the government has simply reinforced poor performance and "prolong[ed] conditions within which a radical islamist insurgency has thrived. .

others argue that donors should strengthen efforts to engender good governance , political competition , and consensus building in order to establish lasting political stability .

the state department views these as critical elements of its strategy in somalia , and continues to explore ways to boost public confidence in the tfg and reduce divisions within the government , while at the same time exploring a "dual track" to increase engagement with somaliland and puntland , and local leaders opposed to al shabaab but not affiliated with the tfg .

the state department has budgeted over $12 million in fy2009 and fy2010 for conflict mitigation and reconciliation , and an estimated $20 million for democracy and governance programs .

governance programs include quick - impact programs to demonstrate positive effects of the political reconciliation process and include training for local authorities on transparency and responsiveness to local needs in order to improve their credibility among the population .

the united states also supports somalia's constitutional process and democracy efforts in somaliland and puntland .

the state department recently announced efforts to "engage more actively" with those governments , and with local leaders in south central somalia .

in addition to governance initiatives , usaid implements several programs to foster economic growth and legitimate employment opportunities among somalis .

in 2008 , usaid began a youth education and job skills training program .

esf funding aims to "expand business and livelihood opportunities in order to build confidence a peace process and in emerging governing institutions. .

usaid is developing workforce readiness and business certification programs to enhance job opportunities among targeted youth , and is providing grants for community - driven programs to improve social service delivery and rehabilitation of infrastructure .

the state department plans to provide over $10 million in fy2010 section 1207 assistance to promote stability in somalia through public - private partnerships and economic networks .

this program , which will target such sectors as the livestock industry , aims to expand legitimate sources of revenue for somalis and thereby counter al shabaab recruitment and reduce conflict .

tanzania the united states and tanzania have cooperated on counterterrorism issues since the 1998 bombing of the u.s. embassy in dar es salaam , in which 11 were killed and over 70 injured .

tanzania shares borders with eight countries , and porous borders remain a security challenge .

the state department reports that the country remains vulnerable to international terrorism .

the tanzanian government passed legislation in 2002 criminalizing support for terrorist groups , and in 2006 passed legislation to counter money laundering .

the country established a financial intelligence unit ( fiu ) to receive , analyze , and disseminate suspicious transaction reports , with support from a millennium challenge corporation threshold program .

tanzania hosts the east and southern africa anti - money laundering group ( esaamlg ) .

tanzania is the second - largest recipient of tip and ctf funding in the region .

security sector assistance tanzania has received u.s. assistance to build its capacity to respond to terrorist threats , including through efforts to improve aviation and border security .

in fy2007 , the country received roughly $1 million in section 1206 assistance .

fmf funding , which is part of a broader program to support military professionalization , has a counterterrorism component that supports tanzanian efforts to improve command and control , communications , and night - vision systems .

border control efforts are also supported by nadr .

through earsi , the united states has supported the military's development of a counterterrorism training curriculum , and tanzania receives civil - military operations training through earsi .

in fy2011 , u.s. assistance is expected to support upgrades to the country's border management system .

tanzania initiated efforts in 2005 to establish a national counterterrorism center to collect , share and analyze data among agencies and coordinate crisis response .

u.s. assistance continues to support the center .

the state department reports that tanzanian police have limited investigative capability , and aid includes training in criminal investigation , crisis response , small arms trafficking and related counterterrorism courses .

efforts to mitigate extremism and foster peace through development through eacti , usaid supported basic education initiatives , including girls' scholarships , for muslim and pastoralist populations and provided primary - level education programs by radio .

some of this aid is continuing under earsi ; for example , esf funds in fy2010 supported communications efforts targeting muslim communities .

cjtf - hoa civil affairs teams have been active in coastal communities , conducting infrastructure improvements and other projects .

uganda the state department considers uganda to be a key regional partner and a valuable ally in combating terrorist threats in the region .

uganda provides the majority of au peacekeepers in somalia , and it leads regional efforts to address the threat posed by the lord's resistance army ( lra ) , an insurgent group that continues to terrorize civilians throughout central africa .

u.s. officials have expressed concern that uganda remains a transit point and area of recruitment for violent extremist groups , as well as a possible source for illegal government documents .

president yoweri museveni has been a vocal supporter of counterterrorism efforts in the region , but the state department has documented serious human rights abuses and electoral irregularities in uganda , and some observers have expressed concern that museveni's cooperation on counterterrorism constrains western criticism for alleged political abuses .

uganda enacted anti - terrorism legislation in 2002 that provides the legal basis for prosecuting suspected terrorists and freezing assets , but the country has yet to adopt legislation to counter money laundering or terrorist financing .

security sector assistance the state department reports that uganda's counterterrorism response is constrained by a shortage of equipment , fuel , and funding , and that its security agencies need to improve cooperation and information sharing .

ugandan forces also face competing security priorities , including operations against the lra , insecurity in the karamojong area , and troop contributions to amisom .

u.s. restrictions on military assistance ( related to ugandan military operations in the neighboring democratic republic of congo in the late 1990s ) have been lifted gradually over the last decade , beginning in 2002 when uganda withdrew troops from the drc , to support operations against the lra .

restrictions on imet and fmf remained until may 2004 , when funding was provided support peacekeeping , professionalization , and counterterrorism efforts .

uganda received aid through the former front line states initiative , also known as the east africa regional fund , which provided , for example , almost $4 million in non - lethal military equipment ; the country has received subsequent equipment through excess defense articles ( eda ) to counter the lra threat .

uganda has received over $12 million in fy2009 and fy2010 pko funds for non - lethal anti - lra assistance .

the state department has also provided $2 million in pko funds through the acsbs program for non - lethal equipment and logistics support to ugandan forces .

uganda has been an active participant in the acota program , and its forces have received a variety of counterterrorism - related training for their deployment to somalia under amisom .

the ugandan military has also participated in counterterrorism training courses through earsi pko funds , and ugandan officers have participated in counterterrorism courses at the naval postgraduate school ( nps ) through ctfp .

africom components have provided other assistance through mobile training teams .

other military aid has included training by cjtf - hoa personnel for ugandan non - commissioned officers , and africom - supported education programs at uganda's senior command and staff college .

uganda received intelligence training through the africa data sharing network ( asdn ) in 2010 , primarily to address the lra threat .

u.s. assistance to the ugandan military includes a range of efforts to encourage respect for human rights , improve civilian protection , and improve civil - military relations .

the state department stresses that human rights training is an important component of its imet program , which includes support for ugandan efforts to prosecute abuses .

uganda hosted a regional security seminar in mid - 2010 conducted by the nps's center for civil - military relations with ctfp funds , and it is receiving additional civil - military operations training through earsi .

the united states has supported efforts to build the capacity and professionalism of uganda's law enforcement authorities with da and incle funds .

this assistance includes community - based police training ; advanced courses for specialized police units working on maritime and border security and on the handling of forensic evidence ; and training on general investigative techniques and crime scene management at the national police academy .

da funds also support ugandan efforts to train police from the drc , southern sudan , and somalia at a regional center .

the state department allocated $800,000 in ata funds in 2010 to support counterterrorism - related community - based police training for uganda and other east african nations .

efforts to mitigate extremism and foster peace through development through eacti , usaid supported early childhood development in select ugandan mosques and madrassas targeting poor communities and a strong focus on community participation .

earsi funding in fy2010 has supported messaging programs targeted at muslim communities .

broader development assistance to uganda includes efforts to foster social inclusion and increase access to justice , as well as to encourage more accountable and responsive governance .

other countries in the region burundi the state department reports that burundi's counterterrorism efforts have been hindered by lingering tensions associated with its civil war , weak government institutions , corruption , and porous borders .

the country also lacks the ability to effectively counter money laundering and terrorist financing .

burundi is nevertheless contributing a significant number of troops to amisom , and the united states provides acota assistance and other military training .

based on security concerns related to the july 2010 kampala bombings and al shabaab threats against burundi for its role as an amisom troop contributor , the state department is conducting an anti - terrorism needs assessment in burundi , with particular focus on the criminal justice sector .

in 2010 , opposition parties allege that the government has used terrorism charges selectively to harass those critical of the regime .

rwanda rwanda has reportedly been very cooperative with the u.s. government on efforts to counter terrorism .

the country established a intergovernmental counterterrorism committee early in the early 2000s , and cooperation with the united states on terrorist financing issues has been "excellent," according to the state department .

in 2009 , rwanda initiated efforts to create a financial investigations unit , in accordance with counterterrorist financing legislation passed in 2008 .

rwanda is one of the world's largest contributors to u.n. peacekeeping operations , and the country receives military training and equipment through a variety of programs , including acota , imet , fmf , and military - to - military engagements .

the u.s. coast guard have trained rwandan marines on a variety of maritime and border security topics , including counterterrorism procedures .

rwandan law enforcement authorities have also received u.s. training through a range of programs .

rwanda has arrested several opposition leaders on terrorism - related charges , leading some human rights activists to suggest it is using the charge to harass its critics .

rwandan authorities do not always publicly disclose the evidence behind such charges , making terrorism accusations difficult to substantiate .

sudan sudan remains on the u.s. government's list of state sponsors of terrorism , although the state department reports that the sudanese government pursues counterterrorism operations against threats to u.s. interests and personnel in the country , and continues to disrupt foreign fighters from transiting the country .

the department also reports that "al - qa'ida - inspired terrorist elements" as well as members of palestinian islamic jihad and hamas continue to operate there .

on january 1 , 2008 , an american usaid employee and his sudanese driver were murdered by gunmen in what some in the state department have termed a terrorist attack conducted by aq operatives .

a previously unknown group , ansar al tawhid , claimed responsibility , but u.s. state department has identified the gunmen as "sympathetic" to al qaeda and calling themselves part of a group known as al qaeda in the land between the two niles .

u.s. reports suggest that former participants in the iraqi insurgency have "returned to sudan and are in a position to use their expertise to conduct attacks within sudan or to pass their knowledge to local sudanese extremists," and that sudanese extremists have participated in terrorist activities in somalia .

sudan benefits from select u.s. counterterrorism training .

the country is a member of earsi , but it does not currently receive funding from the program .

u.s. legal restrictions continue to prevent the u.s. government from providing security assistance to the government of sudan , but the united states provides security assistance to the former guerilla army , the sudan people's liberation army ( spla ) , as part of its effort to "promote the long - term stability of southern sudan. .

southern sudan continues to face a range of security threats and remains awash with small arms , in spite of ongoing disarmament , demobilization , and reintegration ( ddr ) efforts .

moreover , a resumption of hostilities between the north and the south cannot be ruled out .

while the main focus of u.s. security assistance efforts in the south is to support security sector reform of the spla and the south sudan police service , with the goal of supporting the spla's transformation into a smaller , more professional conventional military force , elements of the u.s. effort include some counterterrorism training .

for example , spla officers have participated in u.s. counterterrorism courses , including programs at the naval post graduate school , and familiarization events funded through ctfp .

sudan has also received counterterrorism assistance through the terrorist interdiction program .

appendix b .

regional program funding appendix c. related hearings of the 111 th congress hearings on the evolving threat posed by al qaeda and its affiliates: house armed services committee , "al qaeda in 2010: how should the u.s .

respond ? ," january 27 , 2010 senate foreign relations committee , "confronting al qaeda: understanding the threat in afghanistan and beyond," october 7 , 2009 .

hearings on al shabaab's recruitment efforts in the united states: senate homeland and governmental affairs committee , "violent islamist extremism: al - shabaab recruitment in america," march 11 , 2009 ; and "nine years after 9 / 11: confronting the terrorist threat to the homeland," september 22 , 2010 .

house homeland security committee , "the evolving nature of terrorism," september 15 , 2010 .

house homeland security subcommittee on intelligence , information sharing and terrorism risk assessment , series of hearings held by the on may 26 , 2010 ; march 17 , 2010 ; december 15 , 2009 ; and november 19 , 2009 .

hearings on political instability and terrorist activities in somalia: house foreign affairs subcommittee on africa and global health , "the horn of africa: current conditions and u.s. policy," june 17 , 2010 ; and "somalia: prospects for a lasting peace and a unified response to extremism and terrorism," june 25 , 2009 senate foreign relations committee , "developing a coordinated and sustainable strategy for somalia," may 20 , 2009 hearing by the senate armed services committee , "u.s. policy toward yemen and somalia," april 29 , 2010 .

hearings on u.s. efforts to counter terrorism: senate armed services subcommittee on emerging threats and capabilities , "strategies for countering violent extremist ideologies," march 10 , 2010 house armed services subcommittee on terrorism , unconventional threats and capabilities , "strategies for countering violent extremism," february 12 , 2009 senate foreign relations committee , "engaging with muslim communities around the world," february 26 , 2009 .

house foreign affairs committee , "u.s. strategy for countering jihadist websites," september 29 , 2010 .

house financial services subcommittee on oversight and investigations , "a review of current and evolving trends in terrorism financing," september 28 , 2010 .

