the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , which applies to all executive branch and independent agencies , prescribes procedures for agency rulemakings and adjudications , as well as standards for judicial review of final agency actions .

this report provides a brief overview of the apa's core rulemaking and judicial review provisions .

after addressing the various methods through which agencies may promulgate rules , the report highlights the numerous exceptions to the apa's general procedural requirements , including the "good cause" standard , and the rules regarding agency issuance of policy statements , interpretive rules , and rules of agency procedure .

the report then briefly describes two executive orders that place additional rulemaking requirements on executive branch agencies .

the report concludes with a discussion of judicial review of agency action , with a focus on the arbitrary and capricious test , and the review of rule repeals and other changes in agency policy .

the apa describes rulemaking as the "agency process for formulating , amending , or repealing a rule. .

a "rule," for purposes of the statute , is defined expansively to include any "agency statement of general or particular applicability and future effect designed to implement , interpret , or prescribe law or policy or describing the organization , procedure , or practice requirements of an agency. .

rules that are issued in compliance with certain legal requirements , and that fall within the scope of authority delegated to the agency by congress , have the force and effect of law .

federal agencies may promulgate rules through various methods .

although the notice - and - comment rulemaking procedures of § 553 of the apa represent the most commonly followed process for issuing legislative rules , agencies may choose or may be required to use other rulemaking options , including formal , hybrid , direct final , and negotiated rulemaking .

the method by which an agency issues a rule may have significant consequences for both the procedures the agency is required to undertake and the deference with which a reviewing court will accord the rule .

in addition , the apa contains whole or partial exceptions to the statute's otherwise applicable procedural rulemaking requirements .

the apa has carved out a number of exceptions to the default notice - and - comment rulemaking requirements .

depending on the substance or nature of the rule , some , all , or none of the § 553 procedural requirements may apply .

the various exceptions are discussed below .

agencies are generally empowered to amend or repeal existing rules that were issued pursuant to discretionary authority .

in order to do so , however , the agency must comply with the default requirements of the apa , which defines "rulemaking" to be the "process for formulating , amending , or repealing a rule. .

therefore , in order to amend or repeal an existing legislative rule , an agency generally must comply with the same notice - and - comment rulemaking procedures , outlined in § 553 of the apa , that governed the original promulgation of the rule .

in cases where a statute specifically requires alternative procedures for the initial promulgation of a specific legislative rule , the agency may be required to engage in those same procedures to amend or repeal that rule .

rule repeals , which are often deregulatory in nature , may be excused from the apa's delayed effective date requirement if they are deemed to "relieve a restriction. .

as previously noted , the apa requires that a rule may not take effect until 30 days after the date of publication of the final rule .

that requirement , however , is subject to various exceptions , including when an agency finds that there is "good cause" for the rule to take immediate effect , or where the rule "grants or recognizes an exemption or relieves a restriction. .

it would therefore appear that although an agency is generally required to comply with the notice - and - comment requirements of § 553 in repealing a rule , to the extent the repeal removes a previously existing requirement on regulated entities , the rule could be given immediate effect upon publication of the final repeal .

policy statements , interpretive rules , agency rules of procedure , and other informal agency pronouncements that were not subject to notice - and - comment during their initial promulgation and that lack the force and effect of law may be altered immediately and without public participation .

even long - standing agency positions that have been implemented through non - legislative rules may generally be reversed without compliance with notice - and - comment procedures .

recent presidents , through executive order , have also imposed a number of non - statutory requirements on the executive branch rulemaking process .

two such orders include those relating to centralized rulemaking review and a new executive order issued by president trump requiring agencies to offset costs of new rules by repealing existing rules .

both executive orders apply only to executive branch agencies and do not cover independent agencies .

a series of executive orders , beginning with those issued by president reagan , have established a process by which the white house has an opportunity to review and clear proposed regulatory actions of federal agencies .

under these orders , the office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) in the office of management and budget ( omb ) reviews "significant" regulatory actions at both the proposed and final rule stage .

an agency is prohibited , "except to the extent required by law," from issuing a rule while oira review is pending .

in addition , these orders direct agencies to perform a cost - benefit analysis for certain regulatory actions and "adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that the benefits" of the rule "justify its costs. .

executive order 13771 ( order ) , recently issued by president trump , requires agencies to offset the costs of any new rule issued during fiscal year 2017 by repealing existing rules .

the order generally directs that "the total incremental cost of all new regulations , including repealed regulations ... shall be no greater than zero. .

this regulatory cost cap is implemented by requiring that any costs resulting from new rules "shall , to the extent permitted by law , be offset by the elimination of existing costs associated with at least two prior regulations. .

the order , and the guidance issued by the omb implementing the order , establishes a number of general exceptions to the offset requirement .

first , the order applies only during fiscal year 2017 .

second , the order applies to "significant" regulatory actions , a term defined generally as those that have an economic impact of $100 million or more , interfere with actions of other agencies , materially alter entitlements , or raise novel legal or policy issues .

third , the order explicitly exempts rules related to military , national security , or foreign affairs functions of the united states , rules of agency organization , and "any other category of regulations exempted by the director. .

fourth , because the order requires a regulatory offset "unless otherwise required by law," an agency may proceed with mandated rules "that need to be finalized in order to comply with an imminent statutory or judicial deadline even if they are not able to identify offsetting regulatory actions by the time of issuance. .

it should be noted that executive order 13771 does not , and cannot , permit an agency to dispense with statutorily imposed procedural requirements when repealing or amending rules in order to implement the order's cost - offset requirement .

any such alterations to agency rules must be made in compliance with the apa .

as a general matter , there is a "strong presumption that congress intends judicial review of administrative action. .

this presumption is embodied in the apa , which provides that "final agency action for which there is no other adequate remedy in a court [is] subject to judicial review. .

the apa excludes judicial review in two situations — instances where ( 1 ) other "statutes preclude judicial review" or where ( 2 ) "agency action is committed to agency discretion by law. .

the apa provides that courts may hold unlawful and set aside agency actions under a number of circumstances .

specifically , the apa states: the reviewing court shall ... hold unlawful and set aside agency action , findings , and conclusions found to be – ( a ) arbitrary , capricious , an abuse of discretion , or otherwise not in accordance with law ; ( b ) contrary to constitutional right , power , privilege , or immunity ; ( c ) in excess of statutory jurisdiction , authority , or limitations , or short of statutory right ; ( d ) without observance of procedure required by law ; ( e ) unsupported by substantial evidence in a case subject to sections 556 and 557 of this title or otherwise reviewed on the record of an agency hearing provided by statute ; or ( f ) unwarranted by the facts to the extent that the facts are subject to trial de novo by the reviewing court .

in making the foregoing determinations , the court shall review the whole record or those parts of it cited by a party , and due account shall be taken of the rule of prejudicial error .

this provision indicates that the type of judicial review may differ depending on whether the court is reviewing formal or informal rulemakings .

specifically , cases subject to § 556 and § 557 are subject to "substantial evidence" review , whereas other agency actions are subject to "arbitrary and capricious" review .

congress has sometimes , however , required informal , notice - and - comment rulemakings to be reviewed under the substantial evidence test .

however , some have argued that the two standards are the same , and commentators have stated that "the substantial evidence and arbitrary and capricious tests have tended to converge" in judicial review of informal rulemaking .

the most common standard of review that courts apply in challenges to agency action is the "arbitrary and capricious" standard .

this "catch - all" review standard of the apa applies to factual determinations made during informal rulemaking proceedings such as notice - and - comment rulemaking and most other discretionary determinations an agency makes .

given the broad scope of federal agency actions that are subject to this type of review , whether an agency decision is arbitrary and capricious is largely a fact - based and situation - specific question .

the contours of "arbitrary and capricious" review were perhaps most clearly articulated in the supreme court's decision of motor vehicle manufacturers association v. state farm auto mutual insurance co .

in state farm , the court explained that in applying this "narrow" standard of review , "a court is not to substitute its judgment for that of the agency. .

rather , a court should only invalidate agency determinations that fail to "examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation for [the] action including a 'rational connection between the facts found and the choice made. ' .

when reviewing that determination , courts must "consider whether the decision was based on a consideration of the relevant factors and whether there has been a clear error of judgment. .

in general , the court noted that an agency decision is arbitrary and capricious: if the agency has relied on factors which congress has not intended it to consider , entirely failed to consider an important aspect of the problem , offered an explanation for its decision that runs counter to the evidence before the agency , or is so implausible that it could not be ascribed to a difference in view or the product of agency expertise .

fundamentally , the arbitrary and capricious standard requires only that an agency demonstrate that it engaged in reasoned decisionmaking by providing an adequate explanation for its decision .

the agency must be able to provide the "essential facts upon which the administrative decision was based " and explain what justifies the determination with actual evidence beyond a "conclusory statement. .

an agency decision that is the product of "illogical " or inconsistent reasoning ; that fails to consider an important factor relevant to its action , such as the policy effects of its decision or vital aspects of the problem in the issue before it ; or that fails to consider "less restrictive , yet easily administered" regulatory alternatives , will similarly fail the arbitrary and capricious test .

agencies are generally accorded the flexibility to depart from previously established positions by altering or repealing rules or other agency pronouncements .

administrative decisions are not "carved in stone," but rather vary on a nearly "continuing basis ... in response to changed factual circumstances , or a change in administrations. .

yet in executing a significant policy change or other reversal , the agency is required to comply with applicable apa procedural requirements .

thus , in regard to amending or repealing rules , the agency generally may implement such a change only through notice - and - comment rulemaking .

in addition to these procedural requirements , an agency rule that implements a policy change by amending or repealing an existing rule is also subject to arbitrary and capricious review .

although the precise application of that review to an agency change in position is subject to some debate , the supreme court has stated that judicial review is not heightened or more stringent simply because an agency's action alters its prior policy .

specifically , the court has held that there is "no basis in the [apa] or in our opinions for a requirement that all agency change be subjected to more searching review" or that "every agency action representing a policy change must be justified by reasons more substantial than those required to adopt a policy in the first instance. .

instead , arbitrary and capricious review requires only that the agency provide a "reasoned analysis for the change. .

the supreme court's 2009 decision of fcc v. fox television stations established a series of more detailed , but not overly demanding , principles that elucidate the standard for judicial review of agency change .

first , an agency must "display awareness" that it is changing its position .

an agency action that departs from a prior policy without acknowledging the change , or that creates an "unexplained inconsistency" with prior policy is generally viewed as arbitrary and capricious .

second , an agency "need not demonstrate ... that the reasons for the new policy are better than the reasons for the old one ..." it is enough for the agency to show that there are "good reasons" for the change and that the "new policy is permissible under the statute. .

third , the court identified two scenarios in which an agency may be required to provide a "more detailed justification" for a change in policy: when the "new policy rests upon factual findings that contradict those which underlay its prior policy" ; or where the previous policy has "engendered serious reliance interests that must be taken into account. .

in each instance , the court noted that it would be arbitrary and capricious to "ignore" or "disregard" such matters .

the court revisited the question of judicial review of agency change , and the principle of "serious reliance interests" specifically , in encino motorcars , llc v. navarro .

in that case , the court held that a rule reflecting the agency's altered statutory interpretation was arbitrary and capricious because the agency failed to provide the required "reasoned explanation" for the change .

the court stated that while a "summary discussion " of an agency's reasons for changing its position "may suffice in other circumstances," when there has been "decades" of "industry reliance" on a prior policy , an agency must present a "more reasoned explanation" for "why it deemed it necessary to overrule its previous position. .

that requirement , the court concluded , could not be met — especially when "serious reliance interests are at stake" — when an agency offers "almost no reasons at all" or only "conclusory statements" for its decision to change course .

the standard of h.r .

1 judicial review that concerns congressional delegations of legislative authority to administrative agencies addresses whether an agency action is "in excess of statutory jurisdiction , authority , or limitations , or short of statutory right. .

the supreme court has stated that "an administrative agency's power to regulate in the public interest must always be grounded in a valid grant of authority from congress. .

courts grant varying levels of deference to agency interpretations of statutes when examining questions such as whether an agency's action exceeds its congressionally delegated st atutory authority .

a detailed discussion of the types of deference that a court may accord to an agency's interpretation of a statutory provision is available in crs report r43203 , chevron deference: court treatment of agency interpretations of ambiguous statutes , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

