the longshore and harbor workers' compensation act ( lhwca ) requires that private - sector firms provide workers' compensation coverage for their employees engaged in longshore , harbor , or other maritime occupations on or adjacent to the navigable waters of the united states .

although the lhwca program is administered by the department of labor ( dol ) , most benefits are paid either through private insurers or self - insured firms .

the lhwca is a workers' compensation system and not a federal benefits program .

like other workers' compensation systems in the united states , the lhwca ensures that all covered workers are provided medical and disability benefits in the event they are injured or become ill in the course of their employment , and it provides benefits to the survivors of covered workers who die on the job .

in 2016 , the lhwca paid approximately $1.41 billion in cash and medical benefits to injured workers and the families of deceased workers .

nearly all private - and public - sector workers in the united states are covered by some form of workers' compensation .

the federal government has a limited role in workers' compensation and administers workers' compensation programs only for federal employees and several classes of private - sector workers , including longshore and harbor workers .

for most occupations , workers' compensation is mandated by state laws and administered by state agencies .

there is no federal mandate that states provide workers' compensation .

however , every state and the district of columbia has a workers' compensation system .

there are no federal standards for state workers' compensation systems .

however , all u.s. workers' compensation systems provide for limited wage replacement and full medical benefits for workers who are injured or become ill as a result of their work and survivors benefits to the families of workers who die on the job .

workers' compensation in the united states is a no - fault system that pays workers for employment - related injuries or illnesses without considering the culpability of any one party .

in exchange for this no - fault protection and the guarantee of benefits in the event of an employment - related injury , illness , or death , workers give up their rights to bring actions against employers in the civil court system and give up their rights to seek damages for injuries and illnesses , including pain and suffering , outside of those provided by the workers' compensation laws .

workers' compensation is mandatory in all states and the district of columbia , with the exception of texas .

in texas , employers may , under certain conditions , opt out of the workers' compensation system , but in doing so subject themselves to civil actions brought by injured employees .

prior to the enactment of the lhwca in 1927 , longshore and harbor workers were not covered by any workers' compensation system .

although persons who worked entirely on land were covered by workers' compensation laws in those states that enacted such laws , pursuant to the supreme court's 1917 decision in southern pacific co. v. jensen , state workers' compensation systems did not have jurisdiction over persons working on the "navigable waters" of the united states because the constitution granted the authority over "matters of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction" to the federal government .

the lhwca created a federal workers' compensation program to cover these workers .

in 1972 , the lhwca zone of coverage was extended to include areas adjacent to navigable waters that are used for loading , unloading , repairing , or building vessels .

employers required by the lhwca to provide workers' compensation coverage to their employees may either purchase private insurance or self - insure .

the dol is responsible for authorizing insurance carriers to provide coverage under the lhwca program and for authorizing companies to self - insure .

however , the dol does not set or regulate insurance premiums .

these insurance arrangements are the primary means of providing lhwca benefits to injured , sick , and deceased workers and their families .

general revenue is not used to pay any lhwca benefits .

the lhwca provides medical benefits for covered injuries and illnesses and disability benefits to partially cover wages lost due to covered injuries or illnesses , and it provides survivors benefits to the families of workers who die on the job .

although the responsibility for the payment of benefits under the lhwca rests with the employer or the employer's insurance company , decisions on benefit eligibility and the amount of benefits are made by the dol .

upon the report of an injury , illness , or death , the lhwca claims process begins .

if the employer or insurance carrier does not controvert the claim , then arrangements are made by the dol for the claim to be paid .

if , however , the employer controverts any part of the claim , then the dol sets up an informal conference , either in person or by phone , between the employer or insurance carrier and worker with the goal of resolving any disputes over the claim .

if this informal conference fails to resolve all outstanding disputes , then a formal hearing before a dol administrative law judge ( alj ) is scheduled .

if the employer or insurance carrier or the worker is dissatisfied with the decision of the alj , then this decision may be appealed to the benefits review board ( brb ) .

the brb is made up of five members appointed by the secretary of labor .

either party dissatisfied with the decision of the brb may file a petition with the u.s. court of appeals for the circuit in which the injury occurred praying that the brb's decision be set aside or modified .

if an employer or insurance carrier fails to pay compensation in accordance with a final decision on a claim , the covered worker or the dol may request that the u.s. district court order that payment be made .

