mexico shares a nearly 2,000-mile border with the united states , and the two countries have historically close trade , cultural , and demographic ties .

mexico's stability is of critical importance to the united states , and the nature and intensity of violence in mexico has been of particular concern to the u.s. congress .

rising murders , intimidation of mexican politicians in advance of the 2018 elections , and increasing assassinations of journalists and media personnel have continued to raise alarm .

in 2017 , 12 journalists were murdered and that number may increase in 2018 , as 7 journalists were killed in the first 6 months of the year .

mexico's brutal drug trafficking - related violence has been dramatically punctuated by beheadings , public hanging of corpses , car bombs , and murders of dozens of journalists and government officials .

beyond these brazen crimes , violence has spread from the border with the united states to mexico's interior , flaring in the pacific states of michoacán and guerrero in recent years , in the border state of tamaulipas , and in chihuahua and baja california , where mexico's largest border - region cities of juárez and tijuana are located .

organized crime groups have splintered and diversified their crime activities , turning to extortion , kidnapping , auto theft , oil smuggling , human smuggling , retail drug sales , and other illicit enterprises .

these crimes often are described as more "parasitic" for local populations inside mexico .

addressing the question of whether violence ( as measured by the number of intentional homicides ) has reached new heights , the justice in mexico project at the university of san diego reports that total homicides in mexico increased by 7% between 2014 and 2015 .

drug traffickers continue to exercise significant territorial influence in parts of the country , particularly near drug production hubs and along drug - trafficking routes during the peña nieto administration as they had under the previous president .

although homicide rates declined during the first two years of peña nieto's six - year term , total homicides rose 7% in 2015 , 22% in 2016 , and 23% in 2017 , reaching a record level .

in 2017 , government statistics from the national public security system indicate there were more than 29,000 intentional homicides — a new record that exceeded the previous high in 2011 .

in addition , several analysts have raised concerns about severe human rights violations involving mexican military an d police forces , which , at times , have reportedly colluded with mexico's criminal groups .

notably , the mexican armed forces injured or killed some 3,900 individuals in their domestic operations , between 2007 and 2014 , with the victims labeled as "civilian aggressors. .

however , the high death rate ( about 500 were injuries and the rest killings ) indicates the lethality of the encounters with mexican military and official reports did not sort out in published statistics how many of the military's victims were armed or were mere bystanders .

 ( significantly , these statistics did not continue to be made public after 2014 ) .

due to casualty estimates being reported differently by the mexican government than by the media outlets that track the violence , some debate exists on exactly how many have perished .

this report conveys government data , but the data have not consistently been reported promptly or completely .

for example , the government of president felipe calderón released tallies of "organized - crime related" homicides through september 2011 .

for a time , the peña nieto administration also issued such estimates , but it stopped in mid - 2013 .

although precise tallies diverged , the trend during president calderón's tenure was a sharp increase in the number of homicides related to organized crime through 2011 , when the number started a slight decline before calderón left office in late 2012 .

of total intentional homicides since 2006 , many sources indicate that roughly 150,000 of total homicides were organized crime - related killings .

violence is an intrinsic feature of the trade in illicit drugs .

violence is used by traffickers to settle disputes , and a credible threat of violence maintains employee discipline and a semblance of order with suppliers , creditors , and buyers .

this type of drug trafficking - related violence has occurred routinely and intermittently in u.s. cities since the early 1980s .

the violence now associated with drug trafficking organizations in mexico is of an entirely different scale .

in mexico , the violence is not only associated with resolving disputes or maintaining discipline but also has been directed toward the government , political candidates , and the news media .

some observers note that the excesses of some of mexico's violence might even be considered exceptional by the typical standards of organized crime .

yet , mexico's homicide rate is not exceptional in the region , where many countries are plagued by high rates of violent crime , such as in the northern triangle countries of central america — el salvador , guatemala , and honduras .

overall , the region of latin america has a relatively high homicide level ; with 8% of the world's population , latin america has 33% of the world's intentional homicides .

mexico's quick rise in killings associated with the drug war along with the violence in six other countries in the region — brazil , colombia , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , and venezuela — is also concerning to many observers .

university of san diego researchers observe that although mexico's homicide rates compared to homicide rates in other western hemisphere countries fall somewhere in the middle of the regional grouping , the rapid rise in both mexico's rate of homicides and its absolute number of homicides is unmatched .

estimates of mexico's disappeared or missing — numbering more than 34,000 as recently reported by the mexican government — has created both domestic and international concern .

former president calderón made an aggressive campaign against criminal groups , especially the large drug trafficking organizations ( dtos ) , the central focus of his administration's policy .

he sent several thousand mexican military troops and federal police to combat the organizations in drug trafficking "hot spots" around the country .

his government made some dramatic and well - publicized arrests , but few of those captured kingpins were either prosecuted or convicted .

between 2007 and 2012 , as part of much closer u.s. - mexican security cooperation , the mexican government significantly increased extraditions to the united states , with a majority of the suspects wanted by the u.s. government on drug trafficking and related charges .

the number of extraditions peaked in 2012 , but declined somewhat in the first two full years after president peña nieto took office .

another result of this "militarized" strategy was an increase in accusations of human rights violations against the mexican military , which was largely untrained in domestic policing .

when president peña nieto took office in late 2012 , he indicated he would take a new direction in his security policy: more focused on reducing criminal violence that affects civilians and businesses and less oriented toward removing the leadership of the large dtos .

his then - attorney general , jesus murillo karam , said in 2012 that mexico faced challenges from some 60 to 80 crime groups operating in the country whose proliferation he attributed to the calderón government's kingpin strategy .

however , despite peña nieto's stated commitment to shift the focus of the government's strategy , analysts have noted considerable continuity between peña nieto and calderón's security approaches .

the peña nieto government continued the military and federal police deployments used by the calderón government to combat the dtos , but it recentralized control over security to mexico's interior ministry .

moreover , the use of a strategy of taking down through arrest or killing the top drug kingpins has continued .

president peña nieto streamlined cooperation with the united states under the mérida initiative , which began during president calderón's term .

the mérida initiative , a bilateral anticrime assistance package launched in 2008 , initially focused on providing mexico with hardware , such as planes , scanners , and other equipment , to combat the dtos .

the $2.9 billion effort ( through 2017 ) shifted in recent years to focus on training and technical assistance for the police and enactment of judicial reform , including training at the local and state level , southern border enhancements and crime prevention .

after some reorganization of bilateral cooperation efforts , the peña nieto government continued the mérida programs .

in 2014 , the peña nieto administration implemented another security strategy element promised during his presidential campaign: standing up a national militarized police force , or gendarmarie .

the scope of the force implemented in august 2014 was significantly scaled back from its original proposed size of 40,000 to 5,000 officers who were added to the federal police force .

the new force had the mission of protecting citizens from crime and shielding their economic and industrial activities from harm , such as defending vital petroleum infrastructure , although many observers maintain that the gendarmerie's distinct purpose was never followed .

president peña nieto's focus on crime prevention , which also received significant attention early in his term , eventually declined as well , in part due to slow growth .

as world oil prices dropped dramatically in 2014 causing reduced economic expansion , the peña nieto administration imposed significant budget austerity measures , including on some aspects of security .

for more than a decade , members of congress convened numerous hearings dealing with the violence in mexico , u.s. foreign assistance , and border security issues .

congressional concern heightened after u.s. consulate staff and security personnel working in mexico came under attack , with some killed or wounded , allegedly with corrupt police support .

occasional use of car bombs , grenades , and rocket - propelled grenade launchers — such as the one used to bring down a mexican army helicopter in may 2015 — continue to raise concerns that some mexican drug traffickers may be adopting insurgent or terrorist techniques .

potential harm from mexico's criminal groups — or transnational criminal organizations ( tcos ) , as the u.s. department of justice now identifies them — is due in large part to their control of and efforts to move illicit drugs and to expand aggressively into the heroin ( or plant - based ) and synthetic opioids market .

mexico experienced a sharp increase in opium poppy cultivation between 2014 and 2017 ; increasingly mexico has become a transit country for powerful synthetic opioids , such as fentanyl .

a large increase in political candidates slain during the 2018 electoral season in mexico caused some candidates to withdraw from their races in order to avoid violence to themselves or their staffs and families .

this poses another concerning threat to democracy in mexico of overt political intimidation .

crime linked to violence , such as extortion , forced disappearances , and violent robbery , has also risen as the crime groups have diversified their activities .

the u.s. congress has expressed concern over the violence and has sought to provide oversight on u.s. - mexican security cooperation .

the 115 th congress may continue to evaluate how the mexican government is combating the illicit drug trade , working to reduce related violence , and monitor the effects of drug trafficking and violence challenges on the security of both the united states and mexico .

in march 2017 , the u.s. senate passed s.res .

83 in support of both mexico and china and their efforts to achieve reductions in fentanyl production and trafficking .

going forward , some uncertainty has arisen due to tensions between the trump administration and the mexican government regarding several other areas of the u.s. - mexican relationship .

the morena party candidate , president - elect andrés manuel lópez obrador ( known by his initials amlo ) , won with 53% of the vote on july 1 , 2018 .

a leftist populist , amlo may fall back on skepticism toward the u.s. government that he advocated during his campaign , with the potential result of lowering cooperation on security matters .

the splintering of the large dtos into competing factions and gangs of different sizes took place over several years beginning in 2007 and reaching the present .

the development of these different crime groups , ranging from transnational criminal organizations ( known as tcos ) to small local mafias with certain trafficking or other crime specialties , has made the crime situation even more diffuse and the groups' criminal behavior harder to eradicate .

the large dtos , which tended to be hierarchical , often bound by familial ties , and led by hard - to - capture cartel kingpins , have been replaced by flatter , more nimble organizations that tend to be loosely networked .

far more common in the present crime group formation is the outsourcing of certain aspects of trafficking .

the various smaller organizations resist the imposition of norms to limit violence .

the growth of rivalries among a greater number of organized crime "players" has produced continued violence , albeit in some cases these players are "less able to threaten the state and less endowed with impunity. .

on the other hand , the larger organizations ( sinaloa , for example ) that have adopted a cellular structure still have attempted to protect their leadership , as in the 2015 escape orchestrated for the world's most - wanted drug kingpin , "el chapo" guzmán , through a mile - long tunnel from a maximum - security prison .

the scope of the violence generated by mexican crime groups has been difficult to measure due to restricted reporting by the government and attempts by crime groups to mislead the public .

the criminal actors sometimes publicize their crimes in garish displays intended to intimidate their rivals , the public , or security forces , or they publicize the criminal acts of violence on the internet .

conversely , the dtos may seek to mask their crimes by indicating that other actors or cartels , such as a competitor , are responsible .

furthermore , some shoot - outs simply are not reported as a result of media self - censorship or because the bodies disappear .

one example is the reported death of a leader of the knights templar , nazario moreno gonzalez , who was reported dead in 2010 , but no body was recovered .

rumors of his survival persisted and were confirmed in 2014 , when he was killed in a gun battle with mexican security forces .

 ( for more on the knights templar , see " knights templar " section , below. ) .

forced disappearances in mexico have also become a growing concern , and efforts to tabulate an accurate count of the missing or forcibly disappeared have been limited , a problem that is exacerbated by underreporting .

government estimates of the number of disappeared people in mexico have varied over time , especially of those who are missing due to force and possible homicide .

in addition , bodies turn up in mass graves , as in the well - known case of the 43 disappeared students in iguala , guerrero , where the mexican police , the victims' families , and international investigators searching for the students' remains found scores of unmarked mass graves containing bodies that previously had not been counted .

in the gulf coast state of veracruz , in mid - march 2017 , a vast mass grave was unearthed containing some 250 skulls and other remains , some of which were found to be years old .

estimates of the number of disappeared in veracruz during the term of former governor javier duarte , who was in office from 2010 to 2016 , exceed 5,000 .

journalist watchdog group animal politico , which focuses on combating corruption with transparency , concludes in a 2018 investigative article that combating impunity and tracking missing persons cannot be handled in several states because 20 of mexico's 31 states lack the biological databases needed to identify unclaimed bodies .

additionally , 21 states lack access to the national munitions database used to trace bullets and weapons .

the dtos have been in constant flux in recent years .

by some accounts , when president calderón came to office in december 2006 , there were four dominant dtos: the tijuana / arellano felix organization ( afo ) , the sinaloa cartel , the juárez / vicente carillo fuentes organization ( cfo ) , and the gulf cartel .

since then , the large , more stable organizations that existed in the earlier years of the calderón administration have fractured into many more groups .

for several years , the u.s. drug enforcement administration ( dea ) identified the following organizations as dominant: sinaloa , los zetas , tijuana / afo , juárez / cfo , beltrán leyva , gulf , and la familia michoacana .

in some sense these might be viewed as the "traditional" dtos .

however , many analysts suggest that those 7 groups now seem to have fragmented to between 9 and as many as 20 major organizations .

today , fragmentation , or "balkanization," of the major crime groups has been accompanied by many groups' diversification into other types of criminal activity .

the following section focuses on nine dtos whose current status illuminates the fluidity of all the crime groups in mexico as they face new challenges from competition and changing market dynamics .

the goal of the mexican government's counter - dto strategy has been to diminish the extent and character of the dtos' activity from a national - security threat to a law - and - order problem and , once this is achieved , to transfer responsibility for addressing this challenge from military forces back to the police .

president peña nieto did not succeed in reducing the scope of the military in its domestic policing function .

instead , the mexican military has been challenged by accusations of extrajudicial executions by members of its forces and also for the use of torture and other severe human rights violations .

the government remains challenged by the corruption of politicians by dtos , such as the former governor of veracruz alleged to have fostered a "state of terror" during his administration , and he is among 14 sitting and former governors accused of deep corruption in office .

in the wake of the six years under the pri , some towns have experienced serious displacement ; they are often described as ghost towns .

they include towns close to the border in texas in the states of coahuila and tamaulipas ; and in the heart of mexico's golden triangle of drug cultivation , especially the state of sinaloa .

the splintering of the large criminal organizations has driven violence , according to several analysts .

a key cause of the violence has been the transition to a post - sinaloa cartel dominated - era , with the rise of a lucrative heroin trade and synthetic opioids , such as fentanyl , causing renewed conflict .

nevertheless , some observers remain convinced of the capacity of the sinaloa dto , and the newly predominant cjng , to use their well - established bribery and corruption to operate with impunity in mexico .

many u.s. government officials and policymakers have deep concerns about the mexican government's capacity to decrease the violence in mexico and curb the power of the country's criminal groups .

many analysts have viewed as problematic the current government's continued reliance on a controversial kingpin strategy .

they note while it has reduced the violence in some cases , it has not lowered violence in a sustainable way .

for some observers , mexico's dto challenge remains largely an organized crime or mafia problem , coupled with endemic corruption .

accordingly , these analysts contend that the most important tools for managing the problem include long - term institutional reform to replace a culture of illegality and corruption with one of rule of law and respect for lawful authority .

the prospects for strengthening u.s. - mexican security cooperation , including the future of the mérida initiative , remain unclear .

the new administration in mexico may be less willing to adapt to the changing approaches of the u.s. government , and could demand changes in the bilateral relationship or be uncooperative unless treated as a respected partner .

