in the early years of the [refugee] program , large numbers of relatively few nationalities located in a limited number of countries dominated the program .

many of the resettled refugees had family members already in the united states .

over the past decade , however , the united states has worked closely with the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) to make third country resettlement a viable , durable solution for increasing numbers from a broader representation of the world's refugee population , which currently stands at over 10 million .

while we have again resettled large numbers of iraqis , burmese , and bhutanese this year , the usrap has admitted refugees from over 60 nationalities who were processed in some 90 countries .

over 80 percent of these applicants were referred to us by unhcr either individually or in groups .

relatively few have family members resident in the united states .

the administration has worked closely with the congress to invest the resources necessary to reach smaller numbers of the most desperate populations who find themselves in seemingly forgotten locations .

this excerpt , from the interagency report proposed refugee admissions for fy201 1 , suggests the extent of the challenge facing the u.s. government as it resettles a diverse group of individuals with a wide range of needs .

a set of refugee resettlement assistance programs , administered by the office of refugee resettlement ( orr ) in the department of health and human services' administration for children and families ( hhs / acf ) , provides transitional assistance to refugees and other designated groups .

these programs are intended to help the beneficiaries ( who are referred to collectively as "refugees" in this report ) achieve economic self - sufficiency as soon as possible after their arrival in the united states .

achievement of self - sufficiency has been more difficult in recent years in the face of the economic recession .

in light of the economic situation and obstacles to employment facing arriving refugees , hhs requested additional orr funding for fy2011 .

separate from the orr program , the department of state ( dos ) administers a program of initial resettlement for newly arriving refugees known as the reception and placement program .

under this program , public and private , nonprofit entities provide arriving refugees with initial resettlement services and referrals to other services , as needed .

to provide the required services , the participating agencies use reception and placement program funds and contributions from other sources .

in 2010 , dos increased the reception and placement grant provided to these agencies from $900 to $1,800 per refugee .

these recent steps by hhs and dos to provide additional resources for refugee resettlement reflect a larger view on the part of many observers that the refugee resettlement assistance system is in need of reform .

the obama administration has initiated an interagency review of refugee resettlement , which is being lead by the national security council ( nsc ) .

there is little public information about the review .

a june 2010 article in the los angeles times described it as "the first thorough review of refugee resettlement in 30 years," and reported that the nsc had consulted with federal agencies , including hhs and dos , and refugee advocates .

it is not known when the results of the review will be made available .

they have been widely anticipated , however , and may further energize reform efforts .

to help inform possible future efforts to reform the refugee resettlement assistance system , this report discusses existing resettlement assistance programs , key issues and challenges in providing effective assistance , and policy options to reform the current system .

while the refugee admissions process is briefly described and referenced in parts of this report , as relevant , the focus of this report is on resettlement assistance to refugees in the united states .

the admission of refugees to the united states and their resettlement here are authorized by the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , as amended by the refugee act of 1980 .

refugees are one of the main categories of foreign nationals admitted on humanitarian grounds to live permanently in the united states .

humanitarian admissions represent one stream of permanent admissions under u.s. immigration law .

the ina , as amended , sets forth procedures for determining refugee admissions levels and criteria for admitting refugees to the united states .

it also requires refugees to apply to adjust to legal permanent resident ( lpr ) status after one year in refugee status in the united states .

in addition to establishing admissions procedures , the ina , as amended by the refugee act of 1980 , authorizes federal assistance to resettle refugees and promote their self - sufficiency .

it authorizes several refugee assistance programs , as discussed below .

the refugee act of 1980 also amended the ina to establish orr at hhs to administer the refugee assistance programs .

refugee assistance programs are not limited to individuals who are admitted to the united states as refugees .

rather , as detailed below , refugee assistance and benefits are available to various categories of humanitarian admissions .

the ina authorizes several refugee assistance programs , including an initial resettlement program cash and medical assistance , and a program to provide employment - related and other services .

orr programs for refugee minors , non - refugee unaccompanied alien children , survivors of torture , and victims of trafficking are not covered in this report .

in recent years , as noted above , the united states has admitted an increasingly diverse group of refugees .

in its fy2011 budget request for orr , the obama administration highlighted some of the needs of today's refugees: changing demographics of the u.s. resettlement program present new challenges , as many populations require extended employment services to gain a toehold in the u.s. labor market and integrate into u.s. society .

many recent arrivals have spent protracted amounts of time in refugee camps in countries of first asylum , have experienced intense trauma and have disabilities .

many arriving refugees have limited work skills , cannot read and write in their own language and require intensive english as a second language ( esl ) courses prior to employment .

the recent experiences of arriving refugees and resettlement communities have raised many questions about the adequacy of the existing refugee resettlement assistance program to meet the needs of refugees and help them successfully integrate into american society .

a 2010 congressional report by minority staff of the senate foreign relations committee concluded that the current systems of refugee admissions and resettlement "are out - dated and fail to address the needs of the culturally and linguistically diverse populations now being admitted to the united states. .

the report , based on field research conducted in indiana and georgia , also chronicled the strains the current system places on local communities .

a may 2010 report by the columbia university school of international and public affairs ( sipa ) on the u.s. refugee admissions and resettlement programs determined that increasing demographic diversity among the arriving refugee population and a shifting focus toward resettling the most vulnerable has tested the limits of the u.s. resettlement system and has revealed serious problem areas .

several other recent reports have focused on the resettlement of iraqi refugees in the united states .

for example , in june 2009 the international rescue committee ( irc ) , one of the voluntary agencies that helps resettle refugees in the united states , published a report based on the experiences of iraqi refugees resettled in atlanta , ga , and phoenix , az .

the above - cited refugee crisis in americ a focused on iraqi refugees resettled in detroit , mi ; san diego , ca ; and washington , dc .

while highlighting particular challenges faced by newly arriving iraqi refugees , these reports also raised larger questions about the resettlement assistance program .

the circumstances and needs of newly arriving refugees , coupled with the economic downturn , have focused attention on the refugee resettlement assistance issue .

the obama administration has taken steps to provide additional resources for selected assistance programs .

many observers believe , however , that more far - reaching reform of the resettlement assistance system is necessary to enable refugees to achieve successful resettlement and integration .

it remains unclear whether the administration will take additional steps to reform the system and / or whether congress will pursue reform through legislation .

it may be that the results of the nsc - led interagency review mentioned in the introduction will help galvanize support for a particular set of reforms .

