on april 20 , 2010 , the deepwater horizon oil drilling rig was reportedly nearing completion of a deepwater oil well ( owned by bp ) when an uncontained release of hydrocarbons ( oil and natural gas ) caused explosions and fire , resulting in 11 crew member fatalities .

the incident produced the largest oil spill that has occurred in u.s. waters , eclipsing the magnitude of the 1989 exxon valdez spill after four to five days .

the spill spanned approximately 84 days , and following several attempts , responders gained control of the oil discharge on july 15 , 2010 .

based on the most recent estimate from the federal government's flow rate technical group , the deepwater well ultimately released more than 200 million gallons ( or 4.9 million barrels ) of crude oil ( see "well flow rate estimates" below ) .

the uncertainty range of this estimate ( + / - 10% ) is equivalent to two exxon valdez - size spills in either direction .

following the well's containment , satellite data began to reveal decreasing daily quantities of oil on the ocean's surface .

 ( see appendix for a snapshot of satellite analyses from selected days during the spill. ) .

according to the federal government's geoplatform database , august 20 , 2010 , was the first day since the spill's start in which no oil was observed on the ocean's surface .

after several days without observed oil on the ocean surface , the satellite analyses were discontinued on august 25 , 2010 .

although decreasing amounts of oil were observed on the ocean surface following the well containment , oil spill response officials and researchers have found oil in other places .

a pressing question raised by many stakeholders is where did the oil go ? .

assessing the oil's fate is the primary objective of this report .

for the purposes of this report , the term fate refers to the oil itself , not its actual or potential impacts on the gulf ecosystems or organisms .

the impact of the 2010 gulf spill is still being assessed and will likely continue to be assessed for years to come .

because evaluating the actual fate of the oil may take time and may prove difficult , perceptions of the oil's fate may influence congressional interest and action , with consequences for the affected stakeholders .

these perceptions may be influenced by multiple factors , including oil spill assessments and their methods , the group that prepared the assessment ( and perceived biases of the group ) , and the manner in which the assessment is presented .

if policymakers have the perception that the oil has degraded with minimal impacts to the environment , attention to oil spill's consequences and associated impacts may wane .

on the other hand , a perception that a substantial volume of oil remains and poses a threat to the environment could result in continuing pressure on gulf industries and livelihoods .

the fate of the oil may be of interest to policymakers for other reasons , including oversight of oil spill response performance and assessment of the government's capability to monitor oil spills in the environment .

multiple factors play a role in determining the fate of oil released into a marine environment .

these include the chemical composition of the oil , a complex collection of natural processes and pathways , the location of the spill or discharge , and human intervention .

on august 4 , 2010 , the national incident command ( the spill response leadership team of the federal government ) made public an estimate of the oil spill budget for the deepwater horizon incident .

the release of the estimate received considerable media attention and was accompanied by a press conference , attended by key administration personnel: thad allen ( national incident commander ) , jane lubchenco ( administrator of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , noaa ) , carol browner ( director of the white house office of energy and climate change policy ) , and robert gibbs ( white house press secretary ) .

a number of questions were raised about the august 4 estimates , in part because of limited detail about how the estimates were developed ( see "criticism of the august 2010 oil budget estimates" below ) .

on november 23 , 2010 , the federal government released a peer - reviewed "technical document" that further explained how the estimates were derived ; in some cases , the november document modified the august estimates .

the technical document explained that the oil budget estimates were and will continue to be used for operational and response purposes , not to track the final fate of the spilled oil .

although the november technical document stresses this point in its text , the august oil budget estimates appear to have been used exactly for this latter purpose .

even assuming that approximately half of the oil has been removed from the gulf marine environment through direct recovery , burning , skimming , or evaporation , a substantial portion of oil — over 100 million gallons — remained in the gulf as of the oil budget estimate .

where is the remaining oil and what is its physical and chemical state ? .

some data and ongoing studies offer some clues that could provide a partial and preliminary answer .

one of the more comprehensive of these studies was released december 17 , 2010 , by the unified command's operational scientific advisory team ( osat ) .

this report ( hereinafter referred to as the "osat report" ) provides results from samples collected from may through october 2010 in the gulf's nearshore , offshore , and deepwater areas .

although the purpose of the sampling data was to provide responders with detailed information about the location of recoverable oil , the results ( discussed below ) offer further pieces of information concerning the oil's fate .

a complete and definitive answer to the question of the remaining oil is unknown at this juncture .

the most recent authoritative assessment — the november oil budget document — contained estimates based on calculations made in july 2010 .

at the time of these calculations , a substantial portion of the oil had been effectively removed from the gulf environment through human interaction .

however , a greater portion remained , in some form , in the gulf .

months later , it is unknown what happened to the oil that remained .

it is debatable whether the fate of the remaining oil will ever be established conclusively .

multiple challenges hinder this objective: the complexity of the gulf system ; resources required to collect data ; and varied interpretations over the results and observations .

moreover , as time progresses , determining the fate of the oil will likely become more difficult .

regardless , the question of oil fate will likely be addressed through an incremental process .

researchers are continuing to study various components of the gulf , specifically damages to natural resources .

some of these efforts may provide clues to the oil's fate .

