a land exchange , po pularly viewed as a swap or a trade , is a real estate transaction where the disposal ( sale ) and acquisition ( purchase ) of land are combined .

the bureau of land management ( blm ) , in the department of the interior ( doi ) , is authorized to exchange land or interests in land under the federal land policy and management act of 1976 ( flpma ) , as amended by the federal land exchange facilitation act of 1988 ( flefa ) , as well as under other authorities .

administrative exchanges under flpma often are referred to as discretionary exchanges , because flpma does not require the agency and nonfederal parties to exchange lands .

blm implementing regulations are contained in 43 c.f.r .

ยง2200 .

additional information is contained in blm's land exchange handbook and various agency instruction memoranda .

selected provisions of these sources are summarized below in the section entitled " basic rules for exchanges . .

additionally , congress sometimes enacts legislation authorizing and governing specific land exchanges .

legislated land exchanges generally follow the process and procedures outlined in this report , unless the statute provides otherwise .

legislated exchanges are discussed below under " legislated land exchanges . .

this section briefly summarizes the rules and process for conducting administrative land exchanges .

as noted , legislated land exchanges generally follow the process and procedures outlined below , unless congress provides otherwise .

additional information on legislated exchanges follows this section under the heading " legislated land exchanges . .

exchanges may be proposed by blm , private citizens , or state or local government officials , among others .

however , blm is to consider only proposals that conform to land - use plans .

additionally , the secretary of the interior may restrict , for up to five years , application of the mining laws and other public land laws to federal lands under consideration for exchange .

the exchange process typically occurs in five phases: ( 1 ) development of a land exchange proposal , ( 2 ) feasibility evaluation , ( 3 ) processing and documentation , ( 4 ) decision analysis and approval , and ( 5 ) title transfer .

blm field offices take the lead in negotiating and processing exchanges , but blm headquarters ultimately must concur .

the length of time generally required to complete land exchanges depends on the circumstances .

the blm handbook advises that many exchanges take between 18 months and 24 months , but the time depends on the complexities .

the gao review of blm and forest service ( fs ) land exchanges from october 2004 through june 2008 revealed completion times for the agencies ranging from two months to 12 years .

the average time to complete blm's exchanges was about four years .

a key issue for congress is the extent to which the reorganization of the appraisal function and the implementation of other appraisal and exchange reforms addressed perceived problems and improved land transactions .

congress continues to oversee agency processes as reformed in recent years and the underlying authorities , through authorizing and appropriating committees .

despite the reforms implemented by blm and doi , continuing questions include whether to amend the flpma exchange authority or to discontinue exchanges .

critics assert that administrative exchanges are inherently difficult and that this difficulty has contributed to a decrease in exchanges over the past quarter century .

some seek to facilitate exchanges through changes to requirements pertaining to equal value , same state , appraisal processes , and nepa analyses , among others .

others have suggested ending exchanges in favor of existing authorities to buy and sell land for cash , such as those provided under other provisions of flpma .

with cash sales , agencies could sell unwanted parcels and use the cash to buy parcels they prefer .

exchange critics believe that this approach takes the subjectivity out of estimating value through appraisal , procures the best price , and simplifies transactions because there is no requirement to equalize value or act within the same state .

still other observers assert that renewal of authority allowing blm to sell or exchange land and keep the money in a special account for subsequent acquisitions would be preferable to exchanges under flpma .

one such authority was contained in the federal land transaction facilitation act .

this law , which expired in 2010 and was extended for one year ( through july 25 , 2011 ) , provided for the sale or exchange of land identified for disposal under blm's land - use plans .

the proceeds were available to acquire certain lands containing exceptional resources .

a similar current authority , the southern nevada public land management act , is more limited .

it allows blm to sell or exchange land around las vegas , with proceeds available to acquire environmentally sensitive lands in nevada ( as well as for other purposes in nevada ) .

advocates prefer these authorities because land values can be determined through the market and agencies can purchase lands independent of annual appropriations .

blm , among others , supports exchanging land under flpma for the many uses noted above under " pros and cons of land exchanges . .

exchange supporters contend that controversies over valuing properties with unique attributes or in high - growth areas are as likely to occur for land that is sold or acquired under other authorities as for land that is exchanged under flpma .

further , blm asserts that the majority of exchanges are not controversial .

exchange proponents also contend that for many years blm has had limited funding for purchasing land and that blm thus needs exchange authority to acquire additional valuable land .

by equalizing value by adding or removing land parcels , blm typically does not spend money for land exchanges .

finally , exchange proponents believe that past reforms have addressed concerns with exchanges and appraisals .

