the role of natural gas in the u.s. economy has been a major part of the energy policy debate in the 114 th congress .

both the house and the senate have held multiple hearings related to natural gas .

numerous bills have been introduced in both houses .

this report highlights key aspects of global natural gas markets , including supply and demand , and major u.s. developments .

select statutes of u.s. law related to natural gas can be found in appendix g .

some consider natural gas a potential bridge fuel to a lower - carbon economy , because it is cleaner burning than coal and oil .

natural gas combustion emits about one - half less carbon dioxide than coal and one - quarter less than oil when consumed in a typical electric power plant , offset somewhat by fugitive emissions .

fugitive emissions , which can be intentional ( i.e. , vented ) or unintentional ( i.e. , leaked ) , are natural gas that is released to the atmosphere during industry operations .

natural gas combustion also emits less particulate matter , sulfur dioxide , and nitrogen oxides than coal or oil .

in recent years , the united states has become the home to the shale gas revolution , as improved methods to extract natural gas from certain shale formations have significantly increased the resource profile of the united states .

this has spurred other countries to try to develop shale gas , but progress is slow outside of north america .

if the united states continues to and other countries can bring large new volumes of natural gas to market at a competitive price , then natural gas could play a larger role in the world's economy .

in 2016 , the united states started exporting liquefied natural gas ( lng ) from the lower 48 states .

several key factors will determine whether significant new quantities of natural gas come to market , particularly unconventional natural gas resources .

these factors include price , technical capability , environmental concerns , and political considerations .

many countries , both producing and consuming , are watching how the development of u.s. unconventional natural gas resources evolves .

although most natural gas is consumed in the country where it is produced , global and regional markets are becoming more integrated ( see figure 6 ) .

about 30% of natural gas is traded internationally , mostly within regional markets , and the amount of natural gas traded is increasing .

natural gas is transported primarily in two ways: by pipeline , and as a liquid in tankers .

pipelines transport gas between two fixed points , while lng provides flexibility in the final destination .

global lng trade increased by 1.8% in 2015 , and lng's share of the global gas trade was 33% .

traditionally , natural gas is sold under long - term contracts indexed to oil prices , except in the united states and a few other places where natural gas prices are market - based .

u.s. lng exports have placed pressure on other countries to delink their gas exports from oil - indexed prices .

almost all natural gas that is traded internationally is under long - term contracts , usually 20 years in length , whether it is by pipeline or as lng .

this is primarily because natural gas transportation is expensive and long - term contracts are needed to finance construction of the transport facilities .

sometimes lng consumers do not require the entire amount of natural gas in their contracts .

lng producers can sell the excess to other consumers on a one - time or short - term basis ( eg , sell it on "spot" ) .

the spot market for natural gas is growing .

russia is the world's largest natural gas exporter , primarily through its massive pipeline network to europe .

russia opened its first lng export terminal in 2009 , primarily targeting the asian market , to give it flexibility in its exports .

qatar is the leading exporter of lng , accounting for 31% of the world lng trade in 2015 , the majority of which goes to asia and europe .

europe is the largest importing region of natural gas , receiving most of its imports by pipeline from russia , norway , and algeria ; however , recent developments regarding russia and the ukraine have pushed the european union to consider more secure sources of natural gas .

asia , the most import - dependent region , relies mostly on lng ; however , china has become more reliant on imported gas via pipeline , from kazakhstan , myanmar , and turkmenistan .

china has been turkmenistan's primary importer of natural gas , with more than 70% of turkmenistan's exports going to china in 2015 .

currently , the united states and canada have an extensively integrated pipeline system .

canada and mexico are the only recipients of u.s. natural gas by pipeline .

exports are expected to increase to mexico , from 1 tcf in 2015 to almost 1.5 tcf in 2040 .

meanwhile , exports to canada are projected to slightly rise from 0.7 tcf to 0.75 tcf , over the same time period .

is it time for natural gas to take center stage as the world's primary energy source ? .

that is the main question confronting the natural gas industry over the next decade .

the international energy agency ( iea ) states that natural gas is one of the fastest growing fossil fuels , with an increase in demand of approximately 60% in 2040 over 2013 ; natural gas is a major alternative for a world that looks to gradually decarbonize its energy system .

most of the new demand for natural gas is projected to come from non - oecd countries , primarily china and those in the middle east .

nonetheless , the global landscape for energy is shifting ; as north america continues to produce unconventional gas , the rest of the world's exploration of unconventional resources is occurring more gradually .

china is typically a driver in global energy trends .

recently , china has decided to change its economic model , shifting away from an industry - heavy economy to a services - focused one .

this change will require 85% less energy to generate future chinese growth ; consequently , predictions are uncertain regarding china's future in energy consumption .

india , on the other hand , is projected to be a growing contributor to global energy demand , accounting for 25% of the rise in global energy use to 2040 .

however , meeting india's energy demand may prove to be a huge financial commitment — nearly $2.8 trillion .

natural gas comprises about 6% of india's primary energy supply , and is projected to make up less than 10% of india's energy mix in 2040 .

sectorally , the u.s. electric power industry leads the growth in natural gas demand due to several factors , including relatively low prices , lower capital costs , excess natural gas generation capacity , and competitive financing of projects .

government policies , particularly in regard to carbon dioxide emissions , will be a key factor in determining the rate of growth of natural gas usage .

globally , natural gas is projected to account for 28% of total world electricity generation in 2040 , with non - oecd countries representing 61% of this .

natural gas production would likely need to increase to meet the rise in demand and keep prices from dramatically rising .

production and growth is projected in every region except europe .

unconventional gas resources — coal bed methane , shale gas , and tight gas — account for about 60% of growth in the global gas supply .

however , outside of north america unconventional resource development is slower and uneven .

china does have policies that encourage production , but limited water availability , geology , and population density in resource - rich areas may hinder any attempts to fully realize its capacity .

appendix a .

global natural gas consumption ( 2015 ) appendix b .

global natural gas reserves ( 2015 ) appendix c. global natural gas production ( 2015 ) appendix d. u.s. natural gas imports and exports appendix e. global natural gas exporters ( 2015 ) appendix f. major global gas companies ( 2014 ) appendix g. select u.s .

statutes related to natural ga .

