on july 21 , 2010 , title viii of the dodd - frank act , the payment , clearing , and settlement supervision act of 2010 , became effective upon enactment .

title viii authorizes the federal reserve , in coordination with other federal agencies , to supervise and regulate the infrastructure that enables financial intermediaries to process and complete financial transactions .

payment , clearing , and settlement ( pcs ) activities facilitate a variety of financial transactions such as transferring payments for and completing retail purchases , foreign exchange transactions , securities transactions , and derivatives trades .

some key systems in the united states have been operated by the federal reserve banks and others by the private sector .

pcs systems serve a critical role in the financial services sector and the broader economy .

in the united states , the value of transactions for large - value payment systems amounted to $1.06 quadrillion in 2011 .

attention was drawn to the functioning of the u.s. financial system in 2008 when major financial institutions entered bankruptcy ( eg , lehman brothers ) , receivership ( eg , washington mutual ) , or were kept solvent through government assistance ( eg , aig ) .

the interconnectedness of large financial intermediaries deemed "too - big - to - fail" heightened concerns about systemic risk , which can be understood as the failure of one firm leading to system - wide disruptions .

one channel through which systemic risk can spread , as discussed in this report , is a disruption , such as the failure of a "too - big - to - fail" institution , cascading through pcs systems or activities .

aig , a major insurance company , experienced a crisis stemming from a subsidiary that was a leading underwriter of credit default swaps ( cds ) , a type of over - the - counter derivative .

cds provide protection to buyers against credit events such as an issuer's default on corporate debt obligations and structured securities .

cds had been traded bilaterally between institutions through an over - the - counter market system that regulatory authorities had criticized for its inefficiencies and lack of transparency .

the federal reserve bank of new york undertook efforts to encourage industry participants to voluntarily improve the infrastructure of the otc derivatives market in recent years .

in 2006 , alan greenspan , then - chairman of the federal reserve , reportedly said that he was appalled that people were relying on scraps of paper to record transactions , a practice which some blamed for causing a backlog of unconfirmed contracts .

prior to the dodd - frank act , various federal regulatory authorities had oversight responsibilities for certain systems or entities engaged in processing those financial transactions .

title viii reflects recommendations by the previous and current administrations to give the federal reserve explicit statutory oversight authority with respect to elements of the financial infrastructure in the united states , while also giving similar authority to the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) and commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) for certain parts of the infrastructure .

title viii introduces the term "financial market utility" ( fmu or utility ) for those multilateral systems that transfer , clear , or settle payments , securities , or other financial transactions among financial institutions ( fi ) or between a fmu and a financial institution .

title viii addresses the federal regulatory oversight of systemically important payment , clearing , and settlement ( pcs ) systems and pcs activities of financial institutions that facilitate various financial transactions .

financial transactions processed daily in the u.s. economy include payment transfers ranging from small - dollar retail purchase transactions to large - value purchases of securities ; clearing transactions for derivatives trading ; and securities settlement .

title viii regulatory powers apply specifically to those financial market utilities and pcs activities ( of financial institutions ) that are designated as systemically important by the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) , also created by the dodd - frank act .

it is notable that title viii does not consolidate or centralize authority for the approval of the formation of new utilities or pcs activities with the federal reserve or any single regulatory agency .

prior to the enactment of title viii , the federal reserve derived its oversight responsibilities for payment and settlement systems from a range of statutory responsibilities for monetary policy , banking supervision , lender of last resort , and provision of payment and settlement services .

recently , the federal reserve released a final rule regarding fmus .

on july 18 , 2012 , fsoc voted unanimously to designate eight fmus as systemically important ( see " fmus designated by the fsoc " ) .

fsoc did not designate any pcs activities as systemically important at that time .

title viii primarily addresses the regulatory framework rather than affecting the flows of funds through existing payment and settlement systems .

titlevii addresses the derivatives clearing systems and activities for otc swap transactions .

some representatives opposed title viii and struck the title governing pcs supervision from the financial reform bill that the house of representatives passed in december 2009 .

concerns held by some opponents of the title may have included a sense that the u.s. financial infrastructure was adequately supervised , or that the title might have given too much discretionary authority to the federal reserve .

other reservations may have included the view that title viii was unnecessary in light of the federal reserve's efforts to encourage firms to voluntarily strengthen infrastructure procedures in various markets , and the absence of a pcs - related breakdown in september 2008 .

s. 3497 , introduced on august 2 , 2012 , seeks to repeal title viii , stripping fsoc of its authority to designate fmus as systemically important .

this report begins by introducing the major pcs systems operating in the united states , followed by the basics of pcs systems and activities .

the report then describes the different risks , including systemic risk , that are commonly associated with pcs systems and activities .

the next part of the report discusses the oversight authority of the fmu and fi regulators that was in place prior to the enactment of the dodd - frank act , after which the report summarizes the changes made by title viii , including the new regulatory oversight authority of the fed .

the final part of the report addresses implementation of title viii by relevant agencies and the impact of title viii on fmus and fis .

the federal reserve and the private sector operate the systems that constitute the infrastructure for the processing and completion of financial transactions in the united states .

listed below are some of the major systems currently operating in the united states .

some privately - operated systems have been designated by fsoc as systemically important under title viii .

additional information regarding selected systems , including recent transaction volume levels , is set forth in an appendix to this report .

in the future , new and evolving types of financial products , transactions and instruments could lead to new payment , clearing , and settlement systems and activities .

there are other smaller or foreign - based pcs systems that fsoc did not designate as fmus in 2012 .

for example , the depository trust & clearing corporation ( dtcc ) also operates other essential , though not systemically important , private - sector systems in the united states .

these systems are a group of dtcc subsidiaries , which include euro ccp , avox and ficc among others .

some foreign - based systems provided pcs services for u.s. financial actors .

for example , the society for worldwide interbank financial telecommunication ( swift ) is an international financial messaging system headquartered in belgium with u.s. operations , and lch.clearnet is an important clearinghouse for several categories of assets .

the appendix to this report provides additional information regarding these systems .

the existing infrastructure in the united states for those activities consists of systems operated by the federal reserve through the federal reserve banks , and by the private sector .

in some cases , pcs activities are conducted primarily through one central party , such as the fed or a clearinghouse .

in other cases , activities are also conducted bilaterally through two financial institutions .

this section describes the definitions and functions of these systems and activities that may partly overlap .

the following types of systems and activities are covered by title viii: payment systems , which transfer funds electronically from one institution to another ; clearing systems ( or clearinghouses ) , which in the derivatives market often transfer credit risk to a central counterparty ( ccp ) ( clearinghouse ) from each counterparty to a trade ; and settlement systems , which complete transactions such as securities trades .

section 802 of the dodd - frank act reflects concern about risks related to pcs systems and activities .

for example , the proper functioning of the financial markets is considered dependent upon safe and efficient arrangements for the clearing and settlement of payment , securities , and other financial transactions .

although financial market utilities that conduct or support multilateral pcs activities may reduce risks for their participants and the broader financial system , such utilities may also concentrate and create new risks .

congress also found that pcs activities conducted by financial institutions present risks to the participating financial institutions and to the financial system .

congress found it necessary to enhance the regulation and supervision of utilities and pcs activities that are systemically important , in part , to reduce systemic risk and to promote safety and soundness .

further , both the bush and obama administrations addressed the risks arising from payment and settlement systems in proposing financial regulatory reforms .

in those proposals for heightened supervision by the federal reserve , the u.s. department of the treasury noted concerns about the ability of payment and settlement systems to contribute to financial crises , rather than reduce them , potentially threatening the stability of u.s. and foreign financial markets .

title viii of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act , p.l .

111-203 establishes a regulatory framework for systemically important utilities and systemically important pcs activities conducted by financial institutions .

it provides explicit statutory oversight authority to the federal reserve ( fed ) in coordination with an entity's chartering and supervisory authority , establishing a consistent framework across supervisory authorities .

the dodd - frank act also affects pcs systems and activities through title vii , the wall street transparency and accountability act of 2010 , which establishes a comprehensive regulatory framework in regard to the over - the - counter ( otc ) derivatives market and swap transactions .

title vii establishes requirements for the clearing of certain bilateral swap transactions through derivatives clearinghouses .

title vii also strengthens regulatory oversight of designated clearing entities ( registered derivatives clearing organizations and clearing agencies ) by the cftc and the sec , which are subject to the regulatory framework established in title viii .

the senate , but not the house of representatives , passed a version of the financial reform bill containing a title similar to title viii .

the house financial services committee considered but struck by amendment a similar title in mark up , prior to the house of representatives' floor consideration of the financial reform bill , h.r .

4173 .

both the version of title viii in the senate's bill and the version offered in the conference committee were modeled on proposed legislation released by the obama administration in 2009 .

during the conference committee , participants agreed to changes that enhanced the authority of the cftc and sec with respect to their supervised entities .

the changes to the relevant title gave the cftc and the sec rule - writing authority for risk management standards and excluded some of their supervised entities from definitions and federal reserve oversight .

title viii defines systemically important and systemic importance apply to a situation where the failure of or a disruption to the functioning of a financial market utility or the conduct of a pcs activity could create or increase the risk of significant liquidity or credit problems spreading among financial institutions or markets and thereby threaten the stability of the financial system of the united states .

in general , title viii defines a supervisory agency as the federal agency that has primary jurisdiction over a designated financial market utility under federal banking , securities , or commodity futures laws and means the sec with respect to a registered clearing agency , the cftc with respect to a registered derivatives clearing organization , the appropriate federal banking agency with respect to an institution described in section 3 ( q ) of the federal deposit insurance act , and the federal reserve board with respect to any other type of designated financial market utility .

fsoc promulgated final rules for title viii on july 18 , 2011 .

the rules authorized fsoc to designate financial market utilities it deemed systemically important .

fsoc determines whether an fmu is systemically important if any failure of an fmus operations could "create or increase the risk of significant liquidity or credit problems spreading among financial institutions or markets and thereby threaten the stability of the u.s. financial system. .

section 805 of the dodd - frank act provides that , except for certain entities supervised by the cftc and sec , the federal reserve by rule or order shall prescribe risk management standards governing operations of systemically important utilities and the conduct of systemically important activities by financial institutions .

on july 30 , 2012 , the federal reserve released its final rule regarding fmus .

it comprises much of the same material that was included in the proposed rules .

the final rule implements risk management standards for fmus , and standards for determining when fmus must give notice about changes to rules , procedures , or operations that would alter the nature of risks they present .

the addition of two rules , one centering on application waivers , and the other revising the list of changes that do not require notice , mark the difference between the final rule and the proposed rule .

title viii provides the cftc and the sec , respectively , with additional authority to supervise and regulate those systemically important utilities that are derivatives clearing organizations ( dcos ) and clearing agencies ( cas ) , which together are called designated clearing entities .

section 805 of the dodd - frank act authorizes the cftc and sec to prescribe regulations containing risk management standards governing the operations of designated clearing entities or the conduct of designated activities by financial institutions that each agency supervises .

although the fed may challenge such rules as insufficient , the cftc and sec may object to the council regarding the fed's determination .

the council would make the final decision upon the affirmative 2 / 3 vote of its members .

in july 2011 , the fed , cftc , and sec outlined the rulemaking governing their new authorities over dcos and cas , detailing the enhanced risk management standards these entities must follow .

that rulemaking has since been largely finalized .

for instance , the sec announced final rules on june 28 , 2012 specifying registering and review procedures for cas .

the cftc announced a final rule on april 9 , 2012 , adopting new dodd - frank statutory provisions .

the scope of title viii encompasses the infrastructure for the clearing of otc derivatives , which is governed by the regulatory framework established in title vii of the dodd - frank act .

title vii requires firms to clear certain otc derivatives , including credit default swaps , through central counterparties .

both the cftc and the sec must write various rules to implement title vii , which will apply to derivatives clearing organizations and clearing agencies supervised by those agencies .

the clearing requirements in title vii could increase the likelihood of a systemic importance designation under title viii for financial market utilities that engage in clearing otc derivatives .

those financial market utilities and pcs activities conducted by financial institutions that are designated as systemically important will be affected by additional supervision and requirements to comply with newly adopted risk management and conduct standards .

further , those designated firms could potentially be subject to increased oversight through the federal reserve's enhanced examination authority and role in enforcing compliance with applicable rules .

certain payment system infrastructures were previously subject to federal reserve or other agency oversight .

newer systems and technologies may be developed in the future to process financial transactions via the internet and by other means .

the impact on evolving technologies would depend upon the extent to which their activities fall within the scope of the supervisory framework established under the dodd - frank act and whether newer systems become systemically important .

the impact of title viii on a particular entity is likely to vary depending upon whether a financial market utility or financial institution is currently subject to federal reserve supervision , whether a system or institution has operated previously outside the scope of bank regulatory or other federal agency oversight , and whether the utility or institution will also be subject to requirements and potentially increased clearing transaction volume under title vii requirements .

the impact of title viii will also depend upon the actions of various regulators such as how broadly the financial stability oversight council applies the designation of systemic importance to financial market utilities and pcs activities of financial institutions and how stringently the fed , cftc and sec decide to set risk management rules and standards .

