section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 prohibits discrimination against people with disabilities in programs or activities receiving federal financial assistance or under any program or activity conducted by an executive agency or the u.s .

postal service .

the core requirement of section 504 is articulated in subsection ( a ) , which states: no otherwise qualified individual with a disability in the united states , as defined in section 705 ( 20 ) , shall , solely by reason of her or his disability , be excluded from the participation in , be denied the benefits of , or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance or under any program or activity conducted by any executive agency or by the united states postal service... .

the purpose of the rehabilitation act is to ensure that individuals with disabilities can be independent and fully participate in society .

the act seeks to empower individuals with disabilities by maximizing "employment , economic self - sufficiency , independence , and inclusion and integration into society , through ... the guarantee of equal opportunity. .

however , tension may arise between giving full effect to these statutory objectives and ensuring that section 504 compliance remains practicable for federal agencies and grantees .

to prove a violation of section 504 of the rehabilitation act , a plaintiff must show that ( 1 ) the program or activity is carried out by a federal executive agency or with federal funds ; ( 2 ) the plaintiff is disabled within the meaning of the rehabilitation act ; ( 3 ) he is otherwise qualified ; and ( 4 ) he was excluded from , denied the benefit of , or subject to discrimination under the program or activity .

a defendant in a section 504 suit may assert as an affirmative defense to liability that accommodating the plaintiff's disability would constitute an "undue burden. .

in 1985 , the u.s. supreme court held in alexander v. choate that a federal agency or grantee who denies an otherwise qualified plaintiff "meaningful access" to the program or benefit it provides has excluded the plaintiff from the program , denied the plaintiff its benefits , and / or discriminated against the plaintiff within the meaning of section 504 .

moreover , the court stated that to afford meaningful access to people with disabilities , a federal agency or grantee might be required to make "reasonable accommodations. .

although choate was the first case to construe the nondiscrimination prong of section 504 as requiring meaningful access , the court ruled against the plaintiffs in choate .

the plaintiffs argued that tennessee's decision to reduce the number of days of inpatient care paid for by medicaid denied medicaid recipients with disabilities meaningful access to medicaid and hospital services because they spent , on average , more days receiving inpatient care than their nondisabled peers .

the court found that despite tennessee's change in policy , tennessee continued to provide people with and without disabilities "identical" access to medicaid covered inpatient care .

accordingly , while choate remains the source of the meaningful access standard , the case illustrates that practices or policies with a disparate impact on people with disabilities do not , ipso facto , violate section 504 .

the court in choate also noted that section 504 does not require federal agencies and grantees to provide people with disabilities meaningful access to their programs and activities at the expense of their programs' integrity .

the court quoted its holding in southeastern community college v. davis , which established that section 504 does not require a federal grantee "to make 'fundamental' or 'substantial' modifications to accommodate the handicapped , [but] it may be required to make 'reasonable' ones. .

as a reflection of this jurisprudence , department of treasury regulations state that the department is not required to take actions to comply with section 504 when doing so would result in a fundamental alteration of a program or in undue financial and administrative burdens .

the department of treasury did not appeal the d.c .

circuit's decision in american council of the blind .

on remand , the district court granted the council's request for injunctive relief .

pursuant to the terms of the district court's october 3 , 2008 , injunction order , treasury is required to complete changes to each denomination no later than the date when the secretary next approves a redesign for that denomination .

on may 20 , 2010 , the bureau of engraving and printing ( bep ) within the department of treasury published a notice of proposed action identifying the accommodations that it is considering in the wake of american council of the blind .

bep stated that it will ( 1 ) develop and deploy a raised tactile feature as part of the next currency redesign ; ( 2 ) continue its practice of adding large , high - contrast numerals and different and distinct color schemes to each denomination ; and ( 3 ) implement a "supplemental currency reader program" to provide electronic currency readers to people with visual impairments .

comments on bep's proposals were due no later than august 18 , 2010 .

the american council of the blind submitted comments expressing overall satisfaction with bep's plan , particularly with its proposal to incorporate raised tactile features into u.s. currency .

however , the council had concerns with the substance of — and eligibility requirements for — the currency reader distribution program .

the council contended that interim measures , such as the proposed reader program , have a history of becoming permanent substitutes for the originally envisioned program , and , should this happen with the reader program , the treasury would fail to make u.s. currency meaningfully accessible to visually impaired individuals .

the council listed several reasons why distributing currency readers will not make currency denominations readily distinguishable to people with visual impairments .

for one , currency readers must be operated with both hands , which , the council wrote , prevents users from being able to keep their wallet safely in their hands while denominating .

in addition , bills must be fed into the devices one at a time , which can place users in the uncomfortable situation of having to publicly reveal how much money is on their person while also holding up the line behind them .

a third concern is that if a person's currency reader is damaged , lost , stolen , or experiencing a technological glitch , the user has no means of identifying currency denominations .

in light of these concerns , the council urged bep to provide specific details about the timelines for implementing the accessible features on the currency itself and establish performance specifications for devices that are distributed through the currency reader program .

the council also strongly opposed bep's suggested eligibility requirements for the currency reader program .

bep proposed to distribute readers to people who provide documentation verifying that they need a reader to accurately identify the denomination of u.s. banknotes .

this verification must be provided by a "competent authority," namely a registered nurse , licensed practical nurse , or doctor of medicine , osteopathy , or optometry .

the council asserted that this proposed definition of "competent authority" is too limiting .

it urged bep to use the definition of "competent authority" that the library of congress uses to determine who is qualified to benefit from its program for loaning library materials to the blind .

if bep adopts the library of congress's definition of competent authority , applicants for currency readers could obtain verification from a broader range of sources , including , inter alia , therapists , social workers , case workers , and rehabilitation teachers .

