the house is a chamber characterized by rules that favor decision making .

the rules , practices , and traditions of the house also favor the majority , which is normally the majority party , and allow the majority to employ procedures to bring the house relatively expeditiously to a decision on a motion , including a motion to amend ; passage of a measure ; or another question .

for the past 130 years , the house has regularly reinforced its rules to favor the majority , decision making , and efficiency .

through a number of amendments to its rules , for example , the house has given a chair discretion to postpone and cluster votes on both the house floor and in committee , and the authority to reduce the time of floor votes to 5 minutes after a 15-minute vote .

in the past 35 years , the house through its rules has also regularly increased the openness of its proceedings and operations to public view .

committees , for example , may close a meeting to the public only for four specified reasons and only after a vote in public to close the meeting .

an example of openness in operations is the annual financial audit of the house .

house practices also change over time .

they often reinforce majority control , decision making , and efficiency , but sometimes favor member participation .

use of structured rules is an example of the former ; use of amendment rosters in some committees' markups is an example of the latter .

members and leaders of both parties have questioned whether practices , while consistent with house rules , have gotten out of balance , with too much deliberation sacrificed to efficiency or electioneering .

they have made speeches , introduced resolutions , and , when in the minority , issued critiques of the house's legislative management .

practices targeted have included waivers of layover rules , use of structured and closed special rules , and waivers of committee assignment limitations .

the purpose of this report is to provide members with an analysis of house legislative rules and practices , and committee organization and procedures , that could be changed in the 112 th congress .

some analyses respond to bipartisan member concerns over the house's legislative management , others to the needs of leaders in managing such a large body .

ideas presented in this report originated from many sources , including members' resolutions to change rules , experts' and media critiques , and the authors' analysis of the house's lawmaking environment .

the first part of this report examines generally how rules changes can be effected , what forms of rules exist , and some of the implications of choices for change .

the second part examines committee organization and procedures , analyzing considerations underlying potential changes .

the third part examines house floor procedures and agreement between the chambers , again analyzing considerations underlying potential changes .

a reader might wish to select specific topics for study , after the first part , rather than read this report from beginning to end .

the authors sought to address numerous rules and practices that have been the subject of discussion in recent years , which makes a cover - to - cover reading challenging .

the authors' colleagues at the congressional research service are available to committees , members , and staff to analyze potential changes to budget procedures , administrative operations , congressional ethics , constitutional authorities , continuity , and other institutional issues .

change to legislative procedures and to committee organization in the house of representatives can be achieved in a number of ways .

the majority often includes changes in the opening - day rules resolution , but the majority leadership may bring freestanding resolutions to the house floor throughout a two - year congress .

the house , senate , or both might also exercise its rulemaking authority in statute .

the speaker's announced policies , house practices , and party rules can also be used to effect change in the house , but , not being a house rule , these approaches are not enforceable by a point of order .

a house rule or set of rules might be analyzed in a number of ways .

this section presents a few perspectives that might be useful in thinking about how to redraft a rule .

what is the balance being sought between deliberation and decision making ? .

what leader or group of members will be empowered by a change , or will the house be the decision maker ? .

will an action be allowed , forbidden , or made conditional ? .

will there be an enforcement mechanism ? .

how might party rules supplement or supplant an existing or new rule ? .

numerous house rules address the committee system , including committee and subcommittee membership , and committee jurisdiction and referral .

other house rules addressing the committee system have changed in the last few years , such as those affecting committee and subcommittee leadership tenure .

many democratic caucus and republican conference rules also govern the organization , structure , and procedures of house committees , and many party rules , in addition , supplement or even circumvent house rules to reflect , for example , the size of the majority and the political and other needs of both the majority party and its members .

appointment of members to committees is essentially a party rather than a chamber function , with the democratic steering and policy committee and the republican steering committee having primary responsibility for making their party's respective committee assignments .

with some degree of input from the minority party , the majority party has the further responsibility of determining the size and party ratio of each panel .

a member might retain throughout his or her legislative service the committee assignments that he or she initially receives , although some members subsequently seek appointment to a committee with greater subject - matter relevance to their constituency or to a more prestigious exclusive committee , a slot becoming available .

by remaining on a committee , a member accrues seniority and may eventually be elected as a subcommittee or committee chair or ranking minority member .

since each party , and the house , imposes limitations on the number of committees and subcommittees on which a member may serve , members gain expertise in the issue areas handled by their committees .

members' specialized knowledge has been viewed as one of the hallmarks of the house committee system .

waivers for additional assignments , nonetheless , are often granted on a case - by - case basis .

as the number of committees , subcommittees , and informal groups and task forces have increased , and the number of waivers and temporary assignments has expanded , the average number of assignments for members has also risen .

further , as the party caucus or conference attempts to grant member requests for specific assignments , committee sizes have increased , often to accommodate a requested assignment .

the majority party has also occasionally changed a committee's majority - minority ratio to alter the political makeup of the committee .

 ( see below , " ii .

2.3 .

number of assignments ." ) .

these developments have created problems for committees in managing their workloads .

they have given rise to concerns that members' capacity is spread too thin , that minority - party members are underrepresented , and that there are in general too many committees and subcommittees .

these developments also suggest that specialized knowledge is no longer seen as important as it formerly was within the house committee system .

some members have called for removing the decisions on committee size and ratio from the party caucus or conference , and making them decisions for the house .

others have called for strict adherence to party committee assignment limitations by not granting waivers or temporary assignments , while still others have suggested rotating committee assignments or rotating chairmanships .

some members have even suggested allowing committee sizes to be set in accommodating requests by members .

some have called for barring all select committees , while others have suggested abolishing standing committees with limited jurisdiction and a paucity of members interested in serving on them .

some have advocated more reliance on subcommittee government , while others have advocated less .

 ( see below , " ii .

2.1 .

committee sizes ," and " ii .

2.2 .

committee party ratios ." ) .

proposals relating to jurisdiction and referral can be viewed as sweeping , incremental , or cosmetic .

some members have suggested a system of more numerous committees with relatively narrow jurisdictions , while others have advocated having fewer committees with relatively broad jurisdiction .

proposals have also been put forward for house and senate committees to correspond in their jurisdiction , or to have congressional committees correlate with federal agencies , federal programs , or budget functions .

 ( see below , " ii .

4 .

committee jurisdiction and referral ." ) .

some members have suggested merely clarifying rule x ( committee jurisdictions ) by making terminology more explicit or more representative .

some have also called for codifying informal precedents and agreements in the language of rule x .

still others have recommended making rule x reflect programmatic responsibilities by using specific statutory names rather than the general terminology currently used .

some seek a more definitive listing of subject responsibilities among committees .

the majority takes the lead in all aspects of committee organization , except for the assignment of minority members to committees and the designation of minority committee leaders .

the majority takes the initiative in creating or terminating committees , and , for each committee , establishing its size and the majority - minority ratio .

each party has a process for assigning its members to committees and selecting its committee leaders .

the role and authority of subcommittees under house rules is unclear , and their treatment in individual committees varies widely .

is clarity and consistency desirable ? .

committees have both legislative and oversight jurisdiction .

the former refers to the authority of a committee to report legislation on subject matter .

the latter refers to the authority to conduct oversight on subject matter .

legislative jurisdiction generates the most conflict between committees .

committees carefully monitor legislative referrals and committee reports to ascertain any encroachment on their jurisdiction , and seek a referral whenever they believe a new measure or a reported measure has provisions that fall within their jurisdiction .

appointments to select and joint committees are discretionary with the party leader , with little guidance appearing in either house or party rules .

neither party assignment committee plays any role in approving the leader's selections .

as such , decisions may entitle the leader to reward political supporters or those who share the views of party leaders .

some select and joint committees have , or can have , important policy responsibilities .

further , although select committees are intended to be temporary , they sometimes continue for several congresses .

select committees with legislative authority have been used successfully .

some changes to the house committee structure could be made readily in preparing a rules package for the 112 th congress .

other changes that might be desired , such as increasing or decreasing the number of committees and making major shifts in jurisdiction might be done after additional study revealed the implications of the changes .

the means by which legislation is developed has become an issue in and of itself in recent congresses .

members of both parties , whether their party has been in the majority or the minority , have criticized departures from "regular order" and the development of leadership alternatives outside of and subsequent to the committee process .

 ( see also below , " iii .

2.3 .

regular order in chamber deliberations ." ) .

this section briefly explores regular order as it relates to the committee processing of legislation .

regular order related to floor consideration of legislation is examined throughout much of the balance of this report .

house rules place many requirements on committees .

these requirements , set forth principally in rules x and xi , include oversight , hearings , meetings conducted publicly in all but a few specified instances , and reporting legislation and drafting written reports thereon .

many of the requirements for written reports are set forth in rule xiii .

the speaker may also set time limits on committee action on legislation , pursuant to rule xii .

although hearings on legislation followed by a markup followed by reporting might be informally described as the regular order by which a committee considers a piece of legislation and recommends its passage to the house , a committee has a number of options within house rules for how to procedurally structure this process .

in addition , in the house , through a motion to suspend the rules , unanimous consent , or a special rule , the house may partially or completely bypass committee consideration of legislation .

both democratic and republican members of the 111 th congress have spoken about the need for "regular order" and "transparency" in the house's development and consideration of legislation , including within its committees , and some have introduced resolutions to change house rules to promote these concepts .

the foundation for members' arguments dates in part to the democrats' critique during the 109 th congress ( 2005-2006 ) of republican management of the house .

in may 2006 , then - democratic leader nancy pelosi announced the house democrats' "new house principles: a congress for all americans. .

in june 2006 , leader pelosi released the democrats' "new direction for america. .

in both documents , there were proposals or principles for regular order in the development of legislation .

one recommendation listed had implications for regular order and transparency during committee consideration of legislation: bills should be developed following full hearings and open subcommittee and committee markups , with appropriate referrals to other committees .

members should have at least 24 hours to examine a bill prior to consideration at the subcommittee level .

in speaking more recently to the american enterprise institute for public policy research about changes he believed were needed in the legislative management of the house , republican leader john a. boehner indicated: chairmen shouldn't be content to churn out flawed bills and then rely on their leadership to bail them out .

chairmen should operate with the assumption that their bills are going to be on the floor , and assume that once their bills are on the floor , they'll be subject to an open rule .

republican whip eric cantor wrote recently about the centrality of committee work: the legislative agenda ought to reflect the importance of hearings and oversight .

setting aside specific time each week for committees to meet without interruption from floor activities … would provide a protected , regular time for committees to conduct their important business .

in addition to the year - round work of the appropriations committee and its survey and investigations unit , legislative committees are already authorized by house rules to study , inform themselves , or make recommendations on matters related directly or indirectly to spending and other oversight .

these rules provisions include: general oversight authority granted all standing committees ( rule x , cl .

2 ( a ) and ( b ) ) ; a requirement for an oversight plan for each standing committee ( rule x , cl .

2 ( d ) ) ; special oversight authority granted named standing committees ( rule x , cl .

3 ) ; additional functions assigned to the appropriations committee ( rule x , cl .

4 ( a ) ) , the budget committee ( rule x , cl .

4 ( b ) ) , the oversight and government reform committee ( rule x , cl .

4 ( c ) ) , and the house administration committee ( rule x , cl .

4 ( d ) ) ; an additional function assigned to the oversight and government reform committee to make recommendations based on reports of the government accountability office ; a requirement for standing committees to review appropriations for legislation and programs within their jurisdiction ( rule x , cl .

4 ( e ) ) ; a requirement for each standing committee to submit "views and estimates" to the budget committee following the submission of the president's budget to congress ( rule x , cl .

f ) ; a requirement that each standing committee hold at least one hearing in each 120-day period on "waste , fraud , abuse , or mismanagement," one hearing in any session when a committee has "received disclaimers of agency financial statements from auditors," and one hearing whenever the government accountability office ( gao ) has identified a federal program as high risk ( rule xi , cl .

2 ( n ) , ( o ) , and ( p ) ) .

a requirement for committees' reports on legislation to include oversight findings , cost estimates , and related information ( rule xiii , cl .

3 ( c ) and ( d ) ) ; a requirement that information on unauthorized appropriations and other matters be included in reports on general appropriations measures reported from the appropriations committee ( rule xiii , cl .

3 ( f ) ) ; a requirement that a special rule be specific in precluding consideration of an amendment to strike an unfunded mandate from a measure to be considered on the floor ( rule xviii , cl .

11 ) ; restrictions on appropriations bills , such as disallowing unauthorized appropriations ( rule xxi , cl .

2 ) ; disallowing appropriations in legislative measures ( rule xii , cl .

4 ) ; a requirement for disclosing earmarks ( rule xxi , cl .

9 ) ; and a pay - go requirement ( rule xxi , cl .

10 ) .

the committee on oversight and government reform also has very broad authority over the "overall economy , efficiency , and management of government operations and activities" ( rule x , cl .

1 ( m ) ) , and may conduct investigations "without regard" to the jurisdiction of another committee ( rule x , cl .

4 ( c ) ( 2 ) ) .

it could be argued that oversight is one of the most important roles for congress .

having created regulatory agencies , also known as quasi - legislative bodies , and recognizing the need of the president to exercise his constitutional and statutory duties , congress could spend a great deal of its time conducting oversight of federal programs and activities .

given the complexity of the economy , society , and world affairs , congress also needs to gather information and knowledge congressionally — "coming together" — to understand changed circumstances .

oversight influences the implementation of laws and provides congress with the information it needs to enact new laws or amend existing laws .

committees prepare and print a variety of documents , including prints , hearings , staff reports , calendars , and activity reports .

they also prepare reports to accompany legislation reported out of committee .

issues related to committee documents include whether to require committee approval of each product ; access to , and availability of , committee products ; and the differences among the types of documents and the required contents of each .

the work of the rules committee is integral to house proceedings .

for a major , important , or controversial piece of legislation to be taken off a calendar and considered on the floor at the time the majority leadership wishes to schedule it , a special rule reported by the rules committee and approved by the house is the mechanism for accomplishing that objective .

as recently as 25 years ago , when the house considered numerous , specific authorization bills , two - thirds of legislation considered on the house floor was considered under an open rule , not by another form of special rule or by means of a motion to suspend the rules .

in recent congresses , ever fewer pieces of legislation are considered under open or even so - called modified open rules .

 ( see the explanation of different types of special rules below at " iii .

2.7 .

amendments made in order ." ) .

rules committee members are appointed by their party leadership , and the committee is often referred to as an "arm of the leadership. .

a ratio of 2-to - 1-plus - 1 , majority to minority , seems to have become entrenched in the practice of both parties .

member concerns over regular order and transparency , including sufficient time to review legislation and amendments to be considered on the house floor , might be addressed through changes to house rules and through changes in practice related to special rules .

changes could add to the house's deliberative process but slow its decision making .

changes could also make it more difficult for the majority leadership to spare , if desired , its members at least some difficult votes , which it is able to do through its control of the floor .

the rule allowing a motion to recommit before a vote on final passage has undergone two major changes in the past 15 years .

in 1995 , the republican majority changed house rules to guarantee the right of the minority to offer a motion to recommit with or without instructions , which had eroded over the course of many years under the democrats' legislative management of the house .

the former is an instruction to a committee to take an action related to the measure under consideration .

in its most common form , a motion to recommit with instructions is a last attempt by the minority to amend a measure before a vote on final passage .

the motion to recommit without instructions is an attempt to kill a measure and , if successful , would end deliberation and obviate a vote on final passage .

instructions included in a motion to recommit have included not only amendments but directions to a committee to hold hearings or take another action .

instructions have also indicated whether a committee should act "forthwith" or "promptly. .

if a motion to recommit with instructions contains an amendment to the measure under consideration , and the motion is agreed to , the amendment is immediately reported to the house for its consideration , but only if the term "forthwith" is used .

if the term "promptly" is used , the measure is returned to the named committee and further floor consideration of the measure at that time ends .

a motion to recommit with instructions must be germane and comply with other house rules and precedents .

the republican minority in the 110 th congress offered some motions to recommit with instructions using the term "promptly," and some of these motions were agreed to .

in its rules package for the 111 th congress , the democratic majority changed the rule guaranteeing the motion to recommit to allow only motions that contained instructions using the term "forthwith. .

a question raised earlier about the relationship between amendments made in order and the motion to recommit bears repeating here .

repeatedly blocked from offering its amendments in the course of the amendment process , the minority party has resorted to routinely offering motions to recommit with instructions , and it has frequently done so by using forms that are both partisan message and substantive amendment , which can result in the majority leadership pulling legislation from the floor to avoid a vote on a motion to recommit .

might a more open amendment process reduce the emphasis the minority gives the motion to recommit ? .

the house considers a very large number of bills and resolutions each week under a procedure called suspension of the rules .

a single motion suspends all of the rules of the house and passes a measure .

when recognized by the speaker for the purpose of making the motion , the member , normally a committee or subcommittee chair , states: "i move to suspend the rules and pass [the measure]. .

in exchange for consideration of a measure by this procedure , the house limits debate to 40 minutes , prohibits floor amendments , and requires a two - thirds vote for passage .

the motion is in order on mondays , tuesdays , and , since the 108 th congress , wednesdays .

both democratic caucus and republican conference rules allow the speaker to decide what measures to consider by the suspension procedure , but contain guidelines for the speaker's consideration .

both parties disallow under suspension of the rules consideration of a measure that was opposed on reporting by more than one - third of a committee and that breaches a cost ceiling .

the democratic caucus sets that ceiling at an authorization of $100 million , while the republican conference sets it at an increase of 10% in spending .

members might ask whether these guidelines and perhaps others should be made rules of the house ? .

during the 109 th congress , democrats in their critique of republican's management of the house said about suspension of the rules: "the suspension calendar [sic] should be restricted to non - controversial legislation , with minority - authored legislation scheduled in relation to the party ratio in the house. .

republican whip eric cantor most recently proposed reform of suspension's use so that the house no longer considers "expressions of appreciation and recognition," and spends just one day a month on naming public buildings .

republican leader boehner suggested appreciation and recognition be handled through members' special - order and one - minute speeches rather than by legislation .

the house in 1995 banned commemorative legislation , defining commemoration as "recognition" for a "specified period of time. .

the house , however , has allowed under suspension of the rules numerous commemorative - like resolutions , containing language such as "the house supports the goals and ideals of...." it has also recognized groups' and individuals' accomplishments and other events , anniversaries , and achievements .

the house could review the operation of this rule and consider further restrictions , as , for example , the republican leaders suggested .

members in their representational capacity , however , like the opportunity to sponsor a resolution expressing appreciation or recognition and to speak for it in committee and on the floor , despite time and resources this legislation consumes .

might there be other ways to reclaim floor time from measures considered under the suspension procedure than cutting off members' resolutions or as an alternative to special orders and one - minutes ? .

rather than considering measures involving appreciation and recognition under suspension of the rules , consider them by unanimous consent , with the proponent asking unanimous consent to pass the measure and unanimous consent to address the house for some period of time , such as 2-5 minutes , and with other members speaking under a reservation .

as with one - minute speeches , make time for the consideration of measures involving appreciation and recognition by unanimous consent available at the speaker's discretion on any day of the week .

alternately , provide a different form of suspension of the rules for measures involving appreciation and recognition — 10 minutes of debate , no floor amendments , passage by voice vote .

make such motions in order only on mondays .

under any unanimous consent or suspension format , require members to obtain house consideration within 30 calendar days of introduction of such a measure for the measure to be in order .

have "official objectors" from each party review such measures and alert their leadership to any problematic measure .

if committee consideration of such measures is to continue , require committees to adopt rules for expeditious consideration of these measures .

on a different aspect of measures brought up under the suspension procedure , both democratic and republican leadership in the majority have scheduled controversial or at least important measures for consideration under suspension of the rules procedure , perhaps to obtain a test vote .

it forces the house and its members to make a decision where the only opportunity is to vote for or against the motion .

would it be desirable to prevent controversial or important measures from being considered under the suspension of the rules procedure ? .

who might decide if a measure is "controversial" or "important" ? .

should the speaker continue to be solely responsible for determining which measures might be considered under the suspension of the rules procedure ? .

should the chair and ranking minority member of the committee or committees with jurisdiction need to concur in a decision to schedule a measure under the suspension procedure ? .

should there be a majority or bipartisanship leadership team deciding ? .

should the majority caucus or conference decide ? .

the house formerly might have taken two votes as part of considering legislation under the suspension of the rules procedure .

the first vote — a demand for a second under former rule xxviii , clause 2 — was intended to "prevent consumption of the time of the house by forcing consideration of undesirable propositions...." if the second failed on a majority vote , the house did not then debate and vote on the motion to suspend the rules on the measure .

if the house now wishes to consider controversial or major legislation under suspension of the rules procedures , it could consider having a new two - step procedure for motions concerning such legislation , with a procedural vote first on whether to consider a measure under suspension of the rules and then the existing procedure for debate and voting on the motion .

a two - step procedure could prove to be more of an inconvenience than a contribution to management of the house's agenda , but it might be one way to respond to occasionally scheduled controversial or important legislation under the suspension of the rules procedure .

house rule xx , clause 2 ( a ) is clear: "… the minimum time for a record vote or quorum call by electronic device shall be 15 minutes. .

 ( emp h asis added. ) .

yet , there has been heightened institutional and partisan attention to the duration of votes conducted by electronic device — and nearly every vote is conducted in this manner — since 1987 when the democratic speaker held a vote open for what the republican minority considered an inordinate amount of time , alleging the duration affected the outcome .

while most attention has been paid to trying to have members cast their votes in 15-17 minutes , most controversies have arisen over when the presiding officer has announced the final result of a vote — it has been alleged too early in some instances and too late in others .

speaker thomas s. foley first addressed the duration of votes in the speaker's announced policies in the 102 nd congress ( 1991-1993 ) , exhorting members to head to the floor "promptly" when the bells indicate a vote is underway , and indicating that members in the chamber seeking to vote would not be disenfranchised .

all speakers since have included , in the speaker's biennial announcements of policies , guidance to members and the chair on voting .

controversies have still occasionally arisen where individual members have believed they were prevented from voting .

conversely , the most heated controversies have arisen when a presiding officer has been alleged to have held a vote open , or to have closed a vote at a specific juncture , to change the vote's expected outcome .

in recent congresses , two events have stood out .

first , largely in response to the republican leadership's action in 2003 of holding open a vote on the medicare prescription drug program for approximately three hours , democrats proposed holding votes open only for 15-17 minutes .

"a new direction for america" contained a specific recommendation: floor votes should be completed within 15 minutes , with the customary 2-minute extension to accommodate members' ability to reach the house chamber to cast their votes .

no vote shall be held open to manipulate the outcome .

when democrats organized the house in the 110 th congress , they included in their rules package an amendment to rule xx , clause 2 to add a sentence: "a record vote by electronic device shall not be held open for the sole purpose of reversing the outcome of such vote. .

this sentence was the subject of numerous parliamentary inquiries and several points of order in the 110 th congress .

late in the 110 th congress , in response to one democratic presiding officer's decision to end a vote at a particular juncture , the house subsequently approved the creation of a select committee to investigate the possibility of "irregularities" in the conduct of that vote .

the investigation resulted in a recommendation in the house that the rules change be repealed .

the select committee to investigate the voting irregularities of august 2 , 2007 , in its unanimously adopted report , indicated that the change was made with a "noble intent," but it was "difficult to enforce" and a "catalyst for raw anger. .

in adopting its rules for the 111 th congress , the house repealed the sentence .

the house and senate must agree to exactly the same legislative measure before it can be presented to the president for his signature or veto .

while some measures are passed by one chamber and then passed by the second chamber exactly as they passed the first chamber , clearing such measures for presentation to the president , these measures are usually noncontroversial , such as those naming a post office or federal building .

in most instances , the house and senate pass legislation that differs , whether slightly or in important ways .

the chambers then normally reach agreement , and meet the constitutional requirement for the same measure to have passed both chambers before presentation , through amendments between the houses or conference or a combination of both procedures .

it has become house practice to consider senate amendments , and house amendments thereto , and conference reports pursuant to special rules .

members' concerns over regular order and transparency , including sufficient time to review amendments and conference agreements , might be addressed through rules and practice changes .

in the rules package for the 107 th congress ( 2001-2002 ) , the house administration committee's oversight of the engrossment and enrollment of measures and their presentation to the president was transferred to the clerk of the house .

there have been two incidents since then that called into question congressional management of the enrollment process .

the first involved the deficit reduction act of 2005 , which included a provision passed in a different form by the house and senate .

the provision was apparently changed in the senate enrollment .

a case challenging the law on constitutional grounds based on this discrepancy was ultimately dismissed .

in the second incident , the enrolled version of h.r .

2419 , the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , was sent to the president with title iii not included .

president george w. bush vetoed the measure , and congress overrode the veto ( p.l .

110-234 ) .

congress then passed h.r .

6124 , which contained all of the titles that should have been included in h.r .

2419 , and in addition repealed p.l .

110-234 .

president bush vetoed the new bill , and congress again overrode the veto ( p.l .

110-246 ) .

the house could consider returning authority for the engrossment and enrollment of measures to the house administration committee or could strengthen oversight over the clerk's management of this activity or , since no additional problems have come to light , leave existing relationships in place .

the house , its leadership , or the house administration committee could also require additional reporting from the clerk on the engrossment and enrollment of measures , or , since no additional problems have come to light , leave existing reporting in place .

as a presidential candidate , barack obama stated: "when there's a bill that ends up on my desk as president , you the public will have five days to look online and find out what's in it before i sign it , so that you know what your government's doing. .

there has been commentary about the president honoring his campaign promise , about what the promise has meant or how it has been implemented , about the contribution this action could make to transparency in the legislative process , and about the efficacy of posting measures after congressional action has been completed .

once a measure has been presented to the president , he has 10 days , sundays excluded , in which to sign or veto the measure , and he may pocket veto a measure under certain circumstances when congress is not in session .

congress can almost assuredly not place any controls on the president's exercise of his constitutional authority related to waiting to act on a measure until a certain number of days after presentation .

congress can , however , control the amount of time after it clears legislation ( completes action ) and before it presents a measure to the president .

in some instances , it presents measures the same day that congressional action is completed , for example , presenting a new continuing resolution when an existing one is about to expire .

on other occasions , it can delay presentation for days or weeks .

presentation on a rapid or slower schedule might be dictated in part by considerations of public sentiment , either preempting further public debate with a quick presentation or allowing public pressure for signature to build with a slower presentation .

from president obama's inauguration on january 20 , 2009 , through april 30 , 2010 , he was presented 162 bills and joint resolutions .

from the time congress cleared legislation until the president's signature or one veto , the president acted , on average , after 13.3 days .

if relatively minor bills are excluded — those naming post offices and other federal buildings , commemorating or honoring people or events , conveying or exchanging federal land , or approving nominations to the smithsonian board of regents — the president was presented 102 bills and joint resolutions , and acted , on average , 9.0 days after a measure was cleared by congress .

excluding relatively minor bills , the time that elapsed from congressional clearance to presentation was 4.1 days , and the time that elapsed from presentation to presidential action was 4.9 days .

some major bills that were signed more rapidly , however , included h.r .

3590 , patient protection and affordable care act ; h.r .

3548 , worker , homeownership , and business assistance act of 2009 ; h.r .

627 , credit card accountability responsibility and disclosure act of 2009 ; and h.r .

2 , children's health insurance program reauthorization act of 2009 .

if congress wished to ensure a specific period for public review of legislation that it has cleared , it could require that an enrolled measure be posted online for a minimum number of days before it is presented to the president .

if both chambers chose to establish a minimum number of days after clearance that an enrolled measure would be available online for public review , there could be consistency .

if the house but not the senate chose to act , the house could ensure that a minimum number of days of public review would be available for house - numbered measures .

the house could establish a minimum number of days of public review by amending its rules , adopting a standing order , or including a provision in the speaker's policies .

