u.s. national security underpins the system in which americans live .

national security is essential to an environment and geographical space in which people can reside without fear .

it consists , first , of physical security on both the international and domestic sides .

this includes protection from threats external to the country and safety in the homeland .

these generally are accomplished through hard power and homeland security efforts .

second , it consists of economic security — the opportunity and means for people to provide for their own well being under an economic system that is vibrant , growing , and accessible .

third , u.s. national security involves outreach through soft power in an attempt to win the "hearts and minds" of people across the globe .

soft power complements hard power , and , in cases , may substitute for it .

also , the myriad links between governments , businesses , and people across national borders means that american security increasingly depends on countries and activities in far flung places on the globe .

traditionally , the economy entered into the national security debate through four issues: the defense industrial base , base closures and program cuts , international economic sanctions , and export controls .

these issues still garner much of the attention from the vantage point of the military .

from the point of view of the nation as a whole , however , economic security takes on a broader meaning .

this report examines the role of the economy in national security from both macroeconomic and microeconomic points of view .

the macroeconomic issues center on the budget and deficit reduction .

the microeconomic issues focus on providing for the general well - being of the people and in supporting other components of national security .

this report also examines the major sources of long - term economic growth and progress and policies that affect them .

it further addresses the coordination of policies among nations , particularly the g - 20 , and foreign policies that affect human rights , the development of democracy , and u.s. economic assistance .

this broad review of economics and national security illustrates how disparate parts of the u.s. economy affect the security of the nation and that security is something achieved not only by military means but by the whole of the american economy and how it performs .

in national security , the economy is both an enabler and a constraint .

the economic issues related to national security are both broad and complex .

in order to keep this report to a manageable length , this study takes the president's 2010 national security strategy as a beginning construct and largely limits the analysis to the issues raised there .

the purpose of this report is to provide an overview of the economic contributors to national security as well as to furnish links to further resources .

issues , such as reducing the federal budget deficit , immigration , international trade , or innovation , are related to national security in ways that are too numerous and complex to address fully here .

further information can be found in the crs reports cited or can be obtained by contacting the crs analysts indicated .

in the united states , the renewed public debate over national security appears to be generated primarily by three global changes .

the first is the nature of the external threat to physical security — the rise of terrorism and militant islam .

the second is the aftermath of the global financial crisis , particularly the large federal budget deficit and slow rate of recovery .

the third is the growing presence of emerging nations , such as china , india , and brazil , and the shift of economic power toward them .

these changes have created gaps and trade - offs that arguably are undermining the sense of security of americans .

some may say , "what good is protection from a future threat , when i am unemployed because my job just went to china ? .

others may say , "what good is a high salary , if i am dead in a terrorist attack ? .

this debate over national security reaches deep into the fiber of american society .

it is not merely political theater , and it is receiving a fillip by the weakened u.s. economy .

a vibrant , growing , and dominant economy can hide a multitude of problems .

even though wealth and economic means cannot guarantee u.s. security , it can buy a comfortable sort of insecurity .

the economic issue of the day now centers on what measures to take to return the economy to its long - term growth path and reduce the gap between the potential and actual levels of u.s. gross domestic product .

if the economy were to grow faster , many of the constraints on the federal budget would be eased .

there are two major schools of thought on this matter .

the keynesian approach to growth is to continue government deficit spending through the recession and initial recovery phase in order to offset lower consumption by households and reduced levels of investment by businesses .

when the economy recovers , the deficit can be reduced .

the supply side approach is to cut the federal budget deficit now because deficits may discourage investment by causing uncertainty about future policy changes that will be needed to restore fiscal balance .

the supply side approach also attempts to keep taxes on entrepreneurs low in order to induce them to invest more in productive capacity and create more jobs .

each approach recognizes that the long - term security of the nation depends greatly on having a vibrant and growing economy .

congress plays a major role in each element of national security .

whether it be policies dealing with the military , economy , budget , education , economic growth , technology , international relations , or opening markets abroad , congressional action is essential .

not only does congress provide funding for these elements of national security , but it provides oversight , defines the scope of u.s. action , and provides a crucible in which u.s. policies are debated and often determined .

congress allocates the resources to respond to national security threats , and in so doing it plays a part in determining the relative strength of hard and soft power options and the roles individual agencies will play .

for several decades following world war ii , providing national security was conceptually simple .

the united states maintained the world's preeminent military backed by the world's largest economy and led the western world by providing power - based leadership , serving as a beacon for democratic values , and maintaining a system of military alliances .

the conventional wisdom was that washington could provide security for the nation primarily by keeping soviet bombs at bay and communist ideology from creeping across the planet .

the economy always was there , both to fund the military and underpin the provision of economic security for households .

policies for economic growth and issues such as unemployment were viewed as domestic problems largely separate from considerations of national security .

as the world begins the second decade of the twenty - first century , the united states still has a preeminent military , large economy , strong alliances , and democratic values .

however , the economy has come more into play because the country has long been accustomed to pursuing a "rich man's" approach to national security strategy .

the united states could field an overwhelming fighting force and combine it with economic power and leadership in global affairs to bring to bear far greater resources than any other country against any threat to the nation's security .

the world , however , has changed , and with it so have the challenges of providing u.s. national security .

setting aside questions concerning the size , composition , and capability of the u.s. military , the economy enters into the debate on national security through three overlapping roles .

the first is the economy as the source of funds , materiel , and personnel for the military .

the second is the economy as a provider of economic security and well - being for americans .

the third is the economy as the foundation for interaction among countries and of building shared or competing interests .

this includes the flow of wealth generated by trade that allows countries to build their military and financial power , in particular the steady flow of oil revenues into the middle east and the large trade surplus by china .

it also includes u.s. legitimacy and resource availability as it strives to help other countries develop and to foster human rights and democracy abroad .

in the united states , the domestic economic policy debate is divided into two major areas .

the first centers on how to divide the existing economic pie or how to allocate existing economic resources among competing interests .

this debate focuses on the macroeconomy , specifically on the level of the federal budget and its deficit ; on the ability of the economy to fund both national defense and social programs and on issues such as savings , investment , and international trade .

this deficit issue involves both cost and opportunity cost — both the size of the budget and the alternatives foregone by allocating funds to one use instead of another .

it also revolves around whether current costs should be shifted to future generations by borrowing today to cover the federal budget deficit and expecting future taxpayers to repay the resulting debt .

the second issue is how to enlarge the existing pie or how to increase economic growth and productivity in order to generate more resources for all programs .

growth depends both on sufficient aggregate demand by households , businesses , and government and by growing and productive supply .

over the long - term , the growth of supply depends on the microeconomic side of the economy and includes science and technology , education , business methods , natural resource use , and other elements of the economy that generate economic activity and progress .

figure 1 provides a simplified overview of how the economy enters into national security considerations .

national security is sought through a combination of hard power , soft power , and economic opportunity .

the economy underpins each of these by providing funding , human and other resources , capital , products , and an appealing culture and economic model .

the operation of the economy , in turn , relies on government fiscal , monetary , and industrial policies ; on the quality and quantity of human resources ; on progress in science and technology ; and on the global economy through trade and capital flows .

a microeconomic issue that equally falls into the macroeconomic realm is the rate of economic growth of the whole economy .

the rate of economic growth stems from both demand and supply .

on the demand side are macroeconomic policies that affect total household consumption , business investment , government spending , and the balance of trade .

the above discussion of the federal budget and total military expenditures is part of the demand side of the economic debate .

on the supply side are microeconomic policies that affect labor productivity , innovation , and the efficient use of labor and capital .

the government policies that affect the supply side of the economy range from taxes to education , to research and development , and to immigration .

in the following analysis , we exclude discussion of tax policy , an important component of u.s. industrial competitiveness and entrepreneurship but beyond the purview of this report .

instead , we focus on those items that have been addressed in the 2010 national security strategy of the united states and tend to be more directly related to u.s. national security .

on a global basis , the importance of economic growth to national security was demonstrated in the 2008-2009 global financial crisis .

in february 2009 , director of national intelligence dennis c. blair stated in a congressional hearing that instability in countries around the world caused by the current global economic crisis , rather than terrorism , was the primary near - term security threat to the united states .

the slowdown in growth was causing instability in governments , and he feared that u.s. allies and friends would not be able to fully meet their defense and humanitarian obligations .

he also saw the prospect of increased refugee flows and a questioning of american economic and financial leadership in the world .

while this report focuses on the sources of u.s. economic growth , these factors operate to promote growth in other countries as well .

the u.s. economy and national security depends greatly on what happens in countries and economies in the world at large and on the financial impact of trillions of dollars that flow through international foreign exchange markets each day .

the global financial crisis demonstrated strongly how interconnected the economies of the world have become and how quickly conditions in one market can be transmitted across the u.s. economy and across the oceans to europe , asia , and latin america .

imbalances in trade and capital flows , undervalued exchange rates , and government intervention into markets all can affect wealth accumulation , economic strength , and military power .

u.s. national security also is affected by perceptions of the united states in other countries and by ideas and philosophies that drive policy in nations around the world .

some analysts have identified the clash of civilizations as a key source of conflict , while threats posed by non - state , militant islam terrorists command more and more military , diplomatic , and law enforcement resources .

u.s. security may be enhanced by targeting causes of unrest abroad , particularly poverty , human rights abuses , and dictatorial governments .

improving human rights , especially the status of women , has been shown to go hand - in - hand with the development of democracy .

the nexus between democracy and peace , though frayed , still seems to exist , even though experience has shown that democracy cannot simply be parachuted into a country without supporting cultural and political institutions .

in these respects , u.s. economic assistance and diplomatic outreach come into play .

in this section of this report , we address the international economic side of national security by focusing on six large issues .

they are instability in the global economy , savings and exports , opening markets abroad , increasing domestic demand in china , building cooperative arrangements with international partners , deterring threats to the international financial system , and human rights and democracy .

many argue that a key long - term factor in ensuring u.s. national security is to help create a world in which citizens in all countries are afforded basic human rights and have a voice in their governments through democratic means .

realpolitik , however , often requires that the united states deal with certain dictatorial governments for the lack of better alternatives .

u.s. economic assistance and cooperation in areas such as science and technology are intended to achieve a number of u.s. goals related to political and human conditions in foreign countries that affect u.s. national security .

as is evident from the topics covered above , economics enters into national security considerations through a variety of ways .

the economy plays a dual role of providing the resources to help ensure the physical security of americans and of generating employment and income to help ensure the economic security of households .

the economy also provides a model , culture , and other elements of soft power helpful in winning the hearts and minds of people around the world .

there is scarcely an economic policy issue before the congress that does not affect u.s. national security .

likewise , there is scarcely a national security policy issue that does not affect the economy .

