this report describes and analyzes how u.s. policy towards the multilateral development banks ( mdbs ) is made and implemented by the executive branch and congress .

the united states is the largest , or one of the largest , stockholders in several mdbs , including the world bank and four smaller regional development banks: the african development bank ( afdb ) , the asian development bank ( asdb ) , the european bank for reconstruction and development ( ebrd ) , and the inter - american development bank ( idb ) .

making and implementing u.s. policy towards the mdbs is a complex process in which both the executive branch and congress play major roles .

both share the responsibility for u.s. participation in the mdbs , but each branch has primary control over different parts of the decision - making process .

on behalf of the president , the secretary of the treasury is responsible for negotiating with other countries about mdb policies and prospective funding agreements and for managing the day - to - day conduct of u.s. participation in the banks .

congress , for its part , has the ultimate authority over the level of u.s. financial commitments to the multilateral agencies , the general framework for u.s. policy , and the criteria that govern u.s. participation in these institutions .

congress has authority to set the terms for u.s. participation at the mdbs — including how u.s. executive directors shall vote on specific types of loans — and to determine whether the united states will participate in and contribute money towards new mdb funding plans and whether it will support amendments to the mdbs' articles of agreement or other basic changes in their organization .

these authorities give congress a major role in the policy process concerning u.s. participation in the mdbs .

the authority of congress in this area is less extensive than is its authority over u.s. government programs , since it cannot earmark funds or direct the mdbs to approve or disapprove loans for certain countries or purposes .

nevertheless , because it has an authoritative and independent role in the u.s. policy process , the influence of congress in this area is significant .

several committees have responsibility for legislative functions affecting u.s. participation in the mdbs .

the senate committee on foreign relations ( sfrc ) and house committee on financial services ( hfsc ) have jurisdiction over mdb authorizing legislation .

on the senate panel , the subcommittee on international development and foreign assistance , economic affairs , and international environmental protection has responsibility for mdb legislation .

on the hfsc , the subcommittee on monetary policy and trade has similar jurisdiction for mdb concerns .

however , in both the senate and house , the leadership of the full committees has maintained an active interest in mdb and imf issues and they often now also receive a good deal of attention at the full committee level .

the house and senate appropriations committees deal with mdb issues primarily through their respective subcommittees on state , foreign operations , and related programs .

in sum , congress has about a dozen staff on the various committees , plus some staff in the personal offices of a few members , who monitor the mdbs and facilitate the legislative process for related legislation .

issues involving the mdbs and imf are generally only one of many subjects within their areas of responsibility .

in recent decades , congress has had difficulty enacting legislative proposals relating to foreign affairs through freestanding legislation , and the administration and the leadership on both sides in both chambers have preferred that such measures be included as riders on "must pass" legislation .

mdb legislation was also the subject of partisan controversy during the 1970s and 1980s .

only once since 1980 has congress enacted legislation to authorize u.s. participation in an mdb funding plan through regular order as a separate bill .

this means , among other things , that public debate in congress about mdb issues is often limited and policy initiatives are sometimes inserted into mdb legislation at the subcommittee or committee level with limited broader congressional review .

on a few occasions , authorizations for some regional mdbs have been approved in one or the other chamber as part of a compromise package of legislation approved by unanimous consent .

more often , though , mdb and imf authorizations have been enacted as amendments to larger and more comprehensive bills — in many instances , omnibus or year - end supplemental appropriations legislation — that are likely to pass because they contain funding for important or popular programs .

on at least three occasions , mdb authorization bills were enacted by reference , without the actual text of their legislation appearing in the bill that was debated and passed by the house and senate .

in 1981 , congress started inserting its policy directives on the mdbs and imf in one statute , the international financial institutions act ( ifi act ) , rather than including them separately ( as had been the prior practice ) to the original enabling legislation for each bank .

the ifi act has over 25 titles that specify policy goals or requirements for u.s. participation in the ifis .

some provisions are still included in the original mdb membership acts , however , or in other freestanding legislation .

unless congress passes legislation to authorize such actions , the united states cannot join or agree to participate in any mdb funding programs or vote for any changes in fundamental mdb rules and procedures .

the bretton woods agreements act ( bwaa ) , which authorized the united states to join the imf and world bank , set the model for u.s. participation in all mdbs .

it states that "[u]nless congress by law authorizes such action , neither the president nor any person or agency shall on behalf of the united states" propose any changes in the u.s. quota in the imf , subscribe any additional shares of stock ( i.e. , make a financial commitment ) in the world bank , agree to any amendments to the articles of agreement of the bank or fund , make any loans to the fund or bank , or approve any distribution of gold by the imf .

the bwaa also states that no u.s .

governor or alternate governor at the bank may vote for an increase in the capital stock of the bank , if this would require additional subscriptions by the united states , unless congress authorizes such action by law .

this requirement is not included in the legislation enabling u.s. participation in the other mdbs and the administration has not complied with this requirement for some time .

over the years , congress has enacted into law directives ( many of them overlapping ) requiring the secretary of the treasury to instruct u.s. executive directors to take specific actions within the mdbs .

it has required the secretary to consult with other countries about possible coordinated action within the mdbs on specific policy proposals or issues .

it has also directed the secretary to consult with the relevant committees before u.s. executive directors may vote to support certain kinds of initiatives .

many of these directives require that the u.s. representatives at the mdbs oppose many kinds of loans .

these include , for example , loans to countries whose governments violate internationally recognized human rights , expropriate property owned by american investors without adequate compensation , support international terrorism , or fail to cooperate in the suppression of illegal drug trafficking or trafficking in persons .

they also include directives that the u.s. representatives oppose loans for the production of certain agricultural or mineral products that are in oversupply in world markets and compete with u.s. output , and loans for education or healthcare projects where poor people would be charged a user fee for basic services .

directives have also been enacted requiring the u.s. representatives at the mdbs to oppose , subject to various requirements , mdb loans to serbia , burma , zimbabwe , sudan , belarus , and sri lanka , and to oppose participation by cuba or the palestinian liberation organization in the mdbs .

generally , the united states abstains in order to show opposition , though it may cast a negative vote for emphasis in particular situations .

others also require the administration to pursue certain goals or to advocate particular policies in the mdbs .

these can include efforts to include measures relating to workers rights , greater emphasis on the needs of the poor in various situations , more efforts to restructure debts of impoverished countries , increased emphasis on integration of women in the development process , or more attention or increased mdb assistance to countries such as haiti , east timor , tibet , cambodia , mongolia and ukraine .

the authorization and appropriations committees generally hold hearings on the administration's funding requests for the mdbs .

this enables administration witnesses to explain why they believe congress should provide the resources necessary to fund u.s. participation in mdb funding plans .

hearings also provide committee members with opportunities to raise issues of concern where legislation or changes in u.s. policy might be needed .

public witnesses are frequently invited , particularly for authorization hearings , to present additional views .

these hearings provide public information about u.s. policy and the mdbs , which might not otherwise be readily available .

in many instances , because congress now rarely discuss mdb issues in floor debates , these hearings serve de facto as the major forum for congressional discussions about mdb issues and u.s. policy towards the multilateral banks .

congress requires the administration to submit periodic reports on particular topics relating to the mdbs .

the information provided by these reports helps congress exercise oversight over u.s. policy and the mdb program .

before 1998 , information about the activities of the mdbs was often difficult to get .

through reporting requirements , congress required the administration to make information about mdb operations and policies available to the public and to pay attention to particular congressional concerns .

in 1945 , congress required in the bwaa that the administration submit annual reports via the nac on the operations and policies of the international financial institutions .

in subsequent years , congress added requirements that the administration explain how the u.s. executive directors voted on several issues , steps taken in pursuit of particular policy goals , and other concerns .

without information provided by executive agencies , congress has difficulty exercising effective oversight of u.s. policy and the ifis themselves .

however , if the administration concludes that a reporting requirement is too burdensome , it may cease making the report .

there is often little , particularly for the authorizing committees , that congress can do to force a resumption , short of cutting funding for mdb programs .

by 1992 , congress had added many detailed provisions to the annual nac reporting requirement , and the administration decided — on grounds that the burden was too heavy compared to available staff resources — to stop doing the nac report .

in 1998 , congress simplified the nac reporting requirement , dropping the detailed provisions and requiring instead a general review of the operations of the mdbs and the success and goals of u.s. policy .

the most recent reporting , covering fy2014 , discusses current international economic issues , the roles played by the ifis in meeting those challenges , and the goals of u.s. policy .

with the resumption of the nac report , it now appears that the administration is meeting all the major ifi reporting requirements enacted by congress .

the internet has had an important impact on effectiveness of these reporting requirements .

until recently , most required reports were sent to the relevant committees in typescript form and the committees usually filed them without giving them broader circulation .

in recent years , though , treasury has begun posting most the required reports on mdbs and the imf on its website , along with information about the way u.s. representatives have voted on recent loans and policy statements on a variety of issues .

this , together with the fact that the imf and mdbs are much more transparent in their policies and operations , has done much to help congress and the public to better understand the mdbs and u.s. policy towards them .

the mdbs fund their market - rate ( non - concessional ) loan operations through the sale of bonds in world capital markets .

those bonds are backed by the subscribed capital of their member countries and this backing enables the mdbs to borrow and relend money at attractive rates .

bond purchasers need to be confident that the banks' member countries will make good their obligations if the need should arise .

as a member country , the united states subscribes a certain share of the capital stock of each mdb , and its subscription helps provide backing for the banks' borrowings .

only a small portion ( 3% to 5% ) of a new subscription to mdb capital is paid to the bank .

most of the cost of the new shares is subscribed as callable capital .

the mdbs use it to help back their borrowing in world capital markets but member countries do not normally need to pay this portion of their subscription cost to them .

mdbs may call on their members to pay in callable capital only if the bank has become bankrupt and — having exhausted all other assets — it still needs money to pay their creditors .

the mdbs have triple - a creditor status and most analysts believe the likelihood that they will go bankrupt is quite small .

nevertheless , u.s. subscription to mdb callable capital are a contingent liability ; the question is whether and how the u.s. budget should acknowledge that liability .

until fy1982 , congress appropriated , in annual installments consistent with the funding plan , the full amount of money needed to pay the purchase price of the u.s. shares .

since fy1982 , congress has appropriated funds only to cover the paid - in share of new mdb capital subscriptions .

some have questioned how the united states handles through its national budget the contingent liability associated with subscriptions to mdb callable capital .

for example , in 2004 , then - director of the congressional budget office ( cbo ) douglas holtz - eakin told congress that the current budgetary treatment for u.s. financial commitments to the various ifis does not recognize the magnitude of those commitments in a consistent fashion .

he noted that the financial backing and budgetary treatment for the ifis differs for each institution .

he said that congress might want to consider whether all these institutions should be treated alike and whether future efforts to better account for the risks associated with u.s. involvement in these institutions should address past contributions or only those subscribed for future years .

congress may want to consider whether money needs to be appropriated to cover such possibilities .

congress might also want to consider whether its current budgetary treatment of the contingent risk from mdb callable capital is sufficient or whether it might be changed .

such considerations are limited to the mdb non - concessional lending windows .

in contrast , the concessional lending windows at the mdbs do not use similar systems of guarantees ; all u.s. contributions to the concessional lending windows are all paid directly to the institution .

