title ix of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act deals with investor protection and securities regulation .

within that general rubric , the title contains a very broad range of provisions .

parts of title ix address aspects of the securities markets that are commonly viewed as directly involved in the financial crisis , such as credit ratings and securitization .

in developing the legislation , however , congress also addressed issues not directly related to the financial crisis .

in particular , the madoff and stanford ponzi schemes , discovered in late 2008 and early 2009 , raised questions about the quality of regulation by the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) .

as a result , numerous provisions in title ix address the sec's performance and resources .

other key provisions deal with the duty of care that investment industry professionals owe to their clients and mechanisms by which shareholders can exert more effective control over corporate management .

this report provides brief summaries of selected provisions in title ix .

it attempts to include those provisions that create new sec authority , that were controversial during the legislative process , or that appear likely to have far - reaching consequences for the regulation of securities markets .

among the provisions omitted are sections making marginal enhancements to sec authority in particular areas of securities law .

numerous such provisions , which were generally included at the request of the sec and appear to make incremental changes in law and regulation , are not included in the interest of flow and brevity .

credit rating agencies took a large share of the blame for the financial crisis .

they assigned triple - a ratings to thousands of complex subprime mortgage - backed bonds that plunged in value when the housing boom stalled , triggering uncertainty about the true value of those securities and contributing to market - wide panic .

several distinct approaches to rating agency reform were considered: stricter regulation by the sec , to ensure that conflicts of interest ( eg , between the rating and sales operations of the businesses ) did not compromise the integrity or accuracy of ratings ; enhanced accountability through private litigation , by lowering the pleading standard for damage claims against rating agencies based on losses attributable to faulty ratings ; reducing the significance of ratings in the securities marketplace by removing references to ratings in law and regulation , in order to remove any hint of government imprimatur ; and increasing transparency , by requiring rating agencies to disclose information about their methods and models , and about the facts underlying the rating , to allow investors to perform independent evaluations of securities .

the first two approaches are somewhat at odds with the third — the first two implicitly assume that ratings will remain a critical tool for investment decisions and seek to improve their accuracy , while the third considers them inherently fallible , and views any implicit or explicit government endorsement of ratings as undermining market discipline .

the fourth approach in a sense bridges the gaps between the others .

in dodd - frank , congress adopted all these approaches .

the asset securitization process , where home mortgages or other loans are sold by the original lenders , pooled , and resold to bond investors , produced the assets that came to be called "toxic" during the crisis .

losses in value accruing to mortgage - backed securities , together with uncertainty as to the true value of such securities , were a key factor in the freezing of interbank credit flows , as market participants came to doubt the credit - worthiness of banks and the reliability of balance sheets .

subtitle d addresses the asset - backed securities ( abs ) market by imposing new obligations on "securitizers" — issuers of an abs , or persons who organize and initiate abs transactions by selling or transferring assets to an issuer — and ( in some cases ) on "originators," those who , through an extension of credit or otherwise , create a financial asset that collateralizes an asset - backed security and sell that asset directly or indirectly to a securitizer .

many analyses of the causes of the financial crisis assign a role to flawed compensation structures: when executives and traders receive much of their pay in the form of a bonus that reflects a single year's results , they may have an incentive to take long - term risks that boost short - term earnings .

in most years , they profit , and when the rare loss comes , they keep their past bonuses .

subtitle e contains a number of provisions intended to align the incentives and interests of long - term shareholders and employees .

subtitle f is in significant part a response to perceived failures at the sec .

the bernard madoff ponzi scheme , which was investigated several times by the sec but not detected , raised questions about the competence of some sec employees and about managerial and organizational weaknesses .

specifically , some of the sec staff assigned to inspect madoff's firm were inexperienced and took madoff's false assertions at face value .

others failed to take simple steps , such as making a phone call or sending a letter to verify accounts where madoff claimed to hold customer securities , that would have brought the fraud to light much earlier .

there was little or no communication between divisions of the sec: in one case , a team of investigators did not realize that another sec investigation of madoff had recently concluded .

sec supervisors did not support the efforts of front - line staff , in some cases transferring them to other projects before their madoff inspections had reached a conclusion .

the financial crisis raised a number of concerns about municipal securities markets .

a number of towns and counties were sold complex derivatives contracts that proved very costly , and concerns persisted about "pay - to - play" abuses by politically connected intermediaries .

subtitle h makes a number of significant changes to the regulation of municipal markets .

subtitle i contains 19 sections dealing with a range of different topics .

subtitle j changes the way the sec is funded .

since its creation in the 1930s , the sec has collected fees on a variety of securities market transactions .

usually , the amount of such fee collections has exceeded the sec's budget .

since 2000 , the excess has gone not to the treasury general fund , but rather to a special account available only to appropriators to fund the sec .

under dodd - frank , one of the two major fees ( a percentage of the proceeds from all sales of corporate stock ) will be adjusted periodically so that the amount collected is approximately equal to the sec's annual appropriation .

the other major fee ( a percentage of the value of all new securities registered for public sale ) will go to the treasury general fund .

target collection amounts are set out through fy2020 .

subtitle j establishes a reserve fund in the sec which may hold up to $100 million in excess fee collections .

the fund may be used to achieve flexibility and continuity in spending , in order that delays in enacting appropriations bills do not impede multi - year spending projects .

in addition , the law provides for the sec to submit its budget request directly to congress , rather than through the office of management and budget .

appropriations for the sec are authorized through fy2015 , when the amount will be $2.25 billion , about double the sec's 2010 budget .

