narcotics trafficking almost invariably involves some u.s. persons — citizens and resident aliens — as participants in smuggling and as consumers , or facilitators of money transfers .

both statutory authorities and the official policies of the obama administration , as reflected in the southwest border counternarcotics strategy , now mandate involvement of the intelligence community beyond just intelligence agencies that have law enforcement missions in both counterterrorism and counternarcotics , two of the most important elements of border security .

the obama administration has also made clear that the intelligence community is an important part of its counternarcotics efforts .

the national southwest border counternarcotics strategy , published in june 2009 by the office of drug control policy , stated a strategic objective of enhancing intelligence capabilities associated with the southwest border , noting that: over the next few years , the focus of these intelligence programs will be on improving and integrating the flow of timely and relevant intelligence and analysis — as well as the process of information sharing and coordination — among the federal , state , local , tribal , and territorial agencies dedicated to protecting the southwest border from the illicit flow of drugs and associated threats… .

the intelligence efforts in this strategy will be aligned with and will incorporate other national intelligence efforts along the southwest border , in particular those efforts coordinated by the director of national intelligence .

immigration is another major national issue , but not all aspects of illegal immigration are matters of concern for the intelligence community .

to the extent , however , that illegal immigrants include terrorists , drug smugglers , or foreign agents , or reflect significant levels of organized human trafficking , intelligence agencies will be collecting and analyzing relevant information .

the intelligence community ( ic ) , as defined in statute , includes the central intelligence agency ( cia ) , the national security agency ( nsa ) , the national reconnaissance office ( nro ) , the national geospatial - imagery agency ( nga ) , the defense intelligence agency ( dia ) , the bureau of intelligence and research of the state department ( inr ) , the intelligence elements of the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , the military services , the energy department , the office of intelligence and analysis of the treasury department , the office of intelligence and analysis , and the coast guard in dhs .

the organization and activities of these agencies are governed by the national security act of 1947 , as amended ; executive order 12333 , united states intelligence activities , as amended ; and other statutes .

funding of intelligence activities is authorized in annual intelligence authorization acts .

a few agencies have both law enforcement and intelligence responsibilities .

in the justice department , the fbi and the dea , elements of both of which are part of the intelligence community , have major law enforcement responsibilities .

some dhs elements — the u.s. coast guard and the dhs office of intelligence and analysis — are ic members and provide important information regarding border security issues .

officials responsible for border security missions have to identify information that can be collected ( or is already being collected ) by intelligence agencies related to border security issues that either cannot be collected by law enforcement agencies or that can be collected by law enforcement agencies only with great difficulty or expense .

one problem has been the difficulties in information sharing which exist even within the intelligence community , but have been far more complicated when the need is to share intelligence information with law enforcement officials .

the revelations after september 11 , 2001 , that intelligence and law enforcement agencies separately had incomplete pieces of information prior to the attacks on the world trade center and the pentagon , but had been unable to assemble and properly analyze them , led to statutory and policy changes .

historically , intelligence agencies focused on the world outside u.s. borders and retained information for in - depth analysis of trends extending over decades ; law enforcement agencies gathered information that could be used in near - term u.s. court cases .

this distinction continues to complicate interagency coordination ( and congressional oversight ) .

coordination among agencies has always been challenging and it has not always been achieved .

in the aftermath of the attempted bombing of northwest airlines flight 253 on december 25 , 2009 , the senate intelligence committee concluded that inability to identify the bomber in advance was based in large measure on a failure to share information among relevant intelligence and law enforcement agencies .

different statutory frameworks govern the operations of intelligence and law enforcement agencies , especially those affecting the acquisition of information concerning u.s. persons .

the national security act provides that the cia "shall have no police , subpoena , or law enforcement powers or internal security functions," and that provision has served to limit cia cooperation with law enforcement agencies over the years and reflects a congressional determination that the united states not have an all - encompassing intelligence agency that could undermine democratic protections .

in the 1970s , in the wake of revelations that some intelligence agencies had improperly gathered information on u.s. citizens , the distinctions between law enforcement and intelligence were made more stringent , most significantly with the enactment and subsequent implementation of the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) of 1978 .

fisa permitted electronic surveillance to gather foreign intelligence information in the absence of probable cause that criminal activities were planned or underway , but a whole web of rules and regulations evolved that restricted sharing of information derived from fisa surveillance and coordination of investigations with officials involved in criminal prosecutions .

in the aftermath of 9 / 11 , the u.s.a patriot act ( p.l .

107-56 ) and other legislation was enacted that was intended to ensure that information held in any part of the federal government relating to terrorist activities could be shared with other government agencies involved with counterterrorism missions .

the national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) was established to analyze and integrate all intelligence possessed or acquired by any federal agency relating to international terrorism and to ensure that appropriate agencies have access to all - source intelligence regarding counterterrorism .

a number of fusion centers , such as the el paso intelligence center , also bring together information on relevant problems as discussed below .

currently , whereas law enforcement agencies necessarily maintain records on u.s. persons of interest , intelligence agencies maintain records on non - u.s. persons but , in general , are limited in respect to acquiring , maintaining , or disseminating records affecting u.s. persons .

there are , however , additional statutory constraints on cooperation between law enforcement and intelligence agencies .

posse comitatus statutes beginning in the post - civil war era with certain exceptions preclude dod ( including its intelligence elements ) from becoming actively involved in law enforcement efforts .

the national security act , as amended , allows the national intelligence agencies in dod — nsa , the nro , nga , and dia — to collect information about non - u.s. persons outside the united states for , and at the request of , law enforcement agencies .

this provision does not apply to the intelligence organizations of the four military services .

notwithstanding these provisions in the national security act , since the 1980s dod has had specific statutory counternarcotics responsibilities that extend to its intelligence components .

oversight of efforts to ensure the security of u.s. borders creates its own challenges .

a large number of agencies oversee various aspects of border security efforts .

dhs by itself is overseen by multiple congressional committees .

much of the information regarding the role of intelligence agencies is necessarily classified , often highly classified .

the contribution of intelligence agencies must be carefully integrated with the work of law enforcement agencies at the federal , state , local , and tribal levels and with the contributions of mexican , canadian , and other foreign agencies .

these efforts come under the jurisdiction of several committees , including the intelligence , judiciary , homeland security , armed services , foreign relations , and appropriations committees .

border security is inherently an interagency effort .

congress does not oversee a self - contained entity known as "border security ; " rather , components and aspects of the effort are considered by a number of different committees .

there are a number of areas relating to the role of the intelligence community that observers argue may warrant careful oversight .

these include ( 1 ) balancing intelligence agencies involvement in border security efforts with their traditional intelligence missions throughout the world , ( 2 ) "deconfliction," ensuring that the work of intelligence and law enforcement agencies in border security missions is prudently organized and that agencies are not working at cross - purposes or with unnecessary duplication of effort , ( 3 ) that involvement of intelligence agencies in border areas does not improperly affect the civil liberties of u.s. persons , and ( 4 ) the potential effects of u.s. border security efforts on overall relations with canada and mexico ( and potentially other countries ) .

congress addresses border security issues in various authorization and appropriation bills and in regular oversight hearings .

oversight of the role of intelligence agencies , however , is affected by a number of special considerations .

congress authorizes and oversees intelligence activities separately from other governmental activities .

there are also numerous statutory provisions that apply to intelligence agencies that differ significantly from those that govern the work of law enforcement agencies .

there is even a separate court ( the foreign intelligence surveillance court ) that deals with surveillance by intelligence agencies .

the operations of intelligence agencies are funded through the national intelligence program or the military intelligence program .

there has been no overall budget request for border security in executive branch budget submissions nor , as far as is known from publicly available information , has there has there been specific line - item in intelligence budget requests ( either as part of the national intelligence program or the military intelligence program ) for "border security. .

there is a statutory requirement that all intelligence activities must be "specifically authorized. .

this is not generally the case with law enforcement efforts .

this provision may somewhat complicate shifting funds in counternarcotics , and perhaps other accounts , to intelligence activities .

for instance , congress may approve dod budgetary requests for the budget category , drug interdiction and counterdrug activities , that include , but are not limited to , intelligence activities .

thus , any shifting of funds within this account to intelligence activities might arguably lack "specific authorization. .

accordingly , the dod's fiscal year fy2011 budget estimates states that dod "considers this request as notice to congress pursuant to 50 u.s.c .

§ 414 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( c ) that the department of defense intends to make funds appropriated for drug intervention and counterdrug activities of the department of defense available for the all source collection of counterdrug intelligence .

further , the department considers congressional action on this budget request as satisfying the requirement of 50 u.s.c .

§ 414 ( a ) . .

although a unilateral declaration by an executive branch agency may not in the view of some observers definitively resolve an issue of specific authorization , the dod statement at least ensures that the concern is noted .

the intelligence authorization act for fy2010 ( p.l .

111-259 ) includes a provision ( sec .

101 ) that authorizes "appropriated funds available to an intelligence agency may be obligated or expended for an intelligence or intelligence - related activity as appropriated for fiscal year 2010 , as modified by such reprogramming and transfers of funds authorized by and reported to the appropriate congressional committees. .

a role for intelligence agencies in the broader border security effort exists even if it cannot be publicly discussed in significant detail .

there are , however , significant issues that congress may examine in order to ensure that u.s. borders are as secure as possible , that the global missions of the intelligence community are not downgraded , that waste and duplication of effort are avoided , that the civil liberties of u.s. persons are respected , and that canada and mexico remain close partners in preventing narcotics smuggling and terrorist activities .

