the small business administration ( sba ) administers several programs to support small businesses , including loan guaranty programs to enhance small business access to capital ; contracting programs to increase small business opportunities in federal contracting ; direct loan programs for businesses , homeowners , and renters to assist their recovery from natural disasters ; and small business management and technical assistance training programs to assist business formation and expansion .

congressional interest in the sba's programs has increased in recent years , primarily because they are viewed as a means to stimulate economic activity and create jobs .

this report opens with an assessment of the economic research on net job creation ( employment gains related to business startups and expansions minus employment losses related to business deaths and contractions ) to identify the types of businesses that appear to create the most jobs .

that research suggests that business startups play an important role in job creation , but have a more limited effect on net job creation over time because about one - third of all startups close by their second year of existence and fewer than half of all startups are still in business after five years .

however , the influence of small business startups on net job creation varies by firm size .

startups with fewer than 20 employees tend to have a negligible effect on net job creation over time whereas startups with 20-499 employees tend to have a positive employment effect , as do surviving younger businesses of all sizes ( in operation for one year to five years ) .

this information's possible implications for congress and the sba are then examined .

for example , since its formation one of the sba's primary goals has been to promote business competition within the various industrial classifications as a means to deter monopoly and oligarchy formation within those industries .

as part of that effort , the sba provides assistance to all qualifying businesses that meet its size standards .

about 97% of all business concerns currently meet the sba's eligibility criteria .

given congressional interest in job creation , this report examines the potential consequences of targeting sba assistance to a narrower group , small businesses that are the most likely to create and retain the most jobs .

in addition , the government accountability office ( gao ) has argued that the sba's program performance measures provide limited information about the impact of its programs on participating small businesses because those measures focus primarily on output , such as the number of loans approved and funded , rather than outcomes , such as how well the small businesses do after receiving sba assistance .

given congressional interest in job creation , this report examines the potential consequences of adding net job creation as a sba program performance measure .

this report also examines the arguments for providing federal assistance to small businesses , noting that policymakers often view job creation as a justification for such assistance whereas economists argue that over the long term federal assistance to small businesses is likely to reallocate jobs within the economy , not increase them .

nonetheless , most economists support federal assistance to small businesses for other purposes , such as a means to correct a perceived market failure related to the disadvantages small businesses experience when attempting to access capital and credit .

the following sections provide an assessment of employment dynamics in the united states , starting with the latest economic data available from the u.s. bureau of the census concerning the number and employment of small and large enterprises , establishments , and firms ( small is defined here as having fewer than 500 employees and large as having 500 or more employees ) .

this is followed by an assessment of job gains and losses ( sometimes referred to as "churning" ) by small and large establishments ( including opening / startup establishments ) using data available from the u.s. department of labor's bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) .

assessments of employment dynamics usually examine the employment decisions of establishments , firms , and / or enterprises .

an establishment "is a single physical location where one predominant activity occurs. .

a firm "is an establishment or a combination of establishments" and is often "defined by its unique employer identification number ( ein ) issued by the internal revenue service ( irs ) . .

an enterprise "is a firm or a combination of firms that engages in economic activities which are classified into multiple industries .

an enterprise may report under one or a number of eins. .

each of these units of analysis provide information that is useful for understanding employment dynamics .

as the bls explains: the perception is that multiunit businesses act as a whole rather than as a collection of individual establishments .

on the one hand , it could be that larger multiunit businesses make more unified decisions to control hiring , close a plant or store , or lay off workers during economic downturns .

this argument supports the use of a higher level of aggregation than the establishment level .

on the other hand , businesses might make such decisions on the basis of each establishment's profitability , product line , and longer term prospects for contributions to the overall business .

why restrict hiring at a fully profitable and growing location when other locations are suffering from insufficient demand ? .

in this case , the firm may act more like a set of individual establishments rather than a unified set of establishments .

generally speaking , "the net employment change remains the same for all levels of aggregation , but the magnitude of gross job flows varies with the unit of analysis chosen. .

there is "a higher level of churning when job flows are estimated at a lower level of aggregation ( the establishment ) " and a lower level of churning "at a higher level of aggregation ( the enterprise or firm ) [because] expansions in some units offset contractions in other units , leaving job flows at a lesser magnitude. .

the small business act of 1953 ( p.l .

83-163 , as amended ) authorized the sba and justified the agency's existence on the grounds that small businesses were essential to the maintenance of the free enterprise system: the essence of the american economic system of private enterprise is free competition .

only through full and free competition can free markets , free entry into business , and opportunities for the expression and growth of personal initiative and individual judgment be assured .

the preservation and expansion of such competition is basic not only to the economic well - being but to the security of this nation .

such security and well - being cannot be realized unless the actual and potential capacity of small business is encouraged and developed .

it is the declared policy of the congress that the government should aid , counsel , assist , and protect insofar as is possible the interests of small - business concerns in order to preserve free competitive enterprise , to insure that a fair proportion of the total purchases and contracts for supplies and services for the government be placed with small - business enterprises , and to maintain and strengthen the overall economy of the nation .

in economic terms , the congressional intent was to use the sba to deter the formation of monopolies and the market failures they cause by eliminating competition in the marketplace .

the congressional emphasis on deterring monopoly formation could help to explain the sba's historical reliance on factors related to promoting business competition within the various industrial classifications , as opposed to using other factors , such as job creation , when formulating its industry size standards .

the small business act did not mention the sba's role in job creation .

however , in 1954 , wendell barnes , the sba's second administrator , was asked at a congressional hearing to discuss the sba's role in supporting small businesses .

he testified that part of the sba's mission was to provide credit to small businesses to enable them to "provide additional employment. .

for many years , economists and others have argued that providing federal assistance to small businesses is justified because small businesses are perceived to be at a disadvantage , compared with other businesses , in accessing capital and credit .

in their view , lenders are less likely to lend to small businesses than to larger businesses because small businesses tend to be younger and have less credit history than larger businesses .

also , lenders may be reluctant to lend to small businesses with innovative products because it might be difficult to collect enough reliable information to correctly estimate the risk for such products .

as gao has reported: limited evidence from economic studies suggests that some small businesses may face constraints in accessing credit because of imperfections such as credit rationing in the conventional lending market .

some studies showed , for example , that lenders might lack the information needed to distinguish between creditworthy and non - creditworthy borrowers and thus could "ration" credit by not providing loans to all creditworthy borrowers .

several studies we reviewed generally concluded that credit rationing was more likely to affect small businesses , because lenders could face challenges obtaining enough information on these businesses to assess their risk .

others have supported federal assistance to small businesses because they believe that small business ownership provides an opportunity for minorities , women , and immigrants to increase their income and independence and to move into the economic mainstream of the american economy .

in their view , businesses owned by these demographic groups face even greater barriers in obtaining access to capital and credit than other small business owners due to discrimination and their higher likelihood of locating their business in a low or moderate income community .

operating a business in a low or moderate income community is often viewed by lenders as increasing the risk that the business owner will be unable to repay the loan .

in recent years , advocates of providing federal assistance to small businesses have focused increased attention on the sba's role in job creation .

for example , the sba has argued that "improving access to credit by small businesses is a crucial step in supporting economic recovery and job creation. .

economists generally do not view job creation as a justification for providing federal assistance to small businesses .

they argue that in the long term such assistance will likely reallocate jobs within the economy , not increase them .

in their view , jobs arise primarily from the size of the labor force , which depends largely on population , demographics , and factors that affect the choice of home versus market production ( eg , the entry of women in the workforce ) .

however , economic theory does suggest that increased federal spending may result in additional jobs in the short term .

for example , the sba reported in september 2010 that small business funding provided by p.l .

111-5 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , created or retained 785,955 jobs .

the following sections examine the potential consequences of using net job creation as a sba program performance measure and for targeting sba assistance .

that assistance is currently available to businesses that are located in the united states , are a for - profit operating business , qualify as small under the sba's size requirements , and , for loan guarantees , demonstrate a need for the desired credit and are certified by a lender that the desired credit is unavailable on reasonable terms and conditions from nonfederal sources without the sba's assistance .

about 97% of all business concerns currently meet the sba's eligibility criteria .

economic research on net job creation suggests that startups play a very important role in job creation , but have a more limited effect on net job creation over time because about one - third of all startups close by their second year of existence and fewer than half of all startups are still in business after five years .

however , economic research also suggests that the influence of small startups on net job creation varies by firm size .

startups with fewer than 20 employees tend to have a negligible effect on net job creation over time whereas startups with 20-499 employees tend to have a positive employment effect "that continued to increase for five years after their formation before decreasing. .

this finding would suggest that , if providing assistance to startups was used as a factor in sba program performance or in the distribution of sba assistance , the startup's size should also be taken into consideration .

the economic research on net job creation also suggests that net job creation is concentrated among a relatively small group of surviving "high - impact" businesses that are younger and smaller than the typical business , but also have , on average , been in operation for 25 years .

this finding suggests that all three groups of businesses — startups , young small businesses ( in operation for one year to five years ) , and surviving high - impact businesses — are important contributors to net job creation .

as mentioned previously , recent economic research suggests that employment dynamics vary across u.s. industries , with entrepreneurs in some industries providing a greater emphasis on employment expansion than entrepreneurs in other industries .

in sum , economic research on the dynamics of net job creation does not provide a definitive answer concerning how to identify those businesses that are most likely to contribute to net job creation .

however , that research does suggest that small business startups , especially those with at least 20 employees , play a large role in net job creation , as do surviving younger businesses ( in operation for one year to five years ) .

the economic literature does not , as of yet , provide criteria to predict , with any degree of certainty , which of the surviving younger businesses will emerge as high - impact firms .

nonetheless , given the heightened congressional interest in net job creation , increased attention to the fact that the sba is not specifically designed to promote net job creation and does not use net job creation as a program performance measure may lead to additional analysis that can better inform the debate over whether the sba should use net job creation as an outcome - based program performance measure or as a factor in the allocation of its assistance .

