after more than two years of negotiations , the european union ( eu ) and south korea signed a bilateral free trade agreement ( fta ) on october 6 , 2010 .

both the south korean national assembly and the eu parliament have ratified the agreement , and it went into effect on july 1 , 2011 .

the south korea - eu fta ( koreu fta ) is the largest fta in terms of market size that south korea has entered into .

the u.s. - south korea fta ( korus fta ) will be south korea's second - largest .

the koreu fta reflects the eu and south korean trade strategies to use ftas to strengthen economic ties outside their home regions .

it also builds upon the surge in trade and investment flows between south korea and the eu over the past decade , a period of time in which the 27 member states of the eu countries collectively passed the united states in economic importance to south korea .

the koreu fta is very comprehensive , generally mirroring the scope of the korus fta , with some exceptions .

as with the korus fta , the koreu fta reduces and eliminates tariffs and other trade barriers in manufactured goods , agricultural products , and services and would also cover such trade - related activities as government procurement , intellectual property rights , labor rights , and environmental issues .

however , the two agreements contain some basic differences in coverage , reflecting differing circumstances and priorities .

for example , unlike the korus fta , the koreu fta does not include a specific chapter on foreign direct investment and does not allow trade sanctions to be applied where violations of the labor and environment provisions have taken place .

differences also exist in how sensitive sectors such as automobiles are treated .

for example , the koreu fta includes a duty drawback mechanism , while the korus fta has added a special safeguard for motor vehicles in the event of a surge in south korean automobile exports to the united states .

the koreu fta has drawn the attention and interest of u.s. policymakers , including members of congress and the u.s. business community .

the koreu fta could have an impact on u.s. - south korean trade by possibly diverting some south korean trade away from the united states to the eu and could provide the eu with a "first mover" advantage since it entered into force on july 1 , 2011 , and the korus fta is expected to enter into force no earlier than early 2012 .

this report is designed to shed some light on the koreu fta for congress .

it briefly reviews eu - south korean economic ties and the respective eu and south korean objectives regarding the koreu fta .

it then discusses the koreu fta in general and examines some of its major provisions in more detail , with special focus on autos and some other manufacturing sectors , agriculture , services , and labor — areas of particular interest to u.s. policymakers and the u.s. business community .

the report does not attempt to determine if either the korus fta or the koreu fta is better than the other .

that determination can largely be subjective , since the priorities of the eu and the united states differed in some respects .

in addition , the models used in measuring the quantifiable effects of the two agreements likely differ , leading to incompatible measurements .

nevertheless , where possible and relevant , the report draws general comparisons and contrasts with the korus fta .

finally , the report analyzes the prospects for the koreu fta and the agreement's potential implications for the united states .

trade in goods and services and two - way foreign direct investment ( fdi ) are generally the most important aspects of the eu - south korea relationship .

the koreu fta reflects the larger trade strategies that the eu and south korea have pursued .

prior to the mid - 2000s , both were reluctant to enter into bilateral ftas , preferring to conduct trade through the world trade organization ( wto ) and , in the case of the eu , through regional preferential trade arrangements with former colonies .

however , over the last decade , they both have not only been negotiating ftas , but have done so at an accelerated pace .

 ( see table a - 3 and table a - 4 for lists of eu and south korean ftas. ) .

the eu was a pioneer in negotiating preferential trade arrangements ( ptas ) — a general term applied to an arrangement in which member countries agree to eliminate barriers to commerce among them .

the eu itself is a single market , one of the most comprehensive ptas , but has also used ptas to anchor trade relations with neighboring countries , such as members of the european free trade area ( efta — iceland , lichtenstein , norway , and switzerland ) and as a transition mechanism in trade relations with countries slated to accede to the eu .

the eu has also employed ptas to preserve preferential trade relationships with former colonies among developing countries .

however , the eu imposed a moratorium on the formation of ftas and other ptas from 1999-2006 to focus attention on the doha development agenda ( dda ) negotiations .

the fta with south korea is part of a new wave of eu ftas and part of an overall strategy — referred to as global europe — which the european commission's directorate general for trade announced in 2006 .

the strategy was developed to respond to the challenges faced by eu members in a rapidly globalizing economy .

an objective of that strategy is to work towards reducing tariff and non - tariff barriers in trade and to liberalize markets for foreign investment .

the eu also places a priority on multilateral negotiations in the wto and concluding the dda to accomplish this objective .

however , the eu also has determined that some barriers are currently too complex for multilateral negotiations or are otherwise beyond the purview of the wto , for example , competition policy , regulatory issues , government procurement , and stronger intellectual property rights enforcement .

as part of the global europe strategy , the eu has engaged in fta negotiations with the objective that the ftas are more appropriate vehicles to address these more complex issues and can serve as building blocks toward a more robust multilateral trading system .

the global europe strategy sets down two main criteria for selecting fta partners: ( 1 ) that the partner country offers sufficient market potential and ( 2 ) a sufficient level of growth opportunities that would result from the removal of tariff and non - tariff barriers as a result of the fta .

based on these criteria , along with the fact that south korea had negotiated an agreement with the united states ( a chief eu competitor ) the european commission identified south korea as a priority country for an fta .

the eu has ftas in force with chile and mexico and has been negotiating ftas with canada , india , and south africa .

 ( see table a - 3 . ) .

the koreu fta would be the eu's first completed fta in asia .

similar to the korus fta , the koreu fta is a comprehensive pact that covers the broad range of economic activities in the eu - south korean bilateral economic relationship .

the koreu fta is organized into 15 chapters plus special sector specific annexes , which cover automotive products , pharmaceuticals , chemicals , and consumer electronics .

the koreu fta eliminates tariffs on virtually all manufactured goods in south korea - eu bilateral trade within seven years and reduces or eliminates many nontariff barriers ( ntbs ) .

the agreement also establishes rules and procedures in trade in goods and services and addresses trade - related activities pertaining to intellectual property rights ( ipr ) , labor rights , and environmental protection .

similar to the objectives of the korus fta , the provisions in the pending koreu fta are intended to boost goods and services exports from the eu to south korea by eliminating south korean import duties and other barriers to trade in industries from autos and pharmaceuticals to consumer electronics and textiles and apparel .

exports from south korea to the eu might increase in various manufacturing sectors but are not expected to surge since many eu tariffs are already relatively low and the eu's ntbs are for the most part not as significant as in south korea .

the koreu fta also is intended to increase fdi flows between the two partners , especially eu investment in south korea .

the following discussion provides an overview of the koreu fta as a whole but also focuses on possible areas of particular importance with implications for the ongoing debate in the united states over the future of the proposed korus fta .

these areas include trade in certain manufactured goods sectors ( the automobile sector in particular ) , agricultural products , and services ; and issues pertaining to ipr , worker rights , and environmental protection .

where feasible and appropriate , the following discussion includes references to and comparisons of the koreu fta with relevant provisions of the korus fta .

most of the studies done on the impact of the koreu fta estimate that the agreement will have a small but positive affect on the economies of the eu and south korea as a whole and that the larger relative impact would be on the south korean economy .

this conclusion logically follows from the fact that the south korean economy is much smaller than the eu , more dependent on the eu market than is the opposite case , and has higher trade barriers than the eu ; therefore , the effects of trade liberalization under the koreu fta would be greater in relative terms for south korea .

however , in both cases , the impact of the agreement on the overall economy on both sides will be small , reflecting the larger role played by other countries in their trade and also the larger impact that other economic activities — domestic consumption , government spending , and business investment — have in their economies .

most studies indicate that south korea's gdp will increase 1% - 2% after the koreu fta is implemented , while the eu gdp will increase less than 0.05% .

studies regarding the impact of the korus fta on the united states and south korea yielded comparable magnitudes , an expected result given the similarities in the size and comparable levels of development of the eu and the united states and the similarities in the koreu fta and the korus fta .

as with most other ftas , the greatest economic impact of the koreu fta will be on specific sectors in each economy .

those having a comparative advantage vis - a - vis those in their other country are most likely to experience the greatest benefits while import - sensitive sectors will experience the least gains , if not losses , when the agreement is implemented .

eu services providers will be expected to experience gains from the agreement , especially in the areas of retail and wholesale trade ; transportation services ; financial services ; and business services .

this conclusion follows from the fact that eu service providers are among the world's most competitive and eu markets the most open , while the south korean services market is relatively closed .

in terms of trade in goods , eu exporters of pharmaceuticals , auto parts , industrial machinery , electronics parts , and some agricultural goods and processed foods will be expected to gain from the koreu fta's implementation .

at the same time , south korean producers of cars , ships , wireless telecommunications devices , chemical products , and imaging equipment will be expected to increase their exports to the eu market .

