this report offers context for consideration of immigration policy options by presenting data on key geographic , demographic , social , and economic characteristics of the foreign - born population residing in the united states .

data on the native - born population are often shown for comparison .

the report relies heavily on the 2010 american community survey ( acs ) public use micro sample ( pums ) , the largest most representative and recent dataset available on the u.s. population .

in some instances , other data sources , such as decennial census and current population survey data are introduced .

at times , the report discusses possible reasons for patterns observed in the data .

the term "foreign - born" used in this report refers to people born outside the united states who do not automatically acquire citizenship at birth .

the foreign born have a variety of immigration statuses and include immigrants , refugees , nonimmigrants , and persons illegally residing in the united states .

this report often distinguishes between two groups of foreign - born individuals: noncitizens ( a broad category that includes unauthorized aliens as well as legal permanent residents ) and naturalized u.s. citizens .

interest in the u.s. foreign born stems , in part , from the changing demographic profile of the u.s. population , the rapidity of such change , and how both trends correspond to the objectives of u.s. immigration policy .

although relatively small in absolute terms , the foreign born are growing faster than the native - born population generally and specifically among young people and the civilian labor force .

moreover , much policy attention is devoted to dealing with the estimated 11.2 million foreign born ( as of 2010 ) residing illegally in the united states .

in 1970 , the foreign born numbered 9.7 million people , or 4.8% of the total u.s. population , their lowest proportion since 1850 .

by 2010 , the foreign - born population had increased to 39.9 million people representing 12.9% of the total u.s. population ( see figure 1 ) .

although the absolute number of foreign born is higher than at any point in the nation's history , the foreign - born proportion of the total u.s. population was still lower in 2010 than peaks reached at the beginning of the 20 th century .

this report presents information on the foreign - born population that is relevant to several prominent immigration policy issues , including the unauthorized alien population ; proposed revisions to current immigration policies ; the skill and educational composition of new immigrants ; and the impact of foreign - born workers on the u.s. economy .

using the 2010 acs pums , the report describe characteristics of the foreign - born that relate directly to these immigration policy issues .

the report begins by placing the current foreign - born population in historical context .

it then describes from what regions of the world the foreign born originate , where they settle in the united states , and how these foreign origins and u.s. destinations have changed over the past five decades .

because legal status is central to immigration policy , the report discusses the unauthorized population and naturalization trends and often breaks out descriptive statistics by citizenship status throughout the text .

the report describes several critical determinants of labor market outcomes , including age , educational attainment , and english language ability , and then compares the industrial sector and occupational distribution of the foreign born with the native born .

finally , the report presents several measures of economic well - being , including median income and poverty .

the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) of 1952 collected and codified existing immigration law provisions into one organized structure .

amended many times , it remains the foundation of u.s. immigration law .

the 1952 act introduced a system of preferences based on family reunification and skills that upheld and reinforced the national origins quota system established in 1924 .

in 1965 , congress amended the ina , removing widely perceived discriminatory provisions of previous immigration laws and loosening numerical restrictions on immigration .

the 1965 revisions to the ina also had the effect of gradually shifting the ethnic composition of the immigrant flow away from europe and toward latin america and asia .

subsequent legislation — such as the refugee act of 1980 ; the immigration reform and control act of 1986 , which legalized the status of 2.7 million previously unauthorized residents ; and the immigration and nationality act amendments of 1990 — have all increased the number of the foreign born directly by expanding legal immigration to the united states .

these laws have also increased the numbers of foreign born indirectly because naturalized immigrants and legal permanent residents can sponsor for citizenship their relatives living abroad .

legislation aside , the u.s. foreign born also expanded from the aftermath of the vietnam war , central american political turmoil , greater numbers of u.s. - based foreign - born students and business people , and greater u.s. citizen contact with foreign nationals from international travel , study , and work assignments .

legal status of the foreign born has received increased attention with the growing estimated size of the unauthorized population , the geographic dispersion of the foreign born to new u.s. destinations , and increased border security concerns .

legal status of the foreign born encompasses three broad groups: unauthorized aliens , legal noncitizens ( which includes legal permanent and legal temporary residents ) , and naturalized citizens that are described below .

according to the most recent estimates of foreign - born legal status ( figure 5 ) , unauthorized aliens , legal residents ( permanent and temporary ) and naturalized citizens made up , respectively , 28% , 35% and 37% of the foreign - born population .

applied to the total estimated foreign - born population of 39.9 million persons in 2010 ( computed from the acs data ) , these percentages yield absolute population sizes of 11.2 million for unauthorized aliens , 14.0 million for legal residents , and 14.8 million for naturalized citizens .

the 39.9 million foreign born ( in 2010 ) make up roughly one - eighth of the u.s. population , but between 2000 and 2010 , they accounted for nearly one - third of all u.s. population growth .

they include not only an estimated 14.8 million naturalized citizens ( 37% of all foreign born ) but also 11.2 million unauthorized aliens .

of the 16.9 million children with at least one foreign - born parent in 2010 , 14.5 million , or 86% , were born in the united states .

recent estimates indicate that unauthorized aliens , legal residents ( permanent and temporary ) and naturalized citizens made up 28% , 35% and 37% , respectively , of the foreign - born population .

years of u.s. experience and educational attainment are positively associated with citizenship status .

origins of the foreign born have shifted from europe ( 74% in 1960 ) to latin america and asia ( 81% in 2010 ) .

while many foreign - born persons have settled recently in new urban and rural destinations , two - thirds of the foreign - born population lives in california , new york , florida , texas , illinois , and new jersey .

almost two thirds of all foreign born arrived to the united states after 1990 .

between 2000 and 2010 , foreign - born workers accounted for almost all the growth in the u.s. workforce between ages 25-54 .

as this crs analysis illustrates , their labor force contributions to the u.s. economy range from low - skilled occupations in the agriculture , manufacturing , and service sectors to highly skilled occupations in science , engineering , medicine , nursing , defense , and other critical industrial sectors .

the foreign born have lower average educational attainment and a higher proportion of persons without a high school diploma than the native born .

however , the foreign - born and native - born populations possess the same proportion with at least a bachelor's degree .

lower education levels and differences in industrial sector and occupational distributions partly explain income and poverty differences between foreign - born and native - born workers ; for those with at least a four - year college degree , earnings differences by nativity are minimal .

among the foreign born , median incomes of naturalized citizens are roughly 60% higher than those of noncitizens , reflecting higher education levels , older ages , and greater u.s. labor market experience .

poverty status is linked to the lack of citizenship , a difference that is magnified after including the "near - poor," who earn between 100% and 200% of the poverty threshold .

changes in the age composition of the american population can have a considerable impact on the u.s. labor force , on public sector expenditures , and consequently on u.s. public policy .

political debates over immigration policy may sometimes originate because of different priorities for public spending , as younger foreign - born persons and their children tend to demand different public services ( eg , public education and affordable housing ) than older native - born residents ( eg , affordable health care ) .

data sources and limitations unless indicated otherwise , data for this report come primarily from the public use micro sample ( pums ) of the 2010 american community survey ( acs ) .

this survey is sent to roughly 250,000 households every month ( or 3 million households every year ) and replaces the long form questionnaire of the decennial census .

as with the decennial census long form , the acs collects information on socio - demographic characteristics , disability , english and native language use , income , and housing characteristics .

the acs has the advantage of continuous measurement by producing new data every year rather than every 10 years for the decennial census .

however , because it is sent to far fewer households ( 1 in 100 ) compared to the decennial census ( 1 in 6 ) acs estimates of the population and population characteristics have a relatively greater margin of error , particularly for smaller geographic areas .

this report avoids that obstacle because it presents computations at a sufficiently large geographic unit of analysis , often at the national level .

for instance , the 2010 acs pums contains about 2,714,000 observations representing the native born , and 348,000 observations representing the foreign born , before weighting .

as such , descriptive statistics presented herein are based upon sufficiently large sample sizes that support statistical validity at the 95% probability level .

the pums is a publically available dataset that contains no personal identifiers and permits analysis of micro - level data across characteristics of one's choosing .

key definitions nativity , which refers to whether someone is native born or foreign born , generally refers to place of birth , but not exclusively .

the census bureau defines native - born persons as those who were u.s. citizens or u.s. nationals at birth .

hence , in addition to persons born in the united states , the term native - born also includes persons born in a u.s. commonwealth or other territories ( puerto rico , u.s. virgin islands , guam , american samoa , or the northern mariana islands ) , or born abroad to a u.s. citizen parent or parents .

anyone not born a u.s. citizen or u.s. national is defined as foreign born , including those who have become u.s. citizens through naturalization .

naturalized citizens are defined by the immigration and naturalization act ( ina ) as persons admitted as legal residents who have lived in the united states continuously for at least five years ; demonstrated good moral character as well as english reading , writing , and speaking ability ; and passed an examination on u.s. history and government .

if these legal permanent residents have their petitions for naturalization approved , they become u.s. citizens .

