the united states congress and successive u.s. administrations have long supported the european union ( eu ) as a way to advance democracy and strong economic partners in europe .

the current 28-member eu is the latest stage in a process of european integration begun in the 1950s to promote lasting peace and prosperity on the european continent .

during the cold war , the united states viewed this european integration project as central to deterring the soviet threat by securing free markets and engendering political stability in europe .

despite the end of the cold war more than two decades ago and the recent talk of a "pacific rebalance" in united states foreign policy , many observers assert that the security and prosperity of the united states and europe remain inextricably linked .

in addition to a number of common foreign policy concerns , the united states and the eu both face a set of new challenges — ranging from countering terrorism and weapons proliferation to addressing cyber - security and on - line piracy to managing economic downturns and promoting job creation — and have few other comparable partners with whom they share such similar interests and values .

proponents of close u.s. - eu ties argue that neither side can adequately address the diverse array of global concerns alone , and that the united states and the eu have a proven track record of working together .

for example , the two sides have collaborated to promote security in the balkans and afghanistan , have intensified law enforcement cooperation since the 2001 terrorist attacks on the united states , and have worked closely to manage and contain iran's nuclear ambitions .

past u.s. - eu cooperation has also been critical in making the world trading system more open and efficient .

furthermore , the united states and the eu share a huge , mutually beneficial , and increasingly interdependent trade and investment relationship .

despite the global economic downturn and the recent eurozone crisis , the combined u.s. and eu economies account for over 50% of global gross domestic product and roughly 25% of global exports and 31% of global imports .

according to one recent study , the transatlantic economy generates over $5 trillion in commercial sales a year and employs up to 15 million workers on both sides of the atlantic .

of particular importance is the fact that u.s. and european companies are the biggest investors in each other's economies and the united states and europe remain each other's most profitable markets .

at times , however , the u.s. - eu relationship has been challenged by various foreign policy and trade conflicts .

u.s. - eu relations reached a historic low in 2003 over the u.s. - led invasion of iraq , which some eu member states supported and others strongly opposed .

in the aftermath of that crisis , the united states sought to improve relations and emphasize areas of partnership with the eu .

u.s. - eu tensions on several key issues , such as iran and the israeli - palestinian conflict , have since dissipated significantly .

although u.s. - eu differences persist in other areas ( data privacy and climate change for example ) , as do a few lingering u.s. - eu trade disputes ( such as those related to aircraft subsidies and bioengineered food products ) , some observers assert that u.s. - eu relations have largely been characterized by a renewed sense of cooperation over the last several years .

most recently , this cooperative spirit has taken on more of a dynamic in the areas of trade and economic policy .

in 2011 , the united states and the eu created a joint high level working group ( hlwg ) on jobs and growth to consider ways to increase u.s. - eu trade and investment and reduce regulatory barriers .

in february 2013 , the hlwg released its final report outlining ways in which the transatlantic economy can be strengthened and expanded .

as expected , the hlwg recommended that the united states and the eu pursue a comprehensive trade and economic agreement .

in his 2013 state of the union speech , president obama announced that the united states and the eu would launch negotiations on an ambitious , high - standard transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( ttip ) , as called for by the hlwg .

ttip negotiations began in july 2013 .

many members of congress appear to support this initiative in principle , although analysts expect negotiations to be challenging in some areas , including regulatory issues and intellectual property rights .

in light of both the possible benefits of and challenges to greater u.s. - eu cooperation on a wide array of common political and economic issues , some members of congress and their counterparts in the european parliament ( ep ) have long expressed interest in strengthening institutional ties and exploring greater cooperation in areas of mutual interest .

the ep is a key institution of the european union and the only one that is directly elected .

 ( for more information on the ep , see the text box in "role of the legislatures" below. ) .

relations between the u.s. house of representatives and the european parliament can be traced back to 1972 , when a group of members of the house , led by former representative sam gibbons of the house ways and means committee , traveled to brussels for the express purpose of meeting and exchanging views with the ep .

at the time , congress viewed the then - european community ( the precursor to the modern day eu ) mostly as an economic entity with the ability to negotiate trade agreements , but the ep was an institution with limited visibility and authority .

the first congressional visits to brussels were arranged by members of the ways and means committee who were interested in issues such as agriculture subsidies , steel tariffs , anti - dumping initiatives , and general trade - related areas .

these initial parliamentary contacts , which only involved the house , became known as the united states - european community interparliamentary group .

members of the house and members of the european parliament ( meps ) soon began meeting twice a year , once in the united states and once in europe .

given the evolving nature of the transatlantic relationship , and the changes taking place within europe itself , the purpose and focus of the congress - ep interparliamentary exchange gradually turned more to a foreign policy agenda dedicated to issues involving the cold war and the development of the european integration project .

by the mid - 1980s , the responsibility for arranging the u.s. - ep meetings in the congress shifted to the house foreign affairs committee .

as historic political events in europe began to unfold in the late 1980s , the relevance and importance of the congress - ep exchange began to increase under the leadership of former representatives lee hamilton , tom lantos , and benjamin gilman , who were strong supporters of close u.s. - european relations .

these members , along with a handful of others , focused on the implications of the end of the cold war for the united states and the role the evolving eu would play in the new european landscape ; they all believed that congress should better understand both the eu as a whole and its legislative process , a feeling that continues to be shared by many , although not all , even today .

formal institutional cooperation was established in 1999 and currently exists through the transatlantic legislators' dialogue ( tld ) .

contacts between the u.s. congress and the european parliament have been stimulated from time to time by events that have contributed to the slow but steady development of ever - closer relations between the two institutions .

four such milestones in the evolving relationship include the creation of the transatlantic policy network ( tpn ) in 1992 ; the launch of the new transatlantic agenda ( nta ) in 1995 ; the establishment of the transatlantic economic council ( tec ) in 2007 ; and the opening of the european parliament's liaison office ( eplo ) in 2010 .

although the creation of the tec and the appointment of the tld to its advisory group perhaps did more initially to raise the visibility of the tld than any other event over the previous several years , the tld remained relatively unknown in the u.s. congress compared with its status in the european parliament .

with the opening of the ep's liaison office , not only has the parliament become more visible on capitol hill but as a consequence , the tld has also become more visible and is more frequently mentioned in discussions with members of congress and staff .

as noted earlier , at the november 30 , 2012 , session of the tld , a joint meeting with the house ways and means committee on a possible u.s. - eu economic and trade agreement resulted in the participation of a large number of committee members .

still , the visibility of the tld within congress has not yet reached the level necessary to become a more influential organization in promoting the congress - parliament partnership .

some suggest that a key reason for this disparity can be found in the structure and function of the tld itself , which differs significantly between the u.s. congress and the ep .

at the start of each new parliament ( the current one runs from 2009 to 2014 ) , the ep adopts a resolution proposing a list of interparliamentary delegations and sets the number of meps that will constitute each delegation .

at present , there are a total of 41 delegations in the parliament .

the oldest and largest ep delegation is the delegation for relations with the united states ( d - us ) , on which 61 meps serve as members of the delegation ( several dozen meps are considered substitutes ) .

meps are appointed to the delegation for the full five - year term of the parliament .

the d - us meets on a periodic basis to discuss a wide range of issues involving the transatlantic relationship as well as the upcoming tld meetings .

each political group in the parliament receives an allocation of delegation seats roughly proportional to its overall size in the ep .

for example , the european people's party ( epp ) , the largest political group in the parliament , has 19 seats in the d - us whereas the europe of freedom and democracy ( efd ) group , which is the smallest in the ep , has three seats .

similarly , each political group receives an allocation of chairmanships / vice chairs of the various delegations , with the largest group having the first choice of chair .

in 2009 , the epp selected the chairmanship of the d - us as its first choice and named elmar brok , a german mep , as chair .

in 2012 , christian ehler , also a german mep who belongs to the epp , replaced brok as chair of the d - us after brok assumed the chair of the ep's foreign affairs committee .

in the ep , participants in the semi - annual tld meetings are drawn from the d - us delegation .

ep representation in the tld ( eutld ) is led by a steering committee consisting of the chairman and two vice chairs of the d - us and 10 meps who are the chairs of various ep standing committees ranging from international trade to environment , public health and food safety .

the steering committee coordinates all activities of the tld , ensures that there is broad representation of meps from the ep's committees at the tld meetings , and reports to the d - us on its activities .

over 20 meps often attend the semi - annual tld meetings .

on the u.s. side , the tld is one of 13 parliamentary and commission groups operating in congress .

unlike some of the other exchanges , such as the nato parliamentary assembly ( natopa ) , which also include the senate , u.s. representation in the tld ( ustld ) is from the house only .

in addition , the ustld is not statutorily authorized , although it is authorized to receive funds each year to support its activities .

thus , while the natopa is authorized by statute to include a total of 24 official delegates ( 12 each from the house and senate that are appointed by the speaker of the house and the senate majority leader respectively ) , the tld has no specified number of participants and no mandated speaker appointment .

furthermore , official u.s. delegates of several of the statutorily authorized parliamentary exchanges are appointed for the duration of each congress .

the ustld , by contrast , has no fixed term for its participants .

traditionally , the chair and ranking member of the house foreign affairs committee appointed the ustld's chair and vice chair .

during the late 1990s , the chair of the house international relations committee also served as chair of the ustld .

in the 113 th congress , the chair , representative mario diaz - balart ( fl ) , was appointed by the speaker .

the vice chair , representative jim costa ( ca ) , was appointed by the minority leader and the ranking member of the foreign affairs committee .

there is no formal nomination of any other ustld delegate .

many members have attended past meetings , but participation in the ustld — at least until recently — often seemed to be on an ad hoc basis , with little continuity of participants and , in some instances , largely dependent on the ability of the ustld chair to convince members to attend the semi - annual meetings .

moreover , the ustld has no equivalent "steering committee" to help plan future tld meetings , set agendas , or encourage members to participate .

some observers have suggested that the eu caucus , created in the house in 2005 , could serve as the umbrella organization from which tld delegates could be drawn .

however , there has been little association between the two , even though several members of the house participate in both the caucus and the tld .

there is still concern among some observers that without some additional level of formality in the house , the ustld could continue to have difficulty attracting and maintaining a broad group of members willing to participate on a regular basis .

tld supporters worry that the lack of sustained participation by u.s. members hinders the development of personal relationships between legislators , seen as essential for a truly frank and open exchange of views and as necessary ultimately for greater legislative consultation and coordination .

similarly , while the eutld has representation from most of its key parliamentary committees , the ustld is not structured to guarantee the inclusion of members from all of the major congressional committees .

combined with the uncertainty over which members will actually participate in the u.s. delegation each time the tld meets , some meps have observed that the tld sessions do not necessarily provide them with good u.s. contacts with who they can discuss issues of mutual interest on a regular basis .

another difference between the u.s. congress and the ep in relation to the tld involves staffing .

traditionally , on the u.s. side , three principal staffers have operated as the "u.s. secretariat" for the tld: an administrator and one representative from the majority and minority .

in the 112 th congress , however , the majority staff also served as the ustld's secretariat although on several recent occasions a representative of the house's office of inter - parliamentary affairs has attended the tld meetings and assisted with tld logistics .

the staff of the ustld are part of the house foreign affairs committee structure and usually have portfolios with many responsibilities beyond the tld .

observers note that the foreign affairs committee staff are highly professional , knowledgeable of transatlantic relations , and provide sufficient support for most security and foreign policy - related discussions during the tld meetings .

however , these same observers also point out that none of the key items on the u.s. - eu economic or regulatory agenda are ones that fall under the jurisdiction of the house foreign affairs committee .

this disconnect between ustld staff and the issues most frequently found on the tld agenda was further highlighted when the tld , at the beginning of the 112 th congress , was tasked to focus on a few specific issues .

at the december 2011 and june 2012 sessions of the tld , two issues that formed the centerpiece of the discussions involved financial services and transport security , neither of which fall within the jurisdiction of the foreign affairs committee .

the agenda for the november 2012 tld meeting also included sessions on cyber - security and trade , again issues not within the jurisdiction of the foreign affairs committee .

in the view of many experts , it continues to be a real stretch to expect that foreign affairs committee staff who are responsible for following issues and events in places ranging from russia to kosovo to eurasia can somehow also find the time to become proficient on cloud computing , internet freedom , automobile crash testing , container scanning , toy safety , or hedge fund transparency .

and , realistically , neither the foreign affairs committee nor the ustld chair and vice chair could hire a whole cadre of staff with the kind of expertise needed to be responsive to the various issues under consideration by the tld , particularly if the tld is going to remain a partner to the tec during the u.s. - eu negotiations on a transatlantic trade and investment partnership .

although these non - foreign policy matters have come to dominate the tld meeting agenda , it does not appear that there is regular contact between ustld staff and other standing committee staff that would allow for coordination of issues and committee perspectives beyond foreign policy concerns .

the eutld is also staffed by a secretariat , which includes five permanent ep staff dedicated to the coordination and operation of the tld ( as well as ep relations with canada and the g - 8 ) .

recently , the eutld secretariat has worked with the secretariats of the ep standing committees to designate a "tld administrator" for each committee .

these administrators are intended to act as interlocutors between the committees and the tld , as well as the parliament's liaison office in washington ; they help the tld secretariat to identify issues that should be placed on the tld meeting agenda and promoting greater coordination of views and positions .

in the ep , the d - us falls under what is known as the directorate - general for external policy which provides professional support for the ep committees on foreign affairs , development , and international trade , as well as for all of the ep delegations .

the dg - expo also includes a policy department whose staff provide research and background information for the delegations and committees , including the eutld .

since the launch of the tld in 1999 , there have been numerous calls on both sides of the atlantic to find ways to develop even closer cooperation between congress and the ep .

some in the european parliament have gone so far as to suggest the creation of a transatlantic parliamentary assembly consisting of members of congress and the parliament that would share joint responsibility for addressing issues of mutual interest through both oversight and legislative mechanisms .

this proposal has not found any support in the u.s. congress and likely will not in the foreseeable future .

as more members of congress and parliament as well as more outside observers begin to advocate for closer cooperation between congress and parliament , especially now that the united states and the eu have begun to discuss a potential transatlantic economic and trade agreement that both legislative bodies would be involved in , several ideas have been put forward to help strengthen the overall effectiveness of the congress - parliament partnership .

while the european parliament has been far out in front of congress in the pursuit of a stronger relationship , as noted earlier , the u.s. congress as a whole , while supporting dialogue , has not seemed to embrace the need for significantly closer ties .

nevertheless , should congress deem it worthwhile in the years ahead to further deepen relations with the ep , there are a number of potential options that could be considered and explored .

several possible options for enhancing congress - parliament cooperation are discussed below ; some are specific to the ustld , and others pertain to the broader congress - ep relationship .

some observers suggest that a new structure on the u.s. side is needed to oversee and guide congress - ep relations .

however , others contend that the u.s. congress and its committees and subcommittees , the eu caucus , and the tld itself provide the necessary structure for managing the congress - ep relationship .

for those of this view , the issue is not to create a new structure but to find ways to promote more coordination between the various elements of the existing structures in order to try to make the existing structure work more effectively .

many observers have raised the question of what role the senate might play in efforts to strengthen ties between the u.s. congress and the european parliament .

for the operation of the tld in general , the senate has never been involved .

visiting ep delegations coming to the united states have paid courtesy calls occasionally on the senate but the senate has never participated formally in the tld sessions .

senator jeanne shaheen ( nh ) , the former chair of the europe subcommittee of the senate foreign relations committee , had indicated interest in exploring ways the senate could be involved with the tld .

however , there has been no intent to create a senate version of the tld or to statutorily establish a tld with both house and senate participation up to this point .

some observers believe that a reinvigorated house eu caucus could reach out to the senate staff and invite them to attend caucus staff meetings , or to include some senators in the caucus , thus giving the senate contact with the activities of the tld .

others believe that interested senators should consider creating a senate eu caucus and then offer to hold joint meetings / briefings with the house counterpart .

through a joint caucus effort , the senate could potentially participate in tld meetings as additional ustld delegates .

for many experts , the fact that the senate has a co - equal role in the broader transatlantic relationship and the narrower role of regulatory oversight , but is not included as part of the tld for purposes of the tec advisory group , is a serious concern .

as of december 2012 , the tec had met seven times with the advisory group , yet there does not seem to be a formal mechanism within the tld to include the senate in its discussions nor is there a way within the tec advisory group to solicit senate opinion .

thus , while the tld over time could develop some level of authority to represent the views of the house on issues addressed in the tec , including on the upcoming transatlantic trade and investment negotiations , the tld , as currently structured , cannot claim to speak on behalf of the senate .

at a december 2009 hearing of the senate foreign relations committee's europe subcommittee , the issue of the tld and the role of the senate in the tec process was addressed by the witnesses and , according to committee staff , was to be further investigated .

it is unclear that any progress in resolving the issue has been achieved .

one option that would allow the tld to continue its broad mandate to address a wide range of transatlantic issues and at the same time include the senate in its role as a tec advisor , may be for the ustld chair to consider creating a congressional tec working group .

this working group would include members from both the house and senate who sit on committees with jurisdiction over issues on the tec advisory group meeting agenda in order to encourage senate input into the tec process .

some observers suggest that any efforts to elevate the broader congress - parliament relationship must have senate participation .

for example , senate committees might also be encouraged to establish direct contact with ep committees with similar jurisdictions .

as noted previously , while senator shaheen has raised the issue , it remains unclear to what extent members of the senate may be interested in developing relations with the ep , establishing ties with meps , or forging closer links between the relevant senate and ep committees .

the european parliament places a premium on its partnership with the u.s. congress , and is committed to developing closer relations between the two legislative bodies .

as noted above , the ep has implemented its long - held goal to open a legislative liaison office in washington to increase its presence in congress .

and in recognition of the wide array of legislative issues facing congress and the ep that could affect the broader transatlantic relationship , the ep has sought to involve its various standing committees in the work of the tld in an attempt to enhance its effectiveness and utility .

on the u.s. side , however , congress — other than those members who have participated in the tld — does not seem to be , at least at this point , as interested as the european parliament in trying to establish closer legislative cooperation .

some attribute this lack of enthusiasm on the u.s. side to the fact the two institutions do not have the exact same legislative powers or mandates .

and many members of congress may believe that the tld , although never intended to be anything more than a mechanism for exchanging views among parliamentarians , currently wields little influence or authority as a transatlantic policy resource .

the initial involvement of the tld in the tec's efforts to move regulatory cooperation toward the ultimate goal of an unencumbered transatlantic marketplace did appear to raise the tld's visibility in the u.s. congress .

since then , however , there has been little evidence that the ustld's role has generated any additional congressional interest in the tld , the tec , or closer cooperation and collaboration with the european parliament .

while the creation of the tec raised several questions about the role that congress and the ep will or should play in the promotion of greater transatlantic economic integration and regulatory cooperation , on the u.s. side , those questions still appear unanswered .

given the ep's growing power and influence within the eu as a result of the lisbon treaty , some u.s. officials and members of congress continue to assert that it may be in u.s. interests for congress to develop closer ties with the parliament .

however , some of the original congressional advocates of a closer relationship with the ep are no longer in congress and other voices of support seemed to have waned .

outside organizations that initially showed a commitment to try to move this agenda forward also seem to be less enthusiastic now for one reason or another .

some advocates still believe that if the identified concerns about the ustld are fully addressed , the tld could become an organization capable of taking on a more important stakeholder role in promoting congress - parliament cooperation and a stronger voice for transatlantic relations in both congress and the ep .

the fact that the united states and the eu have begun negotiation during the 113 th congress on a comprehensive transatlantic trade and investment partnership could offer some new opportunities for enhancing congress - ep cooperation in the years ahead .

many observers stress that efforts to significantly bolster the overall relationship between congress and the parliament will require a sustained political commitment on both sides and serious consideration of all possible options , including but not necessarily limited to , those focused on the tld .

yet , many believe it is an effort worth pursuing and look forward to a more robust ustld leadership and the role it will play in attempting to enhance relations between the congress and the european parliament .

the following chart identifies the european parliament committees and the u.s. house and senate committees with similar or related jurisdictions .

however , due to the unique nature of both systems , not all ep committees have a corresponding congressional equivalent .

for organizational purposes , committees are grouped into broad "subject areas" given the various competencies of both ep and u.s. committees .

these "subject areas" have been generally determined by ep committee competencies ; accordingly , not all u.s. congressional committees are included .

nor does the chart include ep special committees , which are temporary in nature .

given the complexities of the u.s. committee system in particular , this chart is meant largely for illustrative purposes , and should not be construed as an exhaustive treatment of committee jurisdictions or competencies .

both ep and u.s. congressional committees are listed in alphabetical order .

