since the early 1980s , the periodic debate over reauthorization of federal surface transportation programs has been primarily about money and its distribution .

in each of the five reauthorizations that took place during that period ( 1982 , 1987 , 1991 , 1998 , and 2005 ) , the federal fuel taxes and other sources of revenue dedicated to the highway trust fund ( htf ) were reliably providing the various surface transportation programs with more money year after year .

in 2009 this was not the case .

for the first time in decades , driving declined significantly , with a concomitant decrease in fuel tax revenues .

going forward , the program cannot count on new money from the familiar sources .

the law authorizing federal surface transportation programs expired at the end of fy2009 , but congress has failed to enact a new authorization .

surface transportation programs continue to operate on the basis of authority provided in continuing resolutions and extension legislation .

reauthorization has become a difficult undertaking in the last two decades .

the most recent multi - year law , the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea - lu or safetea ) ( p.l .

109-59 ) was enacted 22 months after previous legislation had originally expired .

the bill prior to safetea , the transportation equity act for the 21 st century ( tea21 ) ( p.l .

105-178 , as amended by p.l .

105-206 ) was also passed well after previous legislative authority had originally expired .

in fact , no surface transportation authorization bill has been enacted on time since the 1970s .

over time , these bills have become increasingly complex in their structure and in their politics as states , other program beneficiaries , and related interest groups compete for constrained federal transportation resources .

safetea has led to controversies over funding parity among the states ( the so - called donor - donee debate ) , its large number of earmarks ( exemplified by the so - called "bridge to nowhere" ) , and the funding problems ahead .

additionally , the structure of the surface transportation programs under safetea and its predecessors has made it difficult for the federal government to respond to certain intermodal transportation needs .

these issues could cause congress to make significant changes to the surface transportation programs in this reauthorization .

this report focuses on the major issues underlying the safetea reauthorization debate .

the surface transportation programs can be difficult to understand .

the language of transportation finance — contract authority , obligation limitations , and so on — is unfamiliar even to many who have a basic understanding of the annual congressional budget process .

this section explains in basic terms how the surface transportation programs are structured and financed .

federal funding for surface transportation has historically been linked to the revenue stream provided by the highway trust fund .

the trust fund has two separate accounts — highways and mass transit .

the primary revenue sources for these accounts are the 18.4 cent - per - gallon tax on gasoline and a 24.4 cent - per - gallon tax on diesel fuel .

although there are other sources of revenue for the trust fund ( truck registrations , truck tires , etc .

 ) , the fuel taxes provide about 90% of the income to the funds .

the transit account receives 2.86 cents per gallon of fuel , and there is also a 0.1 cent per gallon fuel tax reserved for the leaking underground storage tank fund , which is not included in the surface transportation programs .

the federal motor fuels tax has been increased several times since its inception in 1956 .

at the time of the last increase , in 1993 , some of the receipts were deposited in the treasury general fund , but since fy1998 these revenues have been directed to the highway trust fund .

other changes in recent years have modestly increased trust fund revenues .

the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-357 ) provided the trust fund with additional future income by changing elements of federal gasohol taxation .

at the time , there were estimates that these changes could provide the trust fund with an additional $4 billion per year .

safetea also included a number of tax and other changes in its finance title .

the revenue increases in this title were viewed as quite modest and were derived mostly from cutting back on tax fraud and by transferring some treasury general fund revenues associated with transportation - related activities to the trust fund .

it was believed at the time of passage that the changes enacted in safetea , combined with the changes in gasohol legislation enacted in 2004 and enhanced by expected economic growth , would be sufficient to finance the act through fy2009 .

the financial estimates associated with safetea have proved to be overly optimistic .

the highway account has already required three transfers from the general fund totaling $29.7 billion , without which fhwa might not have been able to pay states for work they completed .

in late fy2008 , $8 billion was transferred to carry the highway account into the 2009 fiscal year ( p.l .

110-318 , september 15 , 2008 ) .

in fy2009 the transfer was $7 billion ( p.l .

111-46 , august 7 , 2009 ) .

the surface transportation extension act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-148 , march 18 , 2010 ) transferred $14.7 billion more to the highway account .

historically , the trust fund - based revenue collection system was a reliably growing source of funding for surface transportation , as the trust funds collected more than was expended to implement the program defined by congress .

this situation has changed under safetea as spending on highways and transit has exceeded both highway and transit account revenues on a regular basis .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , in its august 30 , 2011 htf baseline projection , showed that the highway account is expected to have an unexpended balance of $4.2 billion at the end of fy2012 and a negative $8.4 billion by the end of fy2013 .

cbo estimates that the highway account will be unable to meet obligations in a timely manner near the end of fy2012 or during fy2013 , depending on the cash flows into and out of the fund .

the cbo projections show the excess of outlays over tax revenues plus interest as $9 billion for fy2012 and $11.6 billion for fy2013 .

a gap in the neighborhood of $10 billion remains through fy2021 .

cbo projects that the mass transit account , which received a $4.8 billion general fund transfer in fy2010 , will also remain above zero well into through fy2014 .

the mass transit account's end of year negative balance jumps to a negative $5.6 billion for fy2015 and grows rapidly thereafter .

the recent declines in motor fuel tax receipts are unprecedented .

even during the oil shocks of the 1970s , driving , as measured by vehicle miles traveled , returned fairly quickly to the 2% average annual growth rate experienced since the 1960s .

the same thing has not happened since 2007 , even though fuel prices fell to below $2 by december 2008 from their highs of around $4 per gallon in mid - 2008 , as the sluggish economy depressed freight , leisure travel , and commutes to work .

gas prices have since increased and have remained above $3.00 per gallon since december 2010 .

as a rule of thumb , adding a penny to the federal fuels tax provides the trust fund with between $1.6 and $1.8 billion per year in new revenues .

without an increase in the existing fuel taxes , the mostly fuel - based trust fund taxation system will not be able to support increased surface transportation spending over the next few years .

the immediate choice for policymakers , therefore , is to find new sources of revenue for the trust fund , or alternately , to settle for a smaller surface transportation program that might look very different than the one currently in place .

however , if congress chooses to address the short - term funding issue , it will need to address the viability of the trust fund mechanism over the longer term .

in recent years , congress has acted to mandate higher fuel - economy standards for gasoline - powered cars and to encourage development of hybrid and battery - powered vehicles .

as these more fuel - efficient vehicles come to make up a larger share of the u.s. vehicle fleet , consumption of motor fuels may decline even if driving increases .

if it wishes to maintain or increase the size of the surface transportation programs , congress may need to explore alternatives to the motor fuels tax as possible sources of funding .

the difficult outlook for motor fuel tax revenues clouds the outlook for surface transportation reauthorization .

in the past , steady revenue growth enabled congress to meet the competing demands for funding in each reauthorization .

tea21 benefitted from a run - up in fuel usage during the boom years of the late 1990s that was at least partially the result of the popularity of sport utility vehicles during the period .

safetea did not have quite the same financial backing , but the authors of the act were nonetheless able to find sufficient new revenues to expand the programs .

the next reauthorization bill , as the above discussion indicates , lacks a ready source of cash to support expansion — a situation that could define the upcoming legislative debate much more than issues such as program structure and infrastructure needs .

in addition , overriding concerns regarding reducing the federal budget deficit could trump efforts to increase or even maintain current spending on surface transportation infrastructure .

in public , the safetea debate focused on the donor / donee issue and a later , more public , controversy over earmarking .

the actual process of crafting the law , however , was complicated by the political need to satisfy the large number of interest groups supporting specific programs , most of which are funded from the highway trust fund but do not involve building highways .

the reauthorization process will involve detailed consideration of the way in which surface transportation programs are funded , organized , and managed .

a handful of fundamental issues , however , will influence the way in which the eventual legislation is constructed .

national goals and purposes .

today's surface transportation programs have their origins in the creation of the interstate highway program ( 1956 ) and the collapse of public transit systems ( early 1960s ) .

in the intervening decades , it has become difficult to discern how federal surface transportation spending relates to national needs , as the vast majority of the funding is granted to states and localities based not on maximizing the national return on transportation investment , but as an entitlement to be spent largely as state and , to a lesser extent , local authorities think best .

changing the existing decision - making process , however , could involve a transfer of authority from state and local authorities to the federal government .

productivity and performance management .

with the operation of surface transportation programs left largely to states and localities , federal officials often have a poor understanding of the efficiency and effectiveness with which federal funds are being used .

states and localities have , in many cases , very robust processes in place to measure and analyze their programs .

however , these mechanisms are largely internal , and their diversity makes it difficult to compare performance across the country .

federal performance standards might make such comparisons easier , potentially allowing the federal government to direct funding to the state and local governments with the most efficient and effective programs .

once imposed , however , such measures might be "gamed" by state and local officials in ways that negate their value .

even if congress should decide to enforce performance measures by funding penalties , it is possible that the effect of such penalties would be counteracted by funding guarantees in the bill .

accelerating project d elivery .

17 major highway and transit facilities , which often take somewhere on the order of 10 to 15 years to plan and build , are frequently said to take much too long deliver .

studies show that project delay can occur during any of the five main phases in delivering major highway and transit projects: planning ; preliminary design and environmental review ; final design ; right - of - way acquisition and utility relocation ; and construction .

many proposals , particularly for highways , focus mainly on speeding the environmental review process required by the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) and other federal environmental laws and regulations .

one proposal that might be considered is making permanent the surface transportation project delivery pilot program and expanding it to allow delegation of nepa authority for highway projects to any state .

another is to reduce the number of steps in the public transit new starts program and the elimination of the alternatives analysis that is often seen as a duplication of the requirements in nepa .

structural issues .

safetea created two commissions to study the structure and the financing imperatives of the surface transportation programs .

one of these , the national surface transportation policy and revenue study commission , called for a major reorganization of the federal surface transportation programs into 10 new program areas , often across existing programmatic modal boundaries .

a report issued by the george w. bush administration entitled "refocus , reform , renew: a new transportation approach for america," included several proposals for new and reorganized surface transportation programs , with a heavy emphasis on expanding the role of market forces and the private sector in the provision of surface transportation infrastructure .

numerous think tanks , research organizations , and transportation groups have called for organizational changes in the way federal surface transportation programs are administered .

reducing program size .

if congress chooses not to make changes that would increase the flow of revenue into the highway trust fund , it will face a choice between continuing to authorize annual general fund expenditures for surface transportation and reducing the programs' size .

it could simply choose to limit the funding authorized in the surface transportation bill to the htf revenues and interest projected to be available over the life of the bill ( plus the general fund component of the transit title ) .

it could shift some programs currently funded by the highway trust fund , such as the appalachian roads program , to general fund status .

it might reduce matching ratios ( 90:10 for interstates , 80:20 for most other roads , varying proportions for transit projects ) in order to spread the available federal funds more broadly .

more dramatically , it could limit surface transportation funding to programs that it determines fulfill clear national needs , and devolve other responsibilities to the states .

alternative funding mechanisms .

public - private partnerships , in which private companies take responsibility for construction , operation , and / or maintenance of particular transportation projects in return for a flow of payments from government agencies or project users , have been widely encouraged as a means of decreasing reliance on the trust fund .

other proposals for expanding alternative funding include federal grants or loans to state infrastructure banks ; increased authority to lend to local agencies under the transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act ( tifia ) ; increased reliance on grant anticipation revenue vehicles ( known as garvee bonds ) and the private activity bonds authorized by safetea ; and creation of a national infrastructure bank , as proposed by the obama administration in its fy2010 , fy2011 , and fy2012 budgets .

tolling .

congress could choose to expand the role of tolling in federal highway policy .

currently most interstate system highways are under a tolling prohibition .

tolling could help pay for the rebuilding or reconstruction of congested urban interstate highways .

tolling could also be encouraged to provide the funding flows often needed to support public private partnerships .

raising tolling to greater prominence in federal highway policy faces significant obstacles , notably the general public hostility to tolls and the difficulty of garnering political support .

revenue issues .

the two commissions established in safetea both recommended increases in the motor fuel tax to meet the immediate funding needs of surface transportation programs .

both urged an eventual shift to charges based on vehicle miles traveled as a longer - term funding source .

vmt charges represent one type of user fee , but alternatives such as tolls and weight - distance taxes , which are already imposed in some instances on trucks , also might be employed to force road users to pay the costs of surface transportation programs .

 ( crs contacts: bob kirk and will mallett ) .

the federal government provides support for transit agencies' capital investments and operating costs .

although federal transit programs direct most funding to capital investment , transit agencies have some discretion over the use of their federal funds among capital and operating purposes .

the mass transit account of the highway trust fund is the source of approximately 80% of federal transit program monies , with the remaining 20% drawn from the general fund of the u.s. treasury .

although the transit account is in somewhat better financial shape than the highway account , the unexpended balance is projected to reach zero in fy2014 .

despite uncertainty surrounding this projection , it is clear that current revenue into the transit account will not sustain federal transit administration programs and activities at current levels through another four - to six - year authorization period .

within this context , there are both funding and programmatic issues that could arise during reauthorization .

the prospect of constrained federal transit funding is occurring in conjunction with financial problems in the transit industry itself .

the immediate causes are flat or declining government assistance at the state and local levels due to budget conditions and lower patronage due to a high unemployment rate .

but financial problems in public transit are a long - term issue , primarily caused by declining transit system productivity , that results in an increasing requirement for government support from all levels of government .

fares and other operating revenue were only 26% of capital and operating funding sources in 2009 .

for that reason , congress may want to consider whether modifications in the federal transit program might boost ridership at a lower cost per rider to the government .

historically intercity passenger rail transportation programs have been a very minor part of surface transportation program authorization legislation , if present at all .

in safetea - lu , for example , the major initiative was to rename the high - speed rail corridor planning program as the high - speed rail corridor development program , with acquisition of tracks and equipment added as an eligible expense .

the program authorization was $70 million annually from the general fund , but congress did not provide any funding for the program until fy2008 .

meanwhile , amtrak , a railroad company created and owned by the federal government , was authorized and funded outside of the surface transportation authorization acts .

since 2005 , federal initiatives in intercity passenger rail transportation have expanded greatly .

in 2008 congress passed the passenger rail investment and improvement act , which authorized increased funding for amtrak and for states wishing to develop intercity passenger rail service .

in the 2009 , arra , provided $8 billion for grants to states to develop intercity passenger rail service , and another $2.5 billion for this purpose was included in the fy2010 dot appropriations act .

this increased federal interest in intercity passenger rail , due in part to concerns over growing highway congestion , rising gasoline prices , and carbon emissions , makes is more likely that rail will be a larger part of a future surface transportation reauthorization .

in february 2011 , the administration proposed to provide $53 billion over six years in grants to states and to amtrak for improvements to intercity passenger rail service , including development of high - speed rail corridors .

the grants would be funded from the highway trust fund , which would be renamed the transportation trust fund .

as the highway trust fund is already oversubscribed , it is not clear how the additional money would be raised .

intercity passenger rail also was included in the outline reauthorization initiative released by the house t&i committee in july 2011 .

among the issues mentioned are the role of amtrak , the opportunity for private - sector companies to build and operate intercity passenger rail infrastructure and services , and funding .

in the past , all of the funding provided to amtrak and to state governments for intercity passenger rail has come from discretionary annual appropriations ; in the fy2011 dot appropriations act , congress provided no funding for grants to states and rescinded $400 million of the funding appropriated in fy2010 .

in the fy2012 dot appropriations act , congress again provided no funding for grants to states for intercity passenger rail .

given that planning , construction , and equipment manufacturing for passenger rail projects can take several years , a more predictable funding mechanism might be considered , if congress wishes to expand the federal role .

up until the world economy began to slow late in 2007 , the immediate concern of freight carriers and shippers was congestion .

major ports and land gateways experienced a notable run - up in import volumes in the early years of the last decade , but even under reduced freight volume , congestion persists , including on certain highway segments .

congestion frustrates a freight carrier's ability to provide reliable scheduling .

unreliability is costly because it requires shippers to carry buffer stock , reducing an efficient "just - in - time" logistics strategy to a "just - in - case" strategy .

dot projects that total tons transported will grow 68% by 2040 .

highway safety in the united states has improved in recent years .

traffic fatalities have declined by 25% , from 43,510 in 2005 to an 32,885 in 2010 , the lowest number since 1950 .

the traffic fatality rate ( the number of fatalities adjusted for exposure to the risk of dying in a crash ) in 2010 was 1.10 fatalities per 100 million vehicle miles traveled , the lowest level on record .

by comparison , the fatality rate in 1965 was 5.3 fatalities per 100 million vehicle miles traveled .

however , dot failed to reach its goal of reducing the fatality rate to 1.0 by 2008 ( which would have required a reduction in fatalities to around 30,000 ) .

moreover , since the 1960s , when the united states had the best safety record of any country , several other countries have surpassed the united states in lowering their fatality rates .

most of the fatalities occur to three groups: passenger car occupants ( 67% , or 22,187 deaths in 2010 ) ; motorcyclists ( 14% , or 4,502 fatalities in 2010 ; and pedestrians ( 13% , or 4,280 fatalities in 2010 ) .

congress tends to treat commercial vehicle safety issues separately from passenger vehicle safety issues , as matters related to commercial vehicles and their drivers come under a specialized agency , the federal motor carrier safety administration .

increases in federal limits on the size and weight of commercial trucks may be among the most controversial proposals related to safety , as they would increase the productivity of the trucking industry but might have adverse effects on safety as well as on roadway life .

congress may choose to explore the potential of in - vehicle technologies , such as driver - fatigue warning systems and lane departure warning systems , to promote safety .

inspections of commercial vehicles are considered important in promoting compliance with federal safety requirements , but there is concern that the resources available to support inspections do not allow inspections to be done on more than a fraction of the commercial vehicles , making the risk of discovery of noncompliance low .

a separate set of issues concerns the behavior of commercial drivers .

previous laws have funded efforts to prevent drivers from driving while drugged or with serious medical conditions that may impair their driving .

gao , however , found that it was easy for drivers to avoid detection because many collection sites did not follow regulations intended to maintain the integrity of urine tests .

gao also found that drivers who failed a drug test were able to continue driving without submitting to the required return - to - duty process by hiding their past drug history from employers , many of whom did not conduct thorough background checks .

among the measures that congress may wish to consider to deal with this issue are the establishment of a national database for drug testing , additional funding for inspectors , and additional authority to impose fines for failure to comply with federal requirements .

fmcsa has asked for legislative changes that it said would help it enforce bus safety .

 ( crs c ontact: [author name scrubbed] ) .

the federal surface transportation program supports research in many areas , from system efficiency and passenger safety to environmental degradation stemming from transportation projects .

fhwa has the largest research budget of the dot agencies , while nhtsa , fta , and the research and innovative technology administration also have significant roles .

title v of safetea authorized $411 million annually for research .

of that , $196 million went to the surface transportation research program ; $110 million to research on intelligent transportation systems ( its ) ; $70 million to support research at university transportation centers ; $27 million to the bureau of transportation statistics ; and $27 million to training and education programs .

congress is likely to face questions about the adequacy of transportation research funding ; under safetea , federal spending on surface transportation research is approximately 0.9% of total federal expenditures on highways , and some advocates contend that a higher share will have a payoff in terms of reduced costs from crashes , congestion , and environmental damage .

congress also faces competing claims for how transportation research funding should be used .

in safetea's research title , congress earmarked more funding than the total amount that was authorized by the title , with the result that individual research programs and projects received less funding than each was authorized in order that the available funding could be stretched to cover all the designated programs and projects .

no unearmarked research funding was available for some fhwa projects , such as the biennial conditions and performance reports , that in previous years had been funded with such moneys .

in 2008 congress addressed these funding shortfalls by enacting the safetea technical corrections act ( p.l .

110-224 ) , which added additional funding to all of the research programs .

the lack of peer review in the allocation of research funding has also surfaced as a concern .

 ( crs contact: [author name scrubbed] ) .

during past reauthorization debates , environmental requirements have drawn attention due to both the impact that surface transportation projects can have on the environment and the impact that compliance with environmental requirements can have on project delivery .

previous reauthorization legislation has attempted to address environmental compliance issues by authorizing funding for projects to mitigate or minimize environmental impacts associated with surface transportation and by specifying procedures intended to expedite compliance with certain environmental requirements .

the upcoming reauthorization process may include debate over ways to speed the environmental compliance process and fund certain regulatory requirements .

before final design , property acquisition , or construction on a highway or transit project can proceed , fhwa and fta must comply with all applicable environmental review requirements , including those of the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ; 42 u.s.c .

4321 et seq. ) .

nepa requires all federal agencies to consider the environmental impacts of their proposed actions .

to ensure that environmental impacts are considered before final decisions are made , nepa requires the preparation of an environmental impact statement ( eis ) for any federally funded project that significantly affects the quality of the human environment .

if the level of significance of a proposed project is unclear , the agency must prepare an environmental assessment in order to make that determination .

projects that do not individually or cumulatively have a significant social , economic , or environmental effect , and which dot has determined from past experience have no significant impact , are processed as categorical exclusions .

dot regulations require the final nepa documentation to demonstrate that a project will be in compliance with all applicable environmental laws and related requirements .

this means that , for any given transportation project , any environmental study , review , or consultation required by law should be conducted within the framework of the nepa process .

according to fhwa , legal requirements most frequently applicable to its projects are the endangered species act of 1973 ( 16 u.s.c .

1531 et seq .

 ) , national historic preservation act ( 16 u.s.c .

460 et seq .

 ) , clean water act ( 33 u.s.c .

1251 et seq .

 ) , and "section 4 ( f ) "of the department of transportation act of 1966 ( 40 u.s.c .

303 ) .

to meet the requirements of these laws , various agencies , such as the u.s .

fish and wildlife service , the advisory council on historic preservation , the u.s. army corps of engineers , or the environmental protection agency ( epa ) may be required to participate in the nepa process .

that participation may involve performing scientific analysis or issuing permits .

safetea , and tea - 21 before it , both included legislative changes intended to streamline the nepa process .

debate continues on the impact that environmental compliance requirements have on transportation project delivery , with more efficient interagency cooperation frequently identified as an area in need of improvement .

additional provisions intended to expedite nepa reviews may be debated in the upcoming reauthorization process .

another requirement generally carried out within the context of the nepa process is compliance with section 4 ( f ) of the department of transportation act of 1966 .

section 4 ( f ) requirements apply to the use of publicly owned parks and recreation areas , wildlife and waterfowl refuges , and publicly or privately owned historic sites of national , state , or local significance .

the law prohibits the use of a section 4 ( f ) resource for a transportation project unless there is no "prudent and feasible" alternative , and requires all possible planning to minimize harm to the resource .

when a proposed project would use a section 4 ( f ) resource , a separate "section 4 ( f ) evaluation" must be prepared and included with the appropriate nepa documentation .

safetea amended section 4 ( f ) to allow for the use of parks , refuges , and historic sites if that use results in "de minimis impacts. .

safetea also required dot to issue regulations clarifying factors to be considered and standards to be applied in determining whether alternatives are "prudent and feasible. .

due to the continued prohibition on most uses of section 4 ( f ) resources , further changes to the requirements may be debated during the upcoming reauthorization process .

the congestion mitigation and air quality improvement ( cmaq ) program was created in by istea in 1991 , and was reauthorized in tea - 21 and again in safetea .

it provides funds to states for transportation projects designed to reduce traffic congestion and improve air quality , particularly in areas of the country that do not attain national ambient air quality standards .

in particular , it authorizes funding for programs and projects intended to reduce carbon monoxide , particulate matter , and ozone .

cmaq funds are apportioned in accordance with a formula based largely on a state's population and pollution reduction needs .

during the reauthorization process , there will likely be debate regarding the level of cmaq funding and possibly the types of projects eligible for funding .

from fy2005 to fy2009 , the cmaq program provided over $8.6 billion to state departments of transportation and local transit agencies .

specific types of projects eligible for cmaq funds include , but are not limited to: programs for improved public transit ; traffic flow improvement programs that reduce emissions ; and programs to control extended idling of vehicles .

safetea required states and metropolitan planning organizations to give priority in distributing cmaq funds to diesel engine retrofits and other cost - effective emission reduction and congestion mitigation activities that provide air quality benefits .

safetea also expanded eligibility requirements to specifically allow certain types of projects to qualify for cmaq funding .

safetea also directed dot to evaluate and assess a representative sample of cmaq projects , in consultation with epa , to determine their impacts on air quality and congestion levels and to ensure the effective implementation of the program .

further , safetea directed dot to maintain and disseminate a database describing project impacts .

in response to safetea requirements , in october 2008 , fhwa released a report that studied the effectiveness of 67 cmaq - funded projects .

 ( crs c ontact: [author name scrubbed] ) .

under the clean air act , areas that have not attained one or more of the six national ambient air quality standards must develop state implementation plans ( sips ) demonstrating how they will reach attainment .

as of september 2010 , at least 47 areas with 119 million people were subject to the sip requirements .

other areas are likely to be added to this list in the next few years , as more stringent air quality standards for ozone and particulate matter take effect .

section 176 of the clean air act prohibits federal agencies from funding projects in these areas unless the projects "conform" to the sips .

to demonstrate conformity , a transportation improvement program ( tip ) must show that the projects to be undertaken will not lead to an increase in emissions that would delay attainment of air quality standards .

new highway and transit projects cannot receive federal funds unless they can make this demonstration .

there are some exceptions: highway safety projects , rehabilitation and reconstruction of transit facilities , purchase of replacement buses and rail cars , noise attenuation projects , and pedestrian and bicycle facilities are all allowed to proceed whether or not an area's conformity has lapsed .

but the threat of a conformity lapse and the potential "loss" of highway funds has been a powerful incentive to get local officials to focus on air quality considerations as they plan transportation projects .

in surface transportation reauthorization , congress may weigh the benefits of conformity in achieving air quality goals against the burdens it imposes on proposed transportation projects .

 ( crs contact: jim mccarthy ) .

if the united states is to address climate change , legislation and regulations will need to require significant reductions in emissions of "greenhouse" gases ( ghg ) from transportation sources .

transportation accounts for about one - third of u.s. emissions of the leading greenhouse gas , carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , and about 27% of total emissions of the six major ghgs typically considered .

co 2 is largely a product of combustion: the carbon in fuel ( be it gasoline , diesel , natural gas , or whatever ) combines with oxygen in the atmosphere when the fuel burns .

thus , the principal method of reducing co 2 emissions from transportation sources is to burn less fuel .

emissions can also be reduced by substituting fuels that contain less carbon .

in the case of motor vehicles , this would mean substituting natural gas or other lower - carbon fuels for gasoline and diesel fuel .

in the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ; p.l .

110-140 ) , congress required both improved fuel economy for new cars and trucks and a lower carbon content in renewable transportation fuels .

the law required that new motor vehicles attain an average improvement of 40% in fuel economy by 2020 with incremental improvements between now and then , and that future renewable fuels have a lower carbon content on a life - cycle basis .

the obama administration has now advanced the schedule for eisa's fuel economy standards , with nearly full implementation scheduled by 2016 .

further , the administration has proposed even more stringent standards for 2017-2025 .

surface transportation reauthorization offers the possibility to look at transportation emissions in a broader context , and could provide incentives for systemic changes that might lower the carbon footprint of the transportation sector .

electrification of truck stops to reduce idling , congestion mitigation , high occupancy vehicle lanes , funding for pedestrian and bicycle facilities , preferences for lower carbon vehicles in fta grants , incentives to shift freight and people to less - carbon - intensive modes , and incentives for "smart growth" are among the potential policy options .

 ( crs contact: jim mccarthy ) .

current laws provide subsidies to promote the use of alternative motor fuels .

for example , while gasoline , regardless of its ethanol content , is taxed at 18.4 cents per gallon , every gallon of ethanol blended into gasoline is subject to a credit of 45 cents per gallon .

 ( this credit is set to expire at the end of 2011. ) .

therefore , the effective tax rate on a 10% blend of ethanol in gasoline is 14.9 cents per gallon .

a credit of 50 cents per gallon for natural gas , hydrogen , and other alternative fuels , along with tax credits for biodiesel and renewable diesel , expired at the end of 2009 , but were extended through fy2011 .

while these various incentives were enacted as provisions in energy and economic legislation , there may be interest in using surface transportation reauthorization to extend them .

with interest growing in the environmental effects of alternative fuels , there also may be interest in modifying the fuel credits to reflect their performance on environmental measures .

recent debate in the senate , however , raises questions about the future of these incentives , especially for corn - based ethanol .

safetea and various energy laws include incentives to promote alternative fuel and advanced technology vehicles .

for example , the energy policy act of 2005 established tax credits for the purchase of alternative fuel and hybrid vehicles , many of which expired at the end of 2010 .

fta bus programs provide additional matching funds to transit agencies that purchase alternative fuel and advanced technology buses , including advanced diesel buses , beyond those available for conventional buses .

congress may wish to use reauthorization to modify these incentives to focus more on their energy efficiency or environmental performance .

to expand the use of alternative fuels and advanced technology vehicles , infrastructure to support them must also grow .

just as there are incentives for the purchase of new vehicles , there are tax credits for retail stations to install refueling infrastructure , although these also expire at the end of fy2011 .

as part of the surface transportation reauthorization debate , there may be interest in providing additional incentives , including grants , for tax - exempt entities such as transit agencies to install additional refueling infrastructure , especially if those stations are accessible to the public .

 ( crs c ontact: brent yacobucci ) .

