nearly half a million miles of high - volume pipeline transport natural gas , oil , and other hazardous liquids across the united states .

these transmission pipelines are integral to u.s. energy supply and have vital links to other critical infrastructure , such as power plants , airports , and military bases .

while an efficient and fundamentally safe means of transport , many pipelines carry volatile , flammable , or toxic materials with the potential to cause public injury and environmental damage .

the nation's pipeline networks are also widespread , running alternately through remote and densely populated regions , some above ground and some below .

these systems are vulnerable to accidents and terrorist attack .

recent pipeline accidents in marshall , mi , san bruno , ca , allentown , pa , and laurel , mt , have demonstrated this vulnerability and have heightened congressional concern about pipeline risks .

the federal program for pipeline safety resides primarily within the department of transportation ( dot ) , although its inspection and enforcement activities rely heavily upon partnerships with state pipeline safety agencies .

the federal pipeline security program began with the dot as well , immediately after the terror attacks of september 11 , 2001 , but pipeline security authority was subsequently transferred to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) when the latter department was created .

the dot and dhs have distinct missions , but they cooperate to protect the nation's pipelines .

the federal energy regulatory commission is not operationally involved in pipeline safety or security , but it can examine safety issues under its siting authority for interstate natural gas pipelines , and can allow pipeline companies under its rate jurisdiction to recover pipeline security costs .

collectively , these agencies administer a comprehensive and complex set of regulatory authorities which has been changing significantly over the last decade and continues to do so .

the federal pipeline safety program is authorized through the fiscal year ending september 30 , 2015 , under the pipeline safety , regulatory certainty , and job creation act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-90 ) , which was signed by president obama on january 3 , 2012 .

this report reviews the history of federal programs for pipeline safety and security , key policy issues , and recent developments leading up to p.l .

112-90 .

although the act contains over 30 substantive sections , this report focuses only on a subset of provisions of key interest in recent congressional debate .

of the nation's approximately half million miles of transmission pipeline , roughly 180,000 miles carry hazardous liquids — over 75% of the nation's crude oil and around 60% of its refined petroleum products , along with other products .

within this network , there are nearly 200 inter state crude oil and liquid fuel pipelines , which account for roughly 80% of total pipeline mileage and transported volume .

the u.s. natural gas pipeline network consists of around 300,000 miles of inter state and intra state transmission .

it also contains some 14,000 miles of onshore field and gathering pipeline , which connect gas extraction wells to processing facilities .

around 120 systems make up the inter state gas transmission network ; another 90 or so systems operate strictly within individual states .

these inter state and intra state gas transmission pipelines feed around 900,000 miles of regional pipelines in some 1,400 local distribution networks serving over 66 million customers .

natural gas pipelines also connect to 127 active liquefied natural gas ( lng ) storage sites , which can augment pipeline gas supplies during peak demand periods .

the 112 th congress reauthorized the federal pipeline safety program and enacted a number of new pipeline safety provisions .

in the context of its continuing oversight of federal pipeline safety and security activities , and in addition to the findings of the ntsb's san bruno investigation , the 113 th congress may focus on certain key issues that have drawn particular attention in recent policy deliberations .

both government and industry have taken numerous steps to improve pipeline safety and security over the last 10 years .

while stakeholders across the board agree that federal pipeline safety programs have been on the right track , major pipeline incidents since 2010 suggest there continues to be significant room for improvement .

likewise , the threat of physical and cyberattack on u.s. pipeline infrastructure remains a concern .

the ntsb has identified improvement of federal pipeline safety oversight as a "top ten" priority for 2013 .

the leading pipeline industry associations have concurred .

the american gas association has expressed support for these ntsb recommendations , stating that "pipeline safety and integrity is the top priority for the natural gas industry. .

the interstate natural gas association of america ( ingaa ) has stated that "ingaa members are addressing all of the issues that the ntsb has outlined ... and more. .

the association of oil pipe lines has also welcomed the ntsb's focus on pipeline safety , stating that "operators are hard at work on safety improvements suggested by ntsb , phmsa and their own initiatives. .

whether the renewed efforts by industry , combined with additional oversight by federal agencies , will further enhance the safety and security of u.s. pipelines remains to be seen .

as congress oversees the federal pipeline safety program and the federal role in pipeline security , key issues of focus may be pipeline agency staff resources , automatic pipeline shutoff valves , penalties for safety violations , safety regulations for oil sands crudes , and the possible need for pipeline security regulations , among other concerns .

in addition to these specific issues , congress may assess how the various elements of u.s. pipeline safety and security activity fit together in the nation's overall strategy to protect transportation infrastructure .

pipeline safety and security necessarily involve many groups: federal agencies , oil and gas pipeline associations , large and small pipeline operators , and local communities .

reviewing how these groups work together to achieve common goals could be an oversight challenge for congress .

