this report examines the implications for agriculture of the ongoing but inconclusive debate about global climate change .

whatever the current or future congresses may do regarding climate legislation , interest in existing and prospective governmental and private sector responses will surely continue .

existing governmental climate change activities affecting or potentially affecting agriculture include the environmental protection agency's ( epa ) initiative under the clean air act to address emissions of greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) ; u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) conservation programs that can encourage practices affecting agriculture's emissions or sequestration of ghgs ; and provisions of law encouraging the use of biofuels .

private sector concerns about climate change also could affect agriculture .

for example , some companies increase investment in drought - tolerant seed technology in response to water resource pressures and potentially longer periods of extreme temperatures resulting from a changing climate .

in the climate change debate , agriculture's role is multifaceted .

agriculture is both a source of several ghgs and a "sink" for absorbing carbon dioxide , the most common ghg , thereby partly offsetting emissions .

overall , agriculture is a comparatively modest source of u.s. ghg emissions: it accounts for approximately 7% of u.s. emissions , while transportation accounts for 27% and electricity generation for 35% .

further , it should be recognized that the data on various agriculture emissions are of varying precisions and that the implications of land use changes for emissions are not well understood and are hard to measure .

similarly , agriculture is a dynamic activity and emissions / sequestration can change and also can be manipulated to some degree .

during the 111 th congress , comprehensive climate change legislation passed the house and was reported by a senate committee , but no comprehensive bill was enacted .

at the same time , the administration moved forward on several fronts to address climate change , including research , epa's clean air initiative , and usda's promotion of conservation practices that can diminish emissions .

as these various initiatives progressed , the agriculture community weighed in at several points .

one outcome was that the comprehensive climate change bills largely excluded agriculture from regulatory requirements , and another was that congress through a funding bill excluded agriculture from certain epa regulatory requirements concerning reporting of emissions ( eg , from manure management practices ) .

this report places in context federal agricultural policymaking with respect to the climate change debate .

it describes agricultural activities involving cropland and livestock production that contribute to emissions and sequestration of ghgs ; it reviews recent climate change initiatives , agricultural stakeholder responses , and current status ; and it summarizes the implications of ongoing federal programs affecting agricultural emissions and sequestration .

agricultural activities can be both a source and a "sink" for ghgs , releasing several ghgs through plant and animal respiration and plant decomposition and removing carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) through photosynthesis , thus storing / sequestering it in vegetation and soils .

animal agriculture contributes directly to emissions of ghgs through a variety of processes such as enteric fermentation in domestic livestock ( i.e. , digestion ) and manure management systems and practices .

non - livestock source categories in agriculture likewise emit ghgs , including rice cultivation , agricultural soil management , and field burning of agricultural residues .

a range of land management , agricultural conservation , and other farmland practices also can reduce or abate emissions and / or sequester carbon to some extent .

these include soil conservation , manure and grazing management , and land retirement , conversions , and restoration .

as shown in table 1 , agriculture is estimated to have emitted 6.9% of total u.s. greenhouse gas emissions in 2008 , including co 2 , methane ( ch 4 ) , and nitrous oxides ( n 2 o ) .

conversely , agriculture is estimated to have been a sink for 5.4% of total ghg emissions that were sequestered in the united states .

unlike other prominent economic sectors ( eg , electricity generation and transportation ) , agriculture sector emissions are dominated by ch 4 and n 2 o , not co 2 .

efforts have been underway in the administration to develop policies and strategies to address ghgs and climate change .

the 111 th congress , too , considered legislation in this area: comprehensive climate and energy legislation passed the house in july 2009 and was reported by a senate committee , but no comprehensive bill was enacted .

agriculture generally has been a major part of these discussions , but so far the agriculture sector has been largely excluded from regulatory and legislative proposals .

two sets of actions by the epa concerning ghg emissions have drawn stakeholders' attention .

the 111 th congress showed interest in several aspects of issues concerning agriculture and ghgs , acting mainly to exempt or relieve agriculture from potential regulation of sources' ghg emissions .

first , legislation was introduced in the 111 th congress in response to concerns raised by epa's july 2008 anpr that the agency might require caa permits for ghg emissions from agriculture , which some groups characterized as a "cow tax proposal. .

the legislation , s. 527 and h.r .

1426 , would have amended the clean air act to mandate that no title v permit be issued for controlling carbon dioxide , nitrogen oxide , water vapor , or methane emissions "resulting from biological processes associated with livestock production. .

in addition , in the fy2010 appropriations bill for epa ( p.l .

111-88 ) , congress included a provision similar to the prohibitory language of s. 527 and h.r .

1426 .

as adopted , the measure prohibits epa from using funds under the act to promulgate or implement any rule requiring the issuance of caa title v permits for ghg emissions associated with livestock production .

second , also in final action on p.l .

111-88 , congress blocked epa from using funds in the bill to implement any rule that would require mandatory reporting of ghg emissions from manure management operations .

this bill language applies to manure management systems of all sizes , not just to those that emit more than 25,000 metric tons of co 2 equivalent per year , as contained in epa's mandatory reporting rule .

as noted previously , epa's rule excludes reporting by 99% of farms with manure management systems ; p.l .

111-88 excluded the other 1% of operations .

third , the 111 th congress debated comprehensive climate change bills and in that context considered whether or how to include agriculture and other sources of ghgs in the legislation .

in july 2009 , the house passed the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( h.r .

2454 ) , legislation that covers clean energy , energy efficiency , reducing global warming pollution , transitioning to a clean energy economy , and agriculture and forestry related offsets .

the complex and controversial legislation reflected compromises on various issues , including a number of negotiated changes sought by agriculture interests .

a key feature of the house - passed bill was an economy - wide cap - and - trade system designed to reduce ghg emissions from covered entities .

as passed , the legislation excluded any agricultural enterprise or any small business enterprise that emits less than 25,000 tons of co 2 equivalent of ghg emissions per year .

animal agriculture sources were excluded entirely from the definition of "covered entities" in h.r .

2454 , because of their de minimis impact on the climate ; thus , they would not have been subject to the cap or other mandatory provisions of the bill .

a key feature of h.r .

2454 , as passed by the house , was the creation of a carbon offset provision for agriculture .

the so - called "peterson amendment" was added to h.r .

2454 just prior to the floor debate , following negotiations between the chairmen of the house energy and commerce committee and the house agriculture committee .

among other provisions , the peterson amendment allowed for certain agricultural and forestry activities to become eligible to participate in a carbon offset program .

offsets ( emission reductions from non - covered sources ) could be purchased by covered entities and used to meet their compliance obligations .

thus , the agricultural and forestry sectors could earn income for any emission reductions that it undertakes , provided that the reductions are measurable and verifiable .

the legislation also would have established the offset program under usda ( rather than epa ) , a key difference sought by agriculture stakeholders .

comprehensive climate change legislation was reported from the senate environment and public works committee in february 2010 ( s. 1733 , the clean energy jobs and american power act ) .

regarding agriculture , this bill was similar to h.r .

2454 in that it used the same emissions threshold ( 25,000 metric tons of co 2 equivalent per year ) applicable to the cap - and - trade and other mandatory provisions and would exclude animal agriculture from the definition of "covered entities. .

like h.r .

2454 , s. 1733 would have allowed for agriculture and forestry offsets as part of a cap - and - trade scheme .

also in the senate , the clean energy partnerships act of 2009 ( s. 2729 ) was introduced by senator stabenow shortly after the senate environment and public works committee completed work on s. 1733 .

this bill ( often referred to as the "stabenow amendment" ) would have expanded the agricultural and forestry carbon offset provisions in the comprehensive climate bills ( eg , s. 1733 ) and also would have allowed for certain other provisions benefitting u.s. farmers and landowners .

some degree of ghg emissions reduction from agricultural activities can be achieved with existing conservation and land management practices , which also conserve and improve the quality of soil , water , air , energy , and plant and animal life .

thus , in addition to or in place of regulating agricultural emissions , another policy option could be to promote various voluntary on - farm practices — ranging from reduced tillage to prescribed grazing — that could mitigate emissions .

the effectiveness , complexity , cost , and break - even point of the conservation practice varies based on the farm type , farm size , land management , and agricultural commodity , among other factors .

a list of selected conservation practices that can reduce agricultural ghg emissions is displayed in table 2 .

typically , conservation practices have been used for soil conservation and water quality improvement , not climate change abatement or mitigation .

however , recent investigations have shown certain conservation practices can significantly reduce agriculturally based ghg emissions .

ideal conservation practices that also could reduce ghg emissions are associated with the primary agricultural sources of these emissions ( described previously ) — enteric fermentation , manure management , and agricultural soil management — or more simply , croplands and livestock .

conservation practices that fall under the domains of nutrient management , tillage operations , field management , precision agriculture , manure management , and dietary management will likely have the most influence on decreasing agricultural ghg emissions .

a combination of practices may be necessary in some cases to significantly reduce ghg emissions .

however , certain conservation practices may decrease a single ghg while simultaneously increasing others .

depending on the agricultural source of ghg emissions , different conservation practices would likely need to be used to obtain desired reductions .

for instance , ghg control strategies for cropland differ from those used for livestock .

cropland ghg emissions generally are distributed over a vast area of land .

land management practices , sometimes referred to as "non - structural practices," work well to reduce ghg emissions from cropland .

on the other hand , livestock ghg emissions may be widely dispersed ( emissions originate from a herd of cattle grazing ) or may emanate from a point - source ( emissions originate from the manure handling system ) .

a mixture of feed management , nonstructural practices , and structural practices may be used to reduce livestock ghg emissions .

in addition to reducing ghg emissions directly , some conservation practices provide another climate change benefit: carbon sequestration ( storage ) , which takes carbon out of the atmosphere .

wetland restoration is a prime example of a conservation practice that sequesters carbon by re - establishing a sustainable ecosystem that provides a relatively greater degree of permanence in co 2 sequestration than some other practices .

strategies , technologies , and practices to reduce ch 4 and n 2 o emissions at the farm level are not mandated by federal policies .

as discussed further below , current federal policies are voluntary and offer incentives for reducing ghg emissions .

absent mandates or increased incentives , financial and monitoring challenges have stalled large - scale adoption of certain practices and technologies .

for example , ch 4 emitted from a dairy farm via enteric fermentation ( i.e. , digestion ) and manure management can be reduced by feeding dairy cows a high - quality forage and using an anaerobic digestion system to capture methane from the manure .

however , the high cost of anaerobic digestion systems is a significant barrier to their widespread use for methane capture .

similarly , n 2 o emitted from corn fields due to nutrient and soil management efforts ( eg , fertilization and tillage ) can be reduced with efficient application of fertilizer and conservation tillage , but costs of adopting appropriate technologies and practices can be prohibitive .

overall , problems of quantifying , monitoring , and verifying emission reduction or carbon storage may make it impracticable to include many agricultural activities in some ghg reduction programs , such as trading , because they might not meet credible standards .

existing conservation and farmland management programs administered at the federal and state levels often encourage agricultural practices that can reduce ghg emissions and / or sequester carbon ( see table 2 ) .

most of these programs are voluntary and were initiated mainly for other production or environmental purposes ( such as soil fertility and water quality improvement ) .

few existing programs specifically address ghg emission concerns in the agriculture and forestry sectors .

however , usda and some states have started to focus additional attention on the potential for emissions reduction and carbon storage under certain existing programs .

these include conservation , forestry , energy , and research programs within existing farm legislation .

in general , conservation programs administered by usda and state agencies encourage farmers to implement certain farming practices and often provide financial incentives and technical assistance to support their adoption .

participation in these programs is voluntary , and long - term maintenance of implemented practices is not mandatory following the completion of a contract .

the effectiveness of these practices depends on the type of practice , how well it is maintained , and also on the length of time a practice is undertaken .

these programs are generally designed to address site - specific improvements based on a conservation plan developed with the assistance of usda technical field staff , state extension services , or private technical service providers .

conservation plans consider the goals and land resource base for an individual farmer or landowner and are typically a necessary precursor to participating in usda's conservation programs .

this section describes relevant usda programs that can provide financial and / or technical assistance for the types of on - farm practices described above to mitigate agriculture's ghg emissions .

questions of whether and how to address human - induced climate change have been widely debated in recent times .

issues of science , economics , values , geopolitics and a host of other concerns have been contentious .

the economic stakes in these debates are potentially large — with both the costs of controls and the "costs of inaction" ranging , by some estimates , into trillions of dollars over several decades .

results of the 2010 congressional elections have altered political dynamics in congress on many issues , and leaders of both political parties have indicated that they currently do not plan to pursue comprehensive approaches to addressing climate change in the 112 th congress , although some elements of previous proposals may move through the legislative process — for example , certain energy policy elements .

how agriculture fits in these discussions has drawn interest in the past and likely will do so again .

appendix a .

agricultural sector emissions of methane and nitrous oxides as shown in table a - 1 , agricultural activities contributed an estimated 34.2% of all ch 4 emissions and 73.3% of all n 2 o emissions in the united states in 2008 .

livestock - related categories ( enteric fermentation and manure management ) were 32.7% of total u.s. ch 4 emissions and 5.4% of total n 2 o emissions in 2008 , while various land management practices were 8.2% of total u.s. ch 4 emissions and 68% of total n 2 o emissions .

between 1990 and 2008 , estimated ch 4 emissions from agricultural activities increased by 14.4% , while estimated n 2 o emissions fluctuated from year to year , but overall increased by 7.0% .

appendix b .

conservation practices and programs affecting ghg .

