the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) created the independent payment advisory board ( ipab , or the board ) to "reduce the per capita rate of growth in medicare spending. .

the board's proposals will be implemented by the secretary of health and human services ( the secretary ) unless congress acts either by formulating its own proposal to achieve the same savings or by discontinuing the automatic implementation process defined in the statute .

this report , which provides an overview of the board , begins with a discussion of the rationale behind the creation of an independent medicare board and briefly reviews prior proposals for similar boards and commissions .

the report then describes the structure of the board , the calculations and determinations required to be made by the office of the chief actuary ( the chief actuary ) in the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) that trigger a board proposal , and the content of and constraints on board proposals — including the medicare productivity exemptions under section 3401 of ppaca .

in addition , the report reviews the expedited and other parliamentary procedures that relate to congressional consideration of board proposals and other board - related activities , and concludes with a description of how the board's proposals are to be implemented and their possible impact .

appendix a details key dates for ipab implementation and various reports required by the law , and appendix b compares the ipab with the medicare payment advisory commission ( medpac ) .

appendix c summarizes the medicare productivity exemptions in section 3401 of ppaca as they relate to section 3403 .

among some proponents of health care reform , a major impetus for reform , in addition to improving quality and increasing access , has been the rising cost of the medicare program .

the explicit charge given by ppaca to the board in section 3403 ( b ) is to "reduce the per capita rate of growth in medicare expenditures. .

as described in more detail below , beginning in 2013 , and each subsequent year , the chief actuary needs to calculate the medicare per capita growth rate — the five - year average growth in medicare program spending per enrollee and the medicare per capita target growth rate — the rate medicare expenditures would grow without triggering interventions under this section .

if the chief actuary determines that projected five - year per capita growth rate in medicare expenditures two years hence exceeds the projected per capita target growth rate , the chief actuary needs to establish an applicable savings target — the amount by which the board must reduce future spending .

the chief actuary's determination also triggers a requirement that the board prepare a proposal to reduce medicare expenditures by an amount at least equal to the applicable savings target .

while funding for the board is authorized beginning in fy2012 and the chief actuary makes its first determination in 2013 , the statute does not provide a date by which the board is to begin its operations .

below , the board's membership , structure , and budget are described .

this section describes the role of the chief actuary and the determination process by which the chief actuary establishes whether the projected per capita medicare expenditures will exceed certain target levels .

the chief actuary's determination sets in motion a three - year sequence of events ( see table 1 ) .

in addition , this section describes the key calculations that the chief actuary will need to make beginning in 2013 and provides an illustrative example of these calculations .

the three - year sequence begins each year with the chief actuary making a determination , by april 30 , as to whether the projected per capita medicare expenditures will exceed certain target levels .

the year in which the chief actuary makes its determination is referred to as the determination year ( dy ) .

the next year is referred to as the proposal year ( py ) and the following year is the implementation year ( iy ) .

if the chief actuary makes a determination by april 30 of the dy that the growth rate for an iy is forecast to exceed the target growth rate for that year , the board is to develop a detailed proposal to reduce the growth rate by the applicable savings target .

this section details the proposal process and key elements of board proposals .

while the board's principal function is to develop proposals that reduce per capita growth in medicare spending , this is not its sole activity .

the board is charged with developing advisory reports related to medicare , annual public information reports , and biennial reports containing recommendations to slow the growth in national health expenditures .

each type of report is detailed below , and a summary , with a timeline of the various board reports , is presented in appendix a .

in addition , the government accountability office ( gao ) is directed , as described below , to undertake a review of the board's initial recommendations and report to congress by july 1 , 2015 .

the secretary must implement the board's proposals unless congress affirmatively acts to amend or block them within a stated period of time and under circumstances specified in the act .

as noted above , ppaca requires the board to submit its proposal to both congress and the president .

the proposal is to be accompanied by , among other things , implementing legislation .

the secretary is required to automatically implement the proposals contained in the ipab legislation on august 15 of the year such a proposal is submitted , unless prior to that date , legislation is enacted that includes the statement , "this act supersedes the recommendations of the board contained in the proposal submitted , in the year which includes the date of enactment of this act , to congress under section 1899a of the social security act," or in 2017 , a joint resolution discontinuing the automatic ipab implementation process has been enacted .

to begin , section 3403 ( d ) of the act establishes special "fast track" parliamentary procedures governing house and senate committee consideration , and senate floor consideration , of legislation implementing the board or secretary's proposal .

these procedures differ from the parliamentary mechanisms the chambers usually use to consider most legislation , and are designed to ensure that congress can act promptly on the implementing legislation should it choose to do so .

it accomplishes this goal by mandating the immediate introduction of the legislation in congress , and by establishing strict deadlines for committee and senate floor consideration , as well as by placing certain limits on the amending process .

the procedures established by the act permit congress to amend the ipab - implementing legislation , but only in a manner that achieves at least the same level of targeted reductions in medicare spending growth as are contained in the ipab plan .

the act bars congress from changing the ipab fiscal targets in any other legislation it considers as well , and establishes procedures whereby a super - majority vote is required in the senate to waive this requirement .

the act establishes a second set of "fast track" procedures governing the consideration of a joint resolution discontinuing the automatic ipab implementation process described above .

such procedures are designed to promote timely consideration of such a joint resolution .

this joint resolution requires a super - majority vote of both chambers and either the signature of the president or overriding his veto by a two - thirds vote in each house to enter into force .

in the absence of either one of the two general or one limited exceptions noted below , the secretary implements the board's proposals on august 15 of the py .

essentially , recommendations that relate to payment rate changes that take effect on a fiscal year basis take effect on october 1 of the py .

recommendations relating to payments to plans under medicare parts c and d and recommendations relating to payment rate changes that take effect on a calendar year basis take effect on january 1 of the iy .

there are two general exceptions to implementing a board proposal: 1 .

if federal legislation was enacted by august 15 of the py that superseded the board's recommendations and a. achieves at least the same net reduction in total medicare program spending as would have been achieved by the board's proposal , and b. does not increase the expected medicare program spending over the ten - year period , starting with the iy , relative to what it would have been absent the legislation .

2 .

beginning with iy 2020 , and beyond , the secretary would not implement a board proposal if a joint resolution was enacted prior to august 15 , 2017 , to discontinue the board .

in addition , beginning in py 2019 , if the board submitted a proposal in the prior year and in the current year the chief actuary determines that the projected per capita rate of growth in national health expenditures for the iy exceeds the projected medicare per capita growth rate for the iy , then the secretary is directed not to implement the recommendations submitted in the prior py .

for example , if in 2020 the board submitted a proposal and in april 2021 the chief actuary determines that the projected per capita rate of growth in national health expenditures for 2023 exceeds the projected medicare per capita growth rate for 2023 , then the secretary would not implement the recommendations contained in the 2020 proposal .

however , the secretary cannot use this exception in two successive years .

a number of bills have been introduced in the 112 th congress that would repeal ppaca completely .

these include , among others , h.r .

2 and s. 192 .

other bills have been introduced to amend the specific provisions of ppaca that relate to ipab .

for instance , h.r .

452 , introduced by representative roe of tennessee on january 26 , 2011 , would repeal ppaca sections 3403 and 10320 ( the ipab provisions ) , including any amendments , and would restore any provisions of law amended by those sections .

on march 29 , 2011 , senator cornyn introduced s. 668 , the health care bureaucrats elimination act , which would also repeal sections 3403 and 10320 of ppaca .

the national commission on fiscal responsibility and reform , popularly referred to as the simpson - bowles deficit commission , proposed two sets of recommendations ( recommendations 3.5 and 3.6 ) regarding ipab .

recommendation 3.5 proposed to "eliminate the provider carve - outs that exempt certain providers from any short - term changes in their payments ( see appendix c ) .

recommendation 3.6 proposed to both establish "a global budget for total federal health care costs and limit the growth in federal health care spending to gdp plus 1%. .

the commission suggested that "expanding and strengthening the independent payment advisory board ( ipab ) to allow it to make recommendations for cost - sharing and benefit design and to look beyond medicare. .

on march 30 , 2011 , the cbo revised its estimate of the likely savings from ipab .

in testimony before the house energy and commerce committee's subcommittee on health , cbo director douglas elmendorf testified that in its february 2011 estimate , cbo concluded that the rate of increase in spending would probably exceed the target rate in some years , and that the ipab , therefore , would have to intervene to reduce the growth of medicare spending .

cbo estimated that those actions would result in $14 billion in savings over the 2012 – 2021 period .

in cbo's march 2011 baseline , by contrast , the rate of growth in medicare spending per beneficiary is projected to remain below the levels at which the ipab will be required to intervene to reduce medicare spending .

as a result of that reduction in projected medicare spending , cbo's march baseline does not include any savings from actions by the ipab .

while this estimate may well change in the future with future changes in cbo's assumptions , cbo currently forecasts that ipab will not generate any savings through 2021 .

in president obama's april 13 , 2011 , remarks on fiscal responsibility , the president called for strengthening an independent commission of doctors , nurses , medical experts and consumers … to reduce unnecessary spending while protecting access to the services that seniors need .

[and if] medicare costs rise faster than we expect , then this approach will give the independent commission the authority to make additional savings by further improving medicare .

the president's proposal was further described in a fact sheet issued by the white house , which detailed that ipab should target per beneficiary medicare cost growth to gdp per capita plus 0.5% beginning in 2018 rather than the current 1% .

the president's fy2013 budget , as submitted to congress on february 13 , 2012 , includes a proposal to strengthen the ipab .

beginning in the sixth year of implementation , 2020 ( which ties to the 2018 determination year ) , when the target growth rate is based on the growth in nominal gdp per capita , the proposal would lower the target growth to the growth rate in nominal gdp per capita plus 0.5 percentage point .

the ipab would also be given "additional tools like the ability to consider value - based benefit design and policies that promote integrated and coordinated care. .

this modification would increase the likelihood that the ipab would need to submit a proposal to congress .

h.r .

452 , the medicare decisions accountability act of 2011 , introduced on january 26 , 2011 , would repeal the independent payment advisory board .

on february 29 , 2012 , the house energy and commerce subcommittee on health held a mark - up of the bill and forwarded it to the full committee .

the house energy and commerce committee ordered the bill to be reported by voice - vote on march 6 , 2012 .

the house committee on ways and means also ordered the bill to be reported by voice vote on march 8 , 2012 .

h.r .

452 was combined with the help efficient , accessible , low - cost , timely healthcare ( health ) act of 2011 ( h.r .

5 ) , a bill that would impose caps on some damages awarded in malpractice lawsuits , limit attorneys' fees in malpractice lawsuits , and establish a statute of limitations for filing health care lawsuits .

on march 22 , 2012 , the house passed the combined version of h.r .

5 .

appendix a .

key dates for ipab implementation appendix b .

a comparison of ipab and medpac appendix c. medicare productivity exemptions and board recommendations ppaca section 3401 altered certain market basket updates used to adjust medicare base payment amounts and incorporated productivity improvements into those market basket updates that previously did not include them .

since some providers and suppliers of services will receive a reduction in payments beyond their productivity adjustment in some years , section 3403 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( iii ) prohibits , as described below , the board from recommending in some years further reduction in payment rates to those providers and suppliers .

all of the providers and suppliers subject to section 3401 productivity adjustments are listed in table c - 1 .

to be exempt under section 3403 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( iii ) from board recommendations in any given year a provider would have to be slated to receive a reduction under section 3401 in its inflationary payment update in excess of a reduction due to productivity in a year in which such recommendations would take effect .

reduction in excess of a reduction due to productivity adjustment an "update reduction in excess of a reduction due to productivity" means that for that category of provider , after calculating any applicable percentage increase in payments due to changes in costs , reduced by the productivity adjustment , payments are further reduced by an additional applicable percentage specified in section 3401 .

for example , in rate year 2012 , payments to long term care hospitals will be adjusted by changes in their costs , changes in productivity in the broader economy , and then reduced by an additional 0.10 percentage point .

again , only those providers that are subject to this additional reduction in payments will receive a time - limited exemption from board recommendations .

therefore , the relevant factor in determining whether providers have an exemption is whether the provider had a reduction in excess of a reduction due to productivity in the year the recommendation would take effect .

if so , that provider is exempt from board recommendations that take effect in that year .

providers subject to section 3401 table c - 1 also indicates which providers are subject to a productivity adjustment , a reduction in excess of a reduction due to productivity , or some other adjustment ; the applicable time period of the adjustment ; and whether the adjustment gives rise to an exemption period under section 3403 .

crs analysis of cms statistics indicates that in 2009 medicare payments to exempt providers represented approximately 37% of all medicare benefit payments .

proposals generated by the board in 2018 and submitted to the president and congress in 2019 could include provisions , relating to any provider , that the secretary would begin implementing effective august 15 , 2019 , and later .

by 2020 , all exemptions will have lapsed and all providers of services and supplies will potentially be subject to board recommendations .

