in october 2010 , the supreme court heard oral arguments for bruesewitz v. wyeth , a case which involves the scope of the national childhood vaccine injury act .

the issue before the court was whether 42 u.s.c .

section 300aa - 22 ( b ) ( 1 ) of the act precludes all vaccine design defect claims even if the vaccine's side effects were avoidable , in other words whether the section preempts vaccine design defect claims categorically , or whether the vaccine manufacturer has to show on a case - by - case basis that the side effects could not have been avoided by some alternatively designed vaccine .

on february 22 , 2011 , the supreme court issued its decision in bruesewitz , affirming , by a vote of 6-2 , the decision of the u.s. court of appeals for the third circuit that the federal law preempts all design - defect claims against vaccine manufacturers brought by plaintiffs seeking compensation for injury or death caused by the vaccine's side effects .

this report provides an overview of the structure of the vaccine act and the relevant facts of the bruesewitz case .

it then examines the lower court decisions before reviewing the supreme court decision .

finally , it discusses the decision's potential effect on preemption jurisprudence as well as on the existing vaccine act litigation .

the national childhood vaccine injury act ( vaccine act ) was enacted in 1986 and established a national vaccine program to "achieve optimal prevention of human infectious diseases through immunization and ... against adverse reaction to vaccines. .

under the vaccine act , the national vaccine injury compensation program ( compensation program ) was established to handle claims against drug manufacturers for vaccine - related injuries and deaths .

the compensation program has two parts .

part a creates a mandatory forum for the administration of claims by requiring individuals who seek compensation , including the injured party's legal representative , to file a petition in the united states court of federal claims ( vaccine court ) .

a petitioner is entitled to recover if the affected person ( 1 ) received a vaccine covered by the vaccine act ; ( 2 ) suffered a "covered" injury ; and ( 3 ) it cannot be shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the injuries or death were not caused by the vaccine .

a petitioner who suffers an off - table , or non - covered , injury may still recover compensation by proving affirmatively that the vaccine caused the injury .

part b permits a petitioner to decline the result of the vaccine court and pursue a civil suit in state or federal district court only after a final judgment is issued by the vaccine court .

any subsequent civil action is governed by state law , including the applicable statute of limitations , which is stayed pending the outcome of the suit filed in the vaccine court .

however , section 300aa - 22 places limitations on subsequent civil actions , and it is this section that is at issue in bruesewitz v. wyeth .

in this case , the plaintiffs / petitioners were the parents of hannah bruesewitz .

they filed a claim with the vaccine court in april 1995 , seeking compensation on behalf of their daughter , who suffered from several seizures shortly after receiving the third of five recommended doses of the diphtheria - pertussis - tetanus ( dpt ) vaccine on april 1 , 1992 .

hannah was subsequently diagnosed as having residual seizure disorder and developmental delay , for which she will likely require medical care for the remainder of her life .

the dpt vaccine that hannah received was marketed by wyeth ( and its predecessors ) under the trade name tri - immunol and approved in 1948 .

tri - immunol contained whole , inactivated pertussis cells ( "whole - cell" ) that effectively reduced pertussis infections and associated deaths , but it was linked to a variety of adverse events .

in december 1991 , the fda approved wyeth's application for an alternative dpt vaccine , known as acel - imune .

acel - imune does not contain the "whole - cell" component , and is reportedly less likely to cause adverse events .

the fda initially approved wyeth's acel - imune for use in the fourth and fifth doses of the dpt vaccine , but did not approve its use in the first three doses of the dpt vaccine until december 1996 .

thus , for her third dose hannah received the tri - immunol vaccine because there were no non - whole - cell vaccines commercially available at the time .

wyeth , the defendant / respondent , voluntarily discontinued manufacturing tri - immunol in 1998 .

although the plaintiffs filed their complaint with the vaccine court , alleging that hannah suffered covered injuries , the vaccine court held a hearing in july 2002 and concluded in december 2002 that hannah's injuries were off - table injuries and that the petitioners had not proved causation in fact .

on february 14 , 2003 , the plaintiffs did not accept the vaccine court's judgment to dismiss the claim with prejudice , and subsequently brought suit in the philadelphia county court of common pleas in october 2005 .

wyeth removed the action on the basis of diversity jurisdiction to the united states district court for the eastern district of pennsylvania .

the only issue the supreme court agreed to review is whether section 22 ( b ) ( 1 ) precludes all design defect claims or whether a vaccine manufacturer must show on a case - by - case basis that the side effects at issue could not have been avoided by some differently designed vaccine .

after hearing oral arguments on october 12 , 2010 , the supreme court issued its decision on february 22 , 2011 , affirming by a vote of 6-2 the third circuit's holding that the vaccine act expressly preempts all design defect claims against manufacturers .

justice scalia , writing for the majority , found that the text of the vaccine act supports an interpretation that the provision at issue preempts all design defect claims , and that this textual reading is supported by the structure of the act .

justice sotomayor , writing a dissenting opinion , concluded the opposite .

the opinions addressed several of the points raised during oral arguments , such as the potential for a superfluous interpretation of the provision , the purpose of the vaccine act , and the motivation for vaccine manufacturers to keep their products as up - to - date as science and technology permit .

no legislation has been introduced on this issue in the 112 th congress , though some measures were introduced in the 111 th congress .

these and other similar bills have been introduced repeatedly in the past ; however , none of them would have directly affected the outcome of the bruesewitz case , nor overturned the court's decision .

in the 111 th congress , these bills were ( 1 ) h.r .

2459 , the national vaccine injury compensation program improvement act of 2009 , by representative dan burton , and ( 2 ) h.r .

4096 , the national vaccine injury compensation program modernization act of 2009 , by representative tom perriello .

both bills would have amended the statute of limitations for filing a petition with the vaccine court .

specifically , these bills would have extended the period for filing a petition with the vaccine court to within two years after the date of the bill's enactment if an injury or death occurs as a result "of a vaccine set forth in the vaccine injury table that is administered after september 30 , 1988 , and before the date of the [bill's] enactment. .

the bills would have also allowed petitions to be filed notwithstanding a previous dismissal for an untimely filing .

h.r .

2459 would have also addressed the basis for calculating projected lost earnings , the increase of award in the case of a vaccine - related death , allowing compensation for family counseling expenses as well as interim attorneys' fees .

congress has conducted oversight hearings on the compensation program , among concerns that the program was not meeting its original goals of providing expeditious and fair compensation to individuals who may have suffered harm from vaccinations .

the practical effect the bruesewitz decision may have on the autism proceedings could renew congress's interest in evaluating the compensation program .

if congress finds that it wishes to give claimants , such as the 5,000 claimants mentioned above , the ability to pursue design defect claims in state courts , then it may choose to revisit the specific language at issue to clarify if the vaccine act precludes design defect claims .

in the past , congress has introduced legislation to overturn a decision by the supreme court .

one prominent decision was riegel v. medtronic , where the court held that the medical device amendments of 1976 ( mda ) expressly preempted state tort law claims .

in the aftermath , legislation was introduced , though not enacted , that would have amended the mda to provide "[n]othing in this section shall be construed to modify or otherwise affect any action for damages or the liability of any person under the law of the state. .

furthermore , congress could choose to amend the act to clarify the level of causation needed to be shown in order to provide more stability to the system .

