the presidential libraries act ( p.l .

84-373 ; 69 stat .

695 ) , as originally enacted in 1955 , sought to create a system of government "preservation and administration … of papers and other historical materials of any president or former president of the united states. .

pursuant to the law , the general services administration's ( gsa's ) administrator could , among other actions , accept … the papers and other historical materials of any president or former president of the united states , or of any other official or former official of the government , and other papers relating to and contemporary with any president or former president of the united states .

 ( p.l .

84-373 ) as the presidential library system continued to grow after the 1955 act , funding and construction issues became a policy concern .

amid the concerns about growing costs of the libraries , the act was substantially amended in 1986 ( p.l .

99-323 ; 100 stat .

495 ) to "shift the burden of on - going building operations costs of future libraries from the taxpayer to endowment funds. .

today , presidential libraries are funded through a combination of congressional appropriations and private sources .

in general , funds for archiving and management of a president's papers are appropriated to the national archives and records administration ( nara ) , while funds raised by private organizations support facility construction , programming , and other activities related to a president's legacy .

under the act , the archivist of the united states has the authority to accept and take title to land , facilities , and equipment for a library — or to enter into an agreement with certain public or private entities to use their land , facilities , and equipment .

prior to accepting title to the property or entering into the agreement , the archivist must submit a report to congress that includes , among other information , estimates of the costs and funding requirements of the proposed library .

congress then has 60 days of continuous session to disapprove of the acquisition or agreement .

if congress does not act , nara may take title to the property or enter into the agreement for use of the property , so long as the statutorily required endowment for maintenance and similar costs contains sufficient funding .

congress most recently updated presidential library funding requirements in 2008 .

through nara , the federal government currently operates and maintains 13 presidential libraries — including the facility for the records of former president george w. bush , which opened in april 2013 .

table 1 includes all of the current nara presidential library facilities .

figure 1 displays these facilities geographically and denotes the libraries that are affiliated with a university .

the libraries , which primarily serve as archival depositories for presidential records and memorabilia , are privately constructed on behalf of former presidents .

upon completion , the land , buildings , and sometimes other library amenities are deeded to or otherwise placed under the control of the federal government .

among some concerns associated with the construction and maintenance of presidential libraries is the role of the private organizations that build and , sometimes , continue to inhabit the library buildings .

the private organizations , commonly referred to as presidential library foundations , support the construction of the libraries and sometimes the exhibitions displayed within the library or its museum .

this close association with the library may create an amicable public - private partnership at library facilities .

such a relationship , however , may also render unclear which portions of the library and its exhibitions are funded by government appropriations and which portions are not .

some presidential library scholars have raised concerns over whether library exhibits present a balanced version of each president's administration or if they tend to portray the president in an inaccurate or , at least , more favorable , light .

the concerns of these scholars have grown as presidential libraries began to share their materials with k - 12 schools as educational programming .

this report details the legislative history of the presidential libraries act .

it then provides information on existing library facilities and their locations .

the report also discusses the private organizations that financially support their construction and , sometimes , their exhibitions .

it then analyzes legislative options for the act , including changing endowment requirements ; creating a single , centralized presidential library ; or more clearly identifying the role of the libraries' supporting foundations .

this report does not address the laws governing the collection , processing , and archiving of presidential records .

nara is currently examining proposals for the construction of a future barack obama presidential library .

once the archivist has selected a proposal , he is required by law to provide a written report to the president of the senate and the speaker of the house on the proposed "land , buildings , and equipment" that would constitute the future presidential library .

the archivist cannot accept the proposal on behalf of the federal government until "60 calendar days of continuous session" of congress have lapsed .

this report assists members and staff as they deliberate whether to accept proposed facility locations and designs .

the report examines some of the variables that may affect public visitation to facilities and tracks presidential library use of social media and other platforms to increase public engagement generally .

although there are 13 distinct presidential libraries , some traditions and patterns have emerged in their locations and operations .

for example , the first four presidential libraries — roosevelt , truman , hoover , and eisenhower — established two patterns: the facilities were located at what was considered to be the particular former president's hometown ( birthplace or principal residence ) and the libraries' buildings , grounds , and holdings were deeded to the federal government .

change in this practice first occurred with the lyndon baines johnson presidential library , which was located on the campus of the university of texas at austin .

the university could not legally deed its land to the federal government , so another provision of the pla was relied upon to effect federal supervision of the facility .

rather than taking title to the presidential archival facility , the archivist of the united states relied upon his authority to make agreements , upon terms and conditions he considers proper , with a state , political subdivision , university , institution of higher learning , institute , or foundation to use as a presidential archival depository land , buildings , and equipment of the state , subdivision , university or other organization , to be made available by it without transfer of title to the united states , and maintain , operate and protect the depository as a part of the national archives system .

pursuant to this authority , an agreement or memorandum of understanding was executed regarding the federal supervision of the johnson presidential library .

the gerald r. ford presidential library was similarly not deeded to the federal government because of its location on the ann arbor campus of the university of michigan .

a separate ford museum is located in the former president's hometown of grand rapids , michigan .

the museum , which shares the same director as the ford library , is part of the nara presidential library system .

the john f. kennedy , jimmy carter , ronald reagan , and william j. clinton presidential libraries , while deeded to the federal government — in part or in whole — are located in major cities in close proximity to respective presidential hometowns .

the george w. bush library located on the campus of southern methodist university , the alma mater of his wife , laura bush , was not deeded to the federal government .

instead , the facility came under federal supervision through the same provision of the pla that permitted nara to operate the johnson presidential library .

under the current arrangement , smu retains sole ownership of the property and nara is provided with exclusive rights to use their portion of the facility .

in addition to funding the 13 "official" presidential libraries , congress has occasionally provided specific funding for private facilities honoring former presidents .

these libraries , which hold the documents of former presidents who served prior to herbert hoover , may receive a direct line item in the annual appropriations process .

for example , congress appropriated $1 million in 1996 for the calvin coolidge memorial foundation , $500,000 in 1997 for the rutherford b. hayes home , $3 million in 1999 for the abraham lincoln library , and $365,000 in 2000 for the ulysses s. grant boyhood home .

such funds have been used to support construction , maintenance , or other projects .

because they are not part of the federal library system , however , facilities such as these are beyond the scope of this report .

all of the presidential libraries have also adapted to the internet .

a large number of the records available at the various libraries around the nation are now available online or in other electronic formats .

the presidential libraries and their support foundations use the internet for more than just giving researchers access to records: many libraries now offer virtual tours of their facilities online .

use of these electronic resources can make presidential records available to researchers anywhere in the country , rather than requiring researchers to visit the library facilities .

presidential libraries are also using the internet to publicize and share curricular resources for educators .

this includes information regarding in - person tours as well as lesson plans that can be accessed electronically .

the libraries have also embraced social media as part of their efforts to reach a wide audience , which is discussed at greater length in the " outreach and visitation " section below .

starting with president george washington and going through the first century and a half of the american republic , the papers of the president were regarded as personal property to be taken with a president when he left office .

in many cases , records were given to the library of congress for archiving , but the library did not have the staff or funding to "service these collected papers adequately and make them easy for the general researcher to use. .

in other cases , the records were "burned , lost , purloined or destroyed .

impecunious heirs sought to sell them to the [g]overnment , and in the course of some of these transactions , some parts of the collections were withheld or separated out and passed on to relatives or sold to collectors. .

according to one scholar , the records of the presidents are "a whole epoch of american history as seen from the office of the chief executive," that may include "letters and memos … on which great decisions and official acts were based. .

as scholars , the general public , and presidents themselves began to understand the value of these records , interest grew in creating standards for their preservation .

the presidential libraries act ( p.l .

84-373 ; 69 stat .

695 ) , as originally enacted in 1955 , sought to create a system of government "preservation and administration … of papers and other historical materials of any president or former president of the united states. .

amid concerns about growing costs of the libraries , the act was substantially amended in 1986 ( p.l .

99-323 ; 100 stat .

495 ) to "shift the burden of on - going building operations costs of future libraries from the taxpayer to endowment funds. .

these two laws , in addition to several other amendments , currently shape how and where presidential records are collected , preserved , and administered .

the following sections of the report detail the legislative history of the pla .

private organizations typically raise funds to support facility construction , programming , and other activities related to a president's legacy .

these entities are commonly referred to as presidential library foundations , and they play key roles in raising private funds to support the endowments necessary to meet the statutory requirements of the pla .

the foundations are separate legal entities from the libraries .

it appears that all of the currently operating presidential library foundations are structured as tax - exempt public charities described in section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

as such , they are subject to regulation under the irc .

among other things , the foundations' earnings may not be used to benefit any person having a personal and private interest in the organizations' activities , and the foundations may not engage in any campaign activity or a substantial amount of lobbying .

one point that should be noted is that presidential library foundations may engage in other activities besides supporting the library , so long as these activities are consistent with section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status .

for example , the william j. clinton foundation is engaged in a variety of other charitable and educational activities , including initiatives that focus on health and the environment .

as section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations , the library foundations are required to file an annual information return ( form 990 ) with the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

on the form 990 , foundations must report information concerning their finances , including such things as the amounts raised through donations and other sources ; their expenses broken down by category ( eg , compensation , programs , etc .

 ) ; and information on their assets and endowment funds .

foundations must also provide information about their operations , including descriptions of the programs and other activities that justify their section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status .

the form 990s are open to public inspection , along with the library foundations' applications for exempt status and , if applicable , unrelated business income tax return .

the returns may be requested from the irs or the foundation , and the foundations' recent form 990s are available on a private website at http: / / www.guidestar.org .

with respect to donors , federal law generally does not require public disclosure of their identities .

while foundations must disclose donors who have contributed at least $5,000 during the year to the irs on the form 990 , no identifying information about these donors is required to be publicly disclosed .

there is one limited exception in federal law that requires public donor disclosure — the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 ( hloga ) .

hloga requires registered lobbyists who contribute $200 or more to library foundations ( in the aggregate and over six - month reporting periods ) to disclose the contributions in reports filed with the clerk of the house and secretary of the senate , and these reports are publicly available .

these requirements also apply to organizations employing registered lobbyists and political action committees maintained or controlled by lobbyists .

in the 113 th congress , legislation was introduced to require greater transparency in the donations process .

the presidential library donation reform act of 2014 ( h.r .

1133 and s. 2640 ) would have required presidential library foundations to report , on a quarterly basis , contributions of $200 or more to the archivist .

the reporting requirement would have applied to any entity "established to raise funds to create , maintain , expand , or conduct activities at" a presidential library or facility related to a library .

the information that would have been required to be reported would be the amount , date , and source of the contribution ( including the address and occupation of the donor ) .

the foundation would have had to report the information until the later of ( 1 ) the date on which the archivist accepts , takes title to , or enters into an agreement to use any land or facility for the presidential library or ( 2 ) the date on which the relevant president no longer holds office .

the archivist would have been required to publish the donor information on nara's website in a searchable database .

finally , the act would also have made it unlawful to knowingly and willfully make or accept a donation in the name of another person .

h.r .

1133 was reported by the committee on oversight and government reform in june 2013 , and s. 2640 was reported , with amendment , by the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs in august 2014 .

no further action was taken on either bill .

finally , even though presidential library foundations are not required by law to disclose information on their donors , libraries may choose to do so nonetheless .

for example , the william j. clinton foundation agreed in 2008 to voluntarily disclose names and donation ranges of its contributors , amid concerns about potential conflicts of interest surrounding then - senator hillary rodham clinton's nomination as secretary of state .

this section of the report reviews scholarship on the presidential libraries .

among the issues that scholars discuss in their work is the accuracy of the history presented in exhibitions at the presidential libraries , the wisdom of maintaining a federated system , and the costs and benefits of the close relationship between the presidential foundations and the federal libraries .

on february 28 , 2011 , the house committee on transportation and infrastructure and the house committee on oversight and government reform held a joint hearing entitled "america's presidential libraries: their mission and their future. .

at the hearing , archivist of the united states david ferriero testified that the presidential libraries "enrich their local communities. .

he continued: local chambers of commerce and state tourism boards estimate that each visitor to a presidential library spends an additional $100-$200 ( depending on the community ) at local restaurants and hotels .

with nearly 2 million persons visiting presidential libraries in 2010 , the estimated support to the communities that surround presidential libraries may be significant: $15 million estimated to be added to the economy in abilene , kansas ; $43 million estimated in boston ; $55 million estimated in austin , texas .

after the hearing , representatives john mica and rick crawford hosted a forum on the future of the presidential library system that included officials from each of the presidential libraries that comprise the federal system .

at that forum , representative crawford asked the library officials what steps they were taking to attract students and other young people to the libraries .

among the options that representatives from the libraries cited as attracting young people to the library was the use of social media and other technologies .

these statements are supported by crs's examination of the libraries' use of different social media platforms .

table 2 includes information on presidential library use of facebook , twitter , and youtube .

currently , all 13 presidential libraries are using facebook to communicate with the public .

in addition , 10 libraries have independent twitter accounts and 10 have youtube channels .

for libraries that were open prior to 2013 , all but two of these accounts were established prior to 2012 .

the truman , kennedy , and bush libraries have been active on all three platforms since 2010 .

as shown in table 2 , the popularity of each library on these platforms varies greatly .

the facebook page for the ford library , for example , has been "liked" fewer than 3,000 times , the lowest number of any nara - affiliated presidential library .

conversely , the most popular page , which belongs to the george w. bush library , has been "liked" more than 170,000 times .

similar disparities were also found on both twitter and youtube , as indicated by the number of followers and subscribers in table 2 .

regardless of their relative popularity , each of the 13 libraries has been active in their use of social media .

at the time these data were collected , each of the facebook pages had been updated with new content within the prior seven days , and four pages had been updated in the previous 24 hours .

in addition , seven of the library twitter accounts have posted more than 1,000 tweets since joining the network .

for comparison purposes , table 2 also includes data on the use of social media by the national archives and records administration as a whole .

nara adopted social media use earlier than most of the presidential libraries , and has also generally generated a higher level of interest — as measured by likes , followers , and subscribers .

the presidential libraries use these social media platforms for a variety of purposes .

a review of recent facebook posts by the george bush library , the william j. clinton library , and the george w. bush library , for example , included messages related to administrative updates about the library , such as hours of operations or clarifications of policy ; commemoration of important events , including national holidays such as veterans day , september 11 , 2001 , and the birthdays of important world leaders ; current job openings at the library ; events that will be taking place or have recently taken place at the library , including lectures , book signings , and exhibits ; and historic moments that occurred during the applicable president's administration .

both the testimony of mr. ferriero and the expanded use of social media likely indicate that the presidential library system has an interest in increased visitation and the presidential libraries are actively engaged in finding ways to attract more people to the libraries .

data provided by nara , however , suggest that attracting visitors may still be a significant challenge .

from fy1975 to fy2012 , total visitors for all libraries have ranged between 1.1 million and 2.0 million visitors per year .

at the beginning of this period , only 5 libraries were operating — as opposed to the 12 in operation as of 2012 .

figure 2 shows both the total visitors to the libraries per year as well as the number of visitors per library .

while the number of total visitors has varied significantly across time , the number of visitors per open library has steadily declined .

the average number of visitors for any given year in this period was 1.46 million .

this total rose to more than 1.6 million for years in which a new presidential library opened ( years marked separately in table 2 ) .

in the first year of operation , presidential libraries attract an average of 300,000 visitors .

these numbers , however , typically decline over time .

five years after opening , visitation at the average presidential library declines by more than 36% .

the decline in visitors is 43% when looking at visitation across a 10-year time period , with two particular libraries' visitation totals declining by more than 60% in a decade .

attendance levels vary across the library system .

among the 12 libraries that were open in fy2012 , the ronald reagan presidential library had the highest number of visitors , with 381,000 .

six of the libraries , however , had a total number of visitors below 100,000 .

as a comparison , the national archives and records administration facility in washington , dc , has drawn roughly 1 million visitors per year since 2004 .

the relative popularity of each library is difficult to explain in terms of either how recently the president served or the geographic location of the facility .

while library attendance tends to decline over time , no evidence suggests that newer libraries are more visited over time .

for instance , the gerald r. ford library and museum has consistently maintained more visitors than the jimmy carter presidential library and museum in recent years , despite the ford library's opening more than five years earlier .

additionally , the ronald reagan presidential library had a resurgence in annual visitors in the early 2000s and has drawn more visitors since that time than either the george bush presidential library and museum or the william j. clinton presidential library and museum .

a recent study conducted on behalf of the university of chicago suggested that a prospective library to hold the records of president obama located in chicago would draw as many as 800,000 visitors per year , which is a visitation figure much higher than visitation levels at any current facility .

part of the rationale for this figure was that a library located in a more densely populated area with access to public transportation would generate a high number of visitors .

existing data on visitation to presidential libraries , however , suggest this is not always the case .

as demonstrated by table 3 , many of the facilities that are located in densely populated areas , such as the jimmy carter presidential library and museum and the richard nixon presidential library and museum , did not draw a relatively high number of visitors for fy2012 .

at the same time , the william j. clinton presidential library and museum and dwight d. eisenhower library drew more visitors despite locations that are more sparsely populated .

the national archives and records administration currently oversees 13 separate presidential libraries , which serve as repositories for presidential archival materials .

since enacted in 1955 , the presidential libraries act has provided for the preservation and administration of the historical materials of an outgoing president by authorizing the federal government to accept land , buildings , and other materials .

a private nonprofit organization funded the construction of each presidential repository and provided the required endowment .

almost every library is associated with that nonprofit , which often supports library and presidential museum exhibitions .

as this report has noted , the presidential libraries act has placed various requirements on both libraries and foundations to assist in the preservation of presidential legacies .

congress has the authority to legislate the mission and operation of all of the presidential libraries .

congress may choose to clarify the best method of preserving a president's legacy — by creating accurate and balanced exhibits on the presidency and each administration or by providing a user - friendly repository of each president's records .

congress may determine that the current operation of presidential libraries should continue , and that foundations should continue to fund and oversee the creation of public museum exhibits .

nara has final approval of all exhibit content , but the foundations , in many cases , have assumed control of creating the public exhibit portions of the libraries .

congress , however , may determine that nara should play a more active role in the creation and display of library exhibitions .

with greater control , nara could coordinate exhibits among the 13 current libraries and , possibly , offer a more thorough and balanced treatment of the presidency as an institution as well as the historical context of each individual presidential administration .

congress may also reconsider having a disparate collection of presidential libraries around the country .

congress could determine that having all historical presidential materials in one location is a less expensive and more accessible option than operating 13 or more distinct libraries .

congress would face a determination of what to do with library buildings the united states currently owns that would no longer be used as repositories .

congress would also face the question of funding the construction and use of a single facility .

moving all materials into a single facility could have implications for scholarship on presidential history .

on the one hand , a consolidation of the records would make the total collection of presidential materials easily accessible to researchers that would previously have had to visit different locations , such as those creating comparative work .

such a change , however , could also make research more difficult by removing the records from a location that was relevant to the hometown or upbringing of that president .

if a new single archive for presidential materials were constructed in washington , dc , then researchers living in california who had interest in materials on richard nixon may have to travel across the country instead of to yorba linda ( the current location of the richard nixon library ) to access them — or a scholar living in kansas may have to leave the midwest to learn more about dwight d. eisenhower .

additionally , the current system disperses the economic benefits of these facilities to 13 towns and cities around the country .

a consolidated approach would remove this benefit to local communities .

keeping the presidential libraries in the hometowns of the presidents may , arguably , help scholars better understand the environmental and social factors that shaped a president's earlier years and influenced his decisions .

the construction of library facilities outside the hometowns of the presidents themselves , as was the case with the repository for george w. bush in dallas , tx , could undermine this justification for a dispersed library system .

congress , therefore , may have an interest in requiring the construction of future presidential libraries in the hometown of the president .

on the other hand , the location of presidential materials may become increasingly irrelevant as the records of earlier former presidents are put online and a majority of the records of more recent presidents are electronic , making all presidential records more accessible to researchers no matter their location .

one centralized presidential archive could eliminate the need to replicate certain resources that are essential to a records repository .

for example , moving all presidential records into one facility run exclusively by nara would eliminate the need for each individual presidential library to have a specialized facility to protect classified presidential documents .

currently , each presidential library has had to construct and maintain facilities for such sensitive materials .

other services that may currently be required in each library are technology services and security personnel .

moving the materials into a central library , however , could render them susceptible to destruction by a single fire , flood , or other disaster .

additionally , construction of a centralized library could influence the type of research that scholars conduct .

research may focus on the institution of the presidency , as a whole , rather than on the individual presidents .

congress may also be concerned about the relationship between the presidential libraries and the library foundations that provide financial support .

congress has the authority to legislate whether one person can or should concurrently hold a position in the federal government and an unpaid position within the supporting organization .

such an arrangement may make certain that the foundation and nara have similar missions and ideas about the future of the entities .

on the other hand , congress may determine that one person holding a position in both the foundation and nara may present a conflict of interest in which the person could advance private - sector preferences over the interests of the federal government .

to reduce the public costs associated with presidential libraries , congress has the authority to legislate the percentage of the required endowment to accompany the deeding of any presidential library facility .

congress may determine that the current required endowment to accompany the deeding over of a presidential library to the federal government ( 60% ) should be raised , lowered , or maintained at its current level .

as this report has suggested , the federal presidential libraries and their private funding sources typically fulfill different roles .

because of the varied and unique relationships between the libraries and foundations , however , the precise division of labor and property is sometimes unclear .

in addition , as noted previously , relatively little information about private funding sources must be publicly disclosed .

if the various funding relationships among public and private sources are a concern , congress could mandate public disclosure of additional information about funding , division of duties , or office space .

in recent congresses , legislation that would amend fundraising for presidential libraries has been introduced .

h.r .

1133 ( 113 th congress ) , for example , would have required library fundraising organizations to file quarterly reports itemizing contributions totaling at least $200 .

under the bill , the reports would have been filed with nara .

pursuant to h.r .

1133 , the archivist would then have been required within 30 days to publish certain information from these quarterly reports on a publicly accessible website .

h.r .

1133 was reported by the house committee on oversight and government reform and placed on the union calendar on june 20 , 2013 .

no further action was taken on the bill .

nara , in its report on presidential libraries , suggested a possible alternative to the current libraries system that would require foundations to provide the government with a library - only building and "no museum component. .

any museum associated with the corresponding president could be placed "in the same general vicinity," but the facility would be separate and distinct from the library .

removing the foundation from the library facility could clarify to visitors what is privately owned space and what is publicly owned .

finally , the presidential libraries and museums often charge visitors an admission fee .

in some cases , this fee is then divided between the federal government and the foundation .

this fee division , however , is not always made clear to visitors .

in some libraries , the foundations pay the federal government for access to federal government - owned portions of the library facility .

at the reagan and clinton libraries , for example , each foundation pays the federal government a per - person fee after it holds events at which attendees are given free access to the library's museum .

in addition to collecting fees from foundations in certain circumstances , congress has the authority to require nara to clearly identify to visitors what portion of their fees go to the federal government and what portion does not .

congress also has the authority to enact legislation that would allow visitors to pay only for access to the areas of the library or museum that interest them .

regardless of ownership of that portion of the facility , the visitor would pay only for those parts of the facility visited .

congress could , therefore , require visitors to pay separate fees for access to federal property and non - federal property .

the barack obama foundation was established in january 2014 to both begin raising funds for the library endowment and to lay the groundwork for an institute that would operate beyond 2017 .

in addition , the foundation outlined values and priorities for their work , including economic development and community engagement .

the foundation is currently led by a board of directors , which is chaired by martin nesbitt .

the foundation began in march 2014 the process of selecting a site for the facility with the release of the request for qualifications ( rfq ) document .

this was followed by the request for proposal ( rfp ) in september 2014 .

while the rfq invited responses from "institutions of higher learning , not - for - profit organizations , private developers , or municipalities" the rfp specifically referenced universities in outlining the submission requirements .

in december 2014 , four proposals were submitted to the foundation , all of which were affiliated with a university: university of chicago ( chicago , il ) university of illinois at chicago ( chicago , il ) columbia university ( new york city , ny ) university of hawaii ( honolulu , hi ) the foundation has announced that a decision will be reached by march 2015 .

in the rfp guidance , the foundation sought information related to four broad areas: organization: includes strategic vision , administrator and consultant biographies , and university characteristics .

site and development: includes technical information about the proposed site , the process for obtaining the site , risk analysis , and compliance with nara standards .

surrounding community: including community characteristics , economic impacts , and the status of surrounding property .

academic collaboration: including an overview of existing institutes at the university , an outline for a proposed institute , and an outline for a proposed degree - seeking program , if applicable .

once a decision has been reached , it would need to be approved by the archivist and vetted by congress before it could become the official site .

in addition to the universities that have submitted the proposals , many local stakeholders have taken an active role in promoting the projects .

both mayor rahm emanuel of chicago and mayor bill de blasio of new york city , for example , have made numerous public statements in support of their cities' projects .

communities have also become involved in the process by publicizing the estimated economic effects of a library on the local economy .

the obama library is to be the first facility constructed under the new requirements of the presidential historical records preservation act of 2008 , which increased the endowment requirement to 60% .

as a result , it has been estimated that the foundation would need to raise roughly $225,000 a day between 2014 and 2020 to reach the level of private funding used to construct the george w. bush library .

while many of the details for the four proposals are still not finalized , it is likely that the obama presidential library would share many of the organizational characteristics of other recent libraries , such as a well - funded private foundation , an affiliation with a university , and possibly a location not in the hometown of the president .

as a result , the issues that have garnered congressional attention in the past — including private financing , the historic role of the libraries , and the delineation between private and public functions — will likely continue as potential areas of interest as successive library facilities are opened under nara management and congressional oversight .

