long dependent on oil imports , cuba has invited foreign companies to explore for and produce petroleum in its north offshore region , which could hold 4.6 billion barrels of technically recoverable oil according to u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) estimates .

one of those companies , spain - based repsol , is expected to start exploratory drilling in early 2012 .

a number of other companies , all government - owned national oil companies except for repsol , are also considering exploratory offshore drilling in cuban waters .

repsol's exploratory drilling in cuban waters reportedly would occur approximately 55 to 60 miles south of key west , florida .

cuba's offshore development so close to the united states raises implications for u.s. policy focusing on oil spill risks and the status of u.s. - cuban cooperation on preparedness and response in the case of a major oil spill .

the deepwater horizon oil spill in the u.s. gulf of mexico heightened concerns about oil spill risks and raised the potential of u.s. - cuban engagement regarding a potential oil spill in cuban waters .

however , the prospects for addressing these concerns are complicated by longstanding u.s. policy to isolate communist cuba .

this report first examines cuba's oil sector , including current production and consumption levels .

it then looks at cuba's offshore development , including the repsol project , other offshore projects involving state - owed foreign oil companies , and the outlook for cuba's offshore oil production .

the report then analyzes considerations for the united states raised by cuba's offshore oil development , examining oil spill risks and environmental dangers if spilled oil reaches u.s. waters , the status of disaster coordination between the united states and cuba , and potential approaches on the issue .

the report then examines the debate over broader u.s. involvement in cuba's offshore oil development , and touches on two outstanding boundary issues related to cuba's offshore oil development .

finally , the report examines legislative initiatives that have been advanced to deal with cuba's offshore oil development .

legislative initiatives in the 111 th congress , none of which received consideration , focused on two approaches toward cuba's offshore oil development .

the first approach would have allowed for u.s. investment in cuba's offshore energy development , while the second approach would have imposed sanctions on individuals and foreign companies that helped the development of cuba's offshore petroleum resources .

in the 112 th congress , the five legislative initiatives introduced to date also different approaches to cuba's offshore oil development , but would not include u.s. investment in cuba's offshore energy development .

one approach , as reflected by h.r .

372 and h.r .

2047 , would allow for the sanctioning of companies involved in cuba's offshore oil development if the companies also wanted to conduct hydrocarbon operations in u.s. offshore waters .

another approach , reflected by s. 405 , would impose requirements on companies conducting hydrocarbon operations off the coast of cuba if the companies also wanted leases for oil and gas development in u.s. waters , and would also require the development and implementation of oil spill response plans for nondomestic oil spills in the gulf of mexico , including a joint contingency plan with mexico , cuba , and the bahamas .

a third approach , reflected by s. 1836 and h.r .

3393 , would provide that americans affected by oil spills that originate in foreign waters could hold those responsible accountable and seek compensation for damages .

concern over cuba's offshore oil development is likely to continue , especially if exploratory drilling begins as anticipated in early 2012 .

an oil spill in cuban waters potentially could carry oil to u.s. waters and coastal areas in florida , and potentially could threaten marine and coastal resources .

the u.s. government has licensed some companies to provide oil spill prevention and containment support to companies operating in cuba and is reviewing additional licenses .

u.s. officials have also engaged with repsol , and will be inspecting the oil rig before it enters cuban waters .

policymakers may want to review whether u.s. - cuban government engagement is warranted in order to maximize preparedness and response in the event of a major spill .

legislative initiatives have been introduced in the 112 th congress reflecting contrasting approaches toward cuba's offshore development .

