federal law has regulated money in elections for more than a century .

concerns about limiting the potential for corruption and informing voters have been at the heart of that law and related regulations and judicial decisions .

restrictions on private money in campaigns , particularly large contributions , have been a common theme throughout the history of federal campaign finance law .

the roles of corporations , unions , interest groups , and private funding from individuals have attracted consistent regulatory attention .

congress has also required that certain information about campaigns' financial transactions be made public .

collectively , three principles embodied in this regulatory tradition — limits on sources of funds , limits on contributions , and disclosure of information about these funds — constitute ongoing themes in federal campaign finance policy .

throughout most of the 20 th century , campaign finance policy was marked by broad legislation enacted sporadically .

major legislative action on campaign finance issues remains rare .

since the 1990s , however , momentum on federal campaign finance policy , including regulatory and judicial action , has arguably increased .

congress last enacted major campaign finance legislation in 2002 .

the bipartisan campaign reform act ( bcra ) largely banned unregulated soft money in federal elections and restricted funding sources for pre - election broadcast advertising known as electioneering communications .

as bcra was implemented , regulatory developments at the federal election commission ( fec ) , and some court cases , stirred controversy and renewed popular and congressional attention to campaign finance issues .

since bcra , congress has also continued to explore legislative options and has made comparatively minor amendments to the nation's campaign finance law .

the most notable recent statutory changes occurred in 2014 , when congress eliminated public financing for presidential nominating conventions and increased limits for some contributions to political parties .

some of the most recent notable campaign finance developments beyond congress have occurred at the supreme court .

the 2010 citizens united ruling spurred substantial legislative action during the 111 th congress and continued interest during subsequent congresses .

the ruling was , however , only the latest — albeit perhaps the most monumental — shift in federal campaign finance policy to occur in recent years .

in another 2010 decision , speechnow.org v. federal election commission , the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia held that contributions to political action committees ( pacs ) that make only independent expenditures cannot be limited — a development that led to formation of "super pacs. .

this report is intended to provide an accessible overview of major policy issues facing congress .

citations to other crs products , which provide additional information , appear where relevant .

the report discusses selected litigation to demonstrate how those events have changed the campaign finance landscape and affected the policy issues that may confront congress , but it is not a constitutional or legal analysis .

as in the past , this version of the report contains both additions of new material and deletions of old material compared with previous versions .

this update emphasizes those topics that appear to be most relevant for congress , while also providing historical background that is broadly applicable .

this report will be updated occasionally as events warrant .

some elements of federal campaign finance policy have substantially changed in recent years ; others have remained unchanged .

enactment of bcra in 2002 marked the culmination of efforts to limit soft money in federal elections and place additional regulations on political advertising airing before elections .

bcra was an extension of efforts begun in the 1970s , with enactment of feca , to regulate and document the flow of money in federal elections .

bcra's soft - money ban and some other provisions remain in effect ; but citizens united , speechnow , and other litigation since bcra have reversed major elements of modern campaign finance law .

the changes discussed in this report suggest that the nation's campaign finance policy may be a continuing issue for congress .

disclosure requirements , a hallmark of federal campaign finance policy , remain unchanged , but the topic has taken on new controversy .

additional information would be required to fully document the sources and rationales behind all political expenditures .

for some , such disclosure would improve transparency and discourage corruption .

for others , additional disclosure might be viewed with suspicion and as a potential sign of government intrusion .

particularly in recent years , tension has also developed between competing perspectives about whether disclosure limits potential corruption or stigmatizes those who might choose to support unpopular candidates or groups .

fundraising , spending , and reporting questions have been at the forefront of recent debates in campaign finance policy , but they are not the only issues that may warrant attention .

even if no legislative changes are made , additional regulation and litigation are likely , as is the constant debate over the role of money in politics .

although some of the specifics are new , these themes discussed throughout this report have been present in campaign finance policy for decades .

