much progress has been made in achieving the ambitious goals that congress established nearly 40 years ago to restore and maintain the chemical , physical , and biological integrity of the nation's waters .

however , long - standing problems persist , and new problems have emerged .

water quality problems are diverse , ranging from pollution runoff from farms and ranches , city streets , and other diffuse or "nonpoint" sources , to "point" source discharges of metals and organic and inorganic toxic substances from factories and sewage treatment plants .

the principal law that deals with polluting activity in the nation's streams , lakes , estuaries , and coastal waters is the federal water pollution control act ( p.l .

92-500 , enacted in 1972 ) , commonly known as the clean water act , or cwa .

it consists of two major parts: regulatory provisions that impose progressively more stringent requirements on industries and cities to abate pollution and meet the statutory goal of zero discharge of pollutants ; and provisions that authorize federal financial assistance for municipal wastewater treatment plant construction .

both parts are supported by research activities , plus permit and enforcement provisions .

programs at the federal level are administered by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) ; state and local governments have primary day - to - day responsibilities to implement cwa programs through standard - setting , permitting , enforcement , and administering financial assistance programs .

the water quality restoration objective declared in the 1972 act was accompanied by statutory goals to eliminate the discharge of pollutants into navigable waters by 1985 and to attain , wherever possible , waters deemed "fishable and swimmable" by 1983 .

although those goals have not been fully achieved , considerable progress has been made , especially in controlling conventional pollutants ( suspended solids , bacteria , and oxygen - consuming materials ) discharged by industries and sewage treatment plants .

progress has been mixed in controlling discharges of toxic pollutants ( heavy metals , inorganic and organic chemicals ) , which are more numerous and can harm human health and the environment even when present in very small amounts — at the parts - per - billion level .

moreover , efforts to control pollution from diffuse sources , termed nonpoint source pollution ( rainfall runoff from urban , suburban , and agricultural areas , for example ) , are more recent , given the earlier emphasis on "point source" pollution ( discharges from industrial facilities and municipal wastewater treatment plants ) .

overall , data reported by epa and states indicate that 44% of river and stream miles assessed by states and 64% of assessed lake acres do not meet applicable water quality standards and are impaired for one or more desired uses .

in 2006 epa issued an assessment of streams and small rivers and reported that 67% of u.s. stream miles are in poor or fair condition and that nutrients and streambed sediments have the largest adverse impact on the aquatic species in these waters .

approximately 95,000 lakes and 544,000 river miles in the united states are under fish - consumption advisories ( including 100% of the great lakes and their connecting waters ) , due to chemical contaminants in lakes , rivers , and coastal waters , and one - third of shellfishing beds are closed or restricted , due to toxic pollutant contamination .

mercury is a contaminant of growing concern .

an epa survey of toxins in lake fish tissue found that mercury concentrations in game fish exceed health based limits in about half of lakes ( 49% ) and that polychlorinated biphenyls ( pcbs ) are at potential levels of concern in 17% of the lakes .

the last major amendments to the cwa were the water quality act of 1987 ( p.l .

100-4 ) .

that legislation culminated six years of congressional efforts to extend and revise the act and was the most comprehensive amendments since 1972 .

authorizations of appropriations for some programs provided in p.l .

100-4 , such as general grant assistance to states , research , and general epa support , expired in fy1990 and fy1991 .

authorizations for wastewater treatment funding expired in fy1994 .

none of these programs has lapsed , however , as congress has continued to appropriate funds to implement them .

epa , states , industry , and other citizens continue to implement the 1987 legislation , including meeting the numerous requirements and deadlines in it .

the clean water act has been viewed as one of the most successful environmental laws in terms of achieving its statutory goals , which have been widely supported by the public , but lately some have questioned whether additional actions to achieve further benefits are worth the costs , especially in view of the continuing problems of the u.s. economy .

criticism has come from industry , which has been the long - standing focus of the act's regulatory programs and often opposes imposition of new stringent and costly requirements .

criticism also has come from developers and property rights groups who contend that federal regulations ( particularly the act's wetlands permit program ) are a costly intrusion on private land - use decisions .

states and cities have traditionally supported water quality programs and federal funding to assist them in carrying out the law , but many have opposed cwa measures that they fear might impose new unfunded mandates .

many environmental and conservation groups believe that further fine - tuning is needed to maintain progress achieved to date and to address remaining water quality problems .

october 2012 marked the 40 th anniversary of passage of the clean water act and 25 years since the last major amendments to the law .

while , as noted , there has been measurable clean water progress as a result of the act , observers and analysts agree that significant water pollution problems remain .

however , there is less agreement about what solutions are needed and whether new legislation is required .

several key water quality issues exist: what additional actions should be taken to implement existing provisions of the law , whether additional steps are necessary to achieve overall goals of the act that have not yet been attained , how to ensure that progress made to date is not lost through diminished attention to water quality needs , and what is the appropriate federal role in guiding and paying for clean water infrastructure and other activities .

for some time , efforts to comprehensively amend the act have stalled as interests have debated whether and exactly how to change the law .

many issues that might be addressed involve making difficult tradeoffs between impacts on different sectors of the economy ; taking action when there is technical or scientific uncertainty ; and allocating governmental responsibilities among federal , state , local , and tribal entities for implementing the law .

these factors partly explain why congress has recently favored focusing legislative attention on narrow bills to extend or modify selected cwa programs , rather than taking up comprehensive proposals .

other factors also have been at work .

these include a general reluctance by many members of congress to address controversial environmental issues in view of the relatively slim majorities held by political parties in the house and the senate ; and an absence of presidential initiatives on clean water issues ( neither the clinton nor the bush administration proposed cwa legislation , nor has the obama administration ) .

in addition , for some time after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , congress was more focused on security , terrorism , and iraq war issues than on many other topics , including environmental protection .

the 2008 election encouraged many policymakers and stakeholders to anticipate much greater attention to many environmental issues , including clean water , by the 111 th congress and the obama administration .

during the 2008 presidential campaign , candidate obama supported several water quality issues , including preservation of wetlands , great lakes restoration legislation , water conservation , regulation of large animal feeding operations , and full funding of clean water infrastructure assistance programs .

funding for water infrastructure projects , discussed next in this report , received early attention in the 111 th congress in light of interest in using increased investment in public works projects — including wastewater — to stimulate the faltering u.s. economy , but the obama administration has not presented other legislative proposals concerning water quality .

also on the congressional agenda was consideration of the geographic reach of the cwa over the nation's waters and wetlands , in light of court rulings — including two supreme court decisions — that have narrowed the law's regulatory jurisdiction , but in ways that are somewhat unclear .

the 111 th congress enacted two bills that amend the cwa .

one dealt with extending a moratorium for cwa permitting of certain vessels ( p.l .

111-215 ) , and the other dealt with ensuring that federal agencies and departments pay localities for reasonable costs associated with managing stormwater pollution from federal properties ( p.l .

111-378 ) .

the 112 th congress also enacted two bills that amend the cwa .

one extended the moratorium for cwa permitting of certain vessels for an additional year , until december 18 , 2014 ( p.l .

112-213 ) , and the other extends authorization of funds for the lake pontchartrain basin program in section 121 of the act through fy2017 ( p.l .

112-237 ) .

two cwa issues that have been the focus of much of legislators' interest in recent congresses received some attention again — water infrastructure financing , and regulatory protection of wetlands — but with different focus than in the recent past , as congressional leadership and priorities shifted after the november 2010 election .

a number of other water quality issues were on congress's agenda through oversight and legislation , as well .

clean water policy and program issues also have been addressed regularly by congress in the context of annual appropriations acts .

epa's appropriations are included in the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations acts .

president obama presented his fy2011 budget request to congress on february 1 , 2010 .

overall , the president's budget called for a freeze on non - security discretionary expenditures at epa and other federal agencies .

consequently , the total request for epa was $10.02 billion , compared with $10.3 billion enacted for fy2010 .

the fy2011 request sought $2.0 billion for clean water srf capitalization grants , which was $100 million less than the fy2010 enacted level , but still an increase above recent years' funding levels .

as in the fy2010 regular appropriations , the president's budget requested that states use 20% of their capitalization grants for "green infrastructure" projects ( such as water efficiency or energy efficiency ) and also use 30% of srf capitalization grants in excess of $1 billion in the form of additional subsidies ( such as loan forgiveness or negative interest loans ) to communities that face difficulties in paying for infrastructure projects .

one item that drew some congressional attention was the president's request for great lakes restoration .

this funding would continue an initiative created in the fy2010 budget to target the most significant environmental problems of the great lakes ecosystem and to coordinate the work of multiple federal agencies in restoring the lakes .

the budget requested $300 million for these activities in fy2011 , because most of the $475 million appropriated in fy2010 was still uncommitted and unspent as of february 2010 , when the fy2011 budget request was submitted .

only 8% of the 2010 funds had been obligated by that time , and some of that year's funds would not be spent until 2011 , according to epa .

congress took only limited action on fy2011 funding for epa before the start of the new fiscal year on october 1 , 2010: a house appropriations subcommittee approved a bill in july , but no further action followed .

at the end of september 2010 , the house and senate passed a continuing resolution to extend fy2010 funding levels for epa and other federal agencies and departments until december 3 , 2010 , because no fy2011 appropriations bills had been enacted by october 1 .

president obama signed the continuing resolution ( cr ) on september 30 ( p.l .

111-242 ) .

this bill was followed by six more short - term crs before congress came to final resolution of fy2011 spending on april 14 , 2011 , enacting a bill to provide funding for epa and all other federal agencies and departments through september 30 ( p.l .

112-10 ) .

the final bill reduced overall funding for epa 15% below the fy2010 level and provided $1.522 billion for the clean water srf program , 27.5% below the fy2010 enacted level and 2% less than the president's request for fy2012 ( discussed below ) .

the legislation , as enacted , did not include a number of policy issue amendments included in an earlier house - passed cr that intended to prohibit funding for a number of epa regulatory activities discussed previously in this report , including implementation of the administration's regulatory initiatives on mountaintop mining in appalachia ; implementation of the chesapeake bay tmdl ; and implementation or enforcement of the november 2010 florida numeric nutrient water quality standards rule .

consideration of the budget for fy2012 began even as funding for fy2011 was still not final .

the president submitted the administration's fy2012 budget request on february 14 .

it sought $9 billion total for epa , a decrease of $1.3 billion from the fy2010 enacted level .

it requested $1.55 billion for clean water srf capitalization grants , which epa estimated would enable states and tribes to initiate approximately 600 clean water projects nationally .

it also requested $350 million for the great lakes initiative .

for several days in july , the house debated h.r .

2584 , providing fy2012 appropriations for epa , but the house did not take final action on the bill before the august recess .

as reported , the bill provided $7.3 billion for epa , 17% less than fy2011 funds and 19% less than the president's fy2012 request .

it reduced funds for the clean water srf capitalization grants to $689 million ( the same level provided in fy2008 ; see table 1 ) , while including no funds for congressionally designated special projects ( i.e. , earmarks ) .

other water quality - specific reductions in the bill included 14% less than fy2011 levels for the section 319 grant program ( for managing nonpoint source pollution ) and the section 106 grant program that assists state implementation of cwa programs .

further , the bill provided $250 million for the great lakes initiative ( 16.5% below the fy2011 level and 29% below the fy2012 request ) .

in addition , h.r .

2584 as reported included a number of general provisions to prohibit funding for certain epa water quality rules , guidelines , and initiatives , including mountaintop mining , florida water quality standards , logging roads , and other topics .

however , the house took no final action on h.r .

2584 , and there was no action in the senate .

final congressional action on fy2012 appropriations for epa and most other federal agencies and departments did not occur until the end of december 2011 , enacted in an omnibus appropriations act , p.l .

112-74 .

in this bill , overall funding for epa is $8.4 billion , approximately 3% below fy2011 levels .

it includes $1.47 billion ( after rescissions ) for the clean water srf program ( 3.7% below the fy2011 amount and 5.1% less than the president's request ) , and $299.5 million for the great lakes initiative , or $50 million less than the request .

the final legislation includes one legislative rider concerning water quality , in a provision dealing with cwa permit requirements for stormwater discharges from logging roads ( see " cwa permits for logging road discharges " above ) .

president obama presented the administration's fy2013 budget request in february 2012 .

it sought $8.34 billion overall for epa , or 4.7% below the level enacted for fy2012 .

the request included $1.175 billion for clean water srf capitalization grants ( 20% below the fy2012 enacted level ) .

the request included $300 million for the great lakes restoration initiative .

the house appropriations committee approved legislation providing fy2013 funds for epa in july 2012 ( h.r .

6091 ) .

as reported , the bill provided $689 million for clean water srf capitalization grants ( the same level provided in fy2008 — see table 1 — and the same level that the committee recommended for fy2012 ) .

the bill included $250 million for the great lakes restoration initiative , $150.5 million for cwa section 319 grants ( 8.8% below fy2012 ) , and $204.3 million for section 106 grants ( 23% below fy2012 ) .

like the fy2012 committee - approved bill , the house legislation as reported included a number of general provisions to prohibit funding for certain epa water quality rules , guidelines , and initiatives , including mountaintop mining , new stormwater regulations , defining waters of the united states , logging roads , and other topics .

the bill would have added buy american requirements for srf - funded water infrastructure projects .

the house did not take up h.r .

6091 , nor did the senate act on an epa appropriations bill ( although the senate appropriations committee released a draft bill in september ) .

prior to the start of fy2013 on october 1 , congress passed and the president signed a continuing resolution bill providing funding for government agencies and departments through march 27 , 2013 ( p.l .

112-175 ) .

this measure funds the government generally at fy2012 levels plus a 0.6% increase .

final action on fy2013 appropriations is expected in early 2013 .

