the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) has the responsibility for creating policies , priorities , and objectives for the federal drug control program .

this national program is aimed at reducing the use , manufacturing , and trafficking of illicit drugs and the reduction of drug - related crime and violence and of drug - related health consequences .

ondcp is located in the executive office of the president .

it was initially created by the anti - drug abuse act of 1988 and most recently reauthorized in the office of national drug control policy reauthorization act of 2006 .

ondcp was authorized to receive "such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2006 through 2010. .

authorization for ondcp expired at the end of fy2010 , but it has continued to receive appropriations .

congress , while continuously charged with ondcp's oversight , is now faced with its possible reauthorization .

the director of ondcp , often referred to as the "drug czar," has numerous responsibilities , of which the primary three are developing a comprehensive national drug control strategy to direct the nation's anti - drug efforts ; developing and overseeing a national drug control budget to implement the national drug control strategy , including determining the adequacy of the drug control budgets submitted by contributing drug control program agencies ( listed below ) ; and coordinating , overseeing , and evaluating the effectiveness of federal anti - drug policies and the national drug control strategy implementation by the various agencies contributing to the drug control program .

in carrying out these responsibilities , former director r. gil kerlikowske put an end to the use of the term "war on drugs," and current acting director michael botticelli has referred to the war on drugs as "outdated. .

the obama administration views a comprehensive drug control strategy as one that includes a range of prevention , treatment , and law enforcement elements and "is guided by what experience , compassion , and science demonstrate about the true nature of drug use in america. .

most of the american public reportedly concurs with the government's view that drug use is a significant challenge facing the nation .

according to a 2014 gallup survey , 63% of respondents reported that they worry a "great deal" or "fair amount" about drug use as a problem in the united states while 37% reported that they worry "only a little" or "not at all" about this issue .

this report provides a discussion of the national drug control strategy , the national drug control budget , and ondcp's evaluation of the national drug control strategy implementation .

it then provides an analysis of selected legislative and oversight issues that congress may consider when debating the reauthorization of ondcp .

policy makers may question the status of the war on drugs , whether drug use should be seen as more of a law enforcement issue or a public health issue , and whether drug control resources are more effective when directed toward prevention and treatment or toward law enforcement .

another issue for consideration is whether the revised national drug control budget represents a complete view of federal drug control activities in the united states .

further , congress may exercise oversight over ondcp's means of evaluating the nation's federal drug control programs .

given the current public debate over the legal status of marijuana , congress may also choose to address ondcp's ability to support or oppose marijuana legalization .

current law requires the director of national drug control policy to ( 1 ) ensure that no federal funds appropriated to ondcp are expended for any study or contract relating to the legalization of a substance listed in schedule i of the controlled substances act and ( 2 ) oppose any attempt to legalize the use of any such substance that the food and drug administration ( fda ) has not approved for use for medical purposes .

the term "war on drugs," popularized by former president richard nixon , was commonly used for nearly 40 years .

in may 2009 , ondcp director kerlikowske called for an end to use of the term .

he noted that using this term is misleading because the united states is not at war with the individuals consuming drugs , but rather with the illegal drugs and their effects .

he also described a gradual shift in societal thoughts on drug use and abuse .

over the past several years , director kerlikowske has repeatedly stated that while drug use was previously considered a law enforcement or criminal justice problem , it transitioned to being viewed as a combination of criminal justice , social policy , and public health problems .

he contends that recently , drug use has been seen more as a public health problem .

for instance , according to the national survey on drug use and health , about 24.6 million americans aged 12 and older were current ( in the past month ) illegal drug users in 2013 , representing 9.4% of this population .

this also represents the largest proportion in the past decade of people aged 12 and older being identified as current illegal drug users .

further , the abuse of alcohol and illicit drugs contributes to over 100,000 deaths in the united states annually .

the fy2015 budget request includes approximately $25.363 billion across both supply - and demand - related programs .

as shown in table 1 , this would be an increase of $151 million over the fy2014 enacted amount of $25.212 billion .

as noted , the continuing appropriations resolution , 2015 ( p.l .

113-164 ) extended funding for the federal government at fy2014 spending levels through december 11 , 2014 .

details of fy2015 federal drug control spending , including the proportion focused on supply - reduction versus demand - reduction activities , remain unclear .

in the fy2015 request , the administration proposes to use approximately 57% of the funds ( $14.436 billion ) for supply - side functions and 43% of the funds ( $10.927 billion ) for demand - side functions .

supply reduction includes funding for domestic law enforcement ( $9.177 billion ) , interdiction ( $3.863 billion ) , and international support ( $1.389 billion ) , while demand reduction focuses on treatment ( $9.597 billion ) and prevention ( $1.337 billion ) .

over the past decade or so , the proportion of federal drug control spending allocated towards supply - side functions has ranged from about 37% to about 43% .

policy makers have questioned whether the national drug control budget aims funding toward the most effective , evidence - based strategies to reduce illicit drug use and abuse .

currently , the budget can be thought of as funding two broad categories of demand - reduction and supply - reduction activities .

critics of the current — and previous — budget's focus on supply - reduction activities may argue that research on prevention and treatment programs has suggested that such demand - reduction programs may be effective at reducing drug use .

research on supply - reduction enforcement programs has not yielded the same results .

in addition to considering outcome effectiveness , policy makers have questioned the cost effectiveness of supply - and demand - reduction activities .

former director kerlikowske has indicated that the most cost - effective elements of the strategy and budget are in prevention and treatment — the two components of demand reduction .

research has indicated , for instance , that drug treatment for high - risk populations , such as criminal offenders , can reduce societal costs .

expert analysis of drug enforcement programs , on the other hand , indicates that while enforcement may produce short - term drug market disruption , the effects are not lasting .

in considering ondcp's reauthorization , policy makers may deliberate on whether to authorize specific supply - reduction or demand - reduction programs .

congress may also exercise oversight regarding ondcp's implementation of evidenced - based activities .

policy makers and industry experts alike have , despite the restructuring of the national drug control budget in fy2012 , questioned whether the budget captures the full scope of the nation's counter - drug activities .

for instance , the budget did not formerly include costs for prosecuting and incarcerating drug offenders .

the proportion of costs incurred by the u.s .

attorneys related to prosecuting drug - related crimes was not included in the previous budget .

the u.s .

attorneys prosecute the entire spectrum of federal crimes ; while some cases may be entirely drug - related , others may only have a drug component , while still others may not be related to drugs at all .

under the revised budget structure , some drug - related prosecution costs are included ; the u.s .

attorneys' drug budget is determined by calculating the costs of attorneys and non - attorneys that are dedicated to non - organized crime drug enforcement task force drug prosecutions .

a similar story holds true for the federal bureau of prisons ( bop ) .

bop is responsible for housing federal inmates — not solely those incarcerated for drug crimes .

while bop was previously included in the unrevised budget , the resources accounted for were only those for inmate treatment programs .

prior to fy2012 , the budget did not include funds for the housing of inmates incarcerated for drug - related crimes , but the revised budget now includes these associated costs .

while experts have expressed concern about drug control policy elements omitted from the budget , some have also questioned whether certain elements included in the current budget may be overly broad and may not directly tackle the nation's drug problems .

for instance , some have argued that policies such as those assisting the afghan government in combating the drug trade and those funding colombian rule of law programs do not directly reduce the supply of drugs to the united states .

on the other hand , some may argue that these programs impacting drug source countries can , in turn , reduce the availability of illicit drugs at home .

thus , policy makers may also debate whether the current budget elements , such as those under the international supply - reduction strategy , are directly related to the national drug control strategy and should be maintained as part of the budget .

when congress reauthorized ondcp in 1998 ( title vii of p.l .

105-277 ) , policy makers made it a requirement for ondcp to create and report on a national drug control performance measurement system , as discussed above .

before the recent national drug control budget restructure , ondcp measured performance by using data from individual agencies — data collected as required by the government performance and results act ( p.l .

103-62 ) — and from national research .

critics of this measurement system argued that while it allowed ondcp to evaluate individual programs and agencies , the performance measurement system did not allow ondcp to holistically assess whether the strategy's goals and objectives were truly being accomplished .

ondcp addressed this concern by developing the performance reporting system ( prs ) .

when debating issues surrounding ondcp's reauthorization , congress may exercise oversight regarding the new prs and whether this system allows for evaluation of individual programs and agencies as well as whether it allows for evaluation of each agency's contribution to the strategy's goals .

the first prs assessment report was released in 2012 , and a second assessment was released in 2014 .

according to ondcp , significant progress was made in achieving stated goals for domestic law enforcement , strengthening international partnerships , and youth substance use prevention .

for example , according to ondcp , "key source and transit countries demonstrated increased commitment to reducing drug trafficking and use through demand and supply reduction efforts. .

ondcp also cited areas where more progress was needed including working with partner countries to reduce the cultivation of drugs and their production potential , especially poppy cultivation in afghanistan , burma , and laos ; marijuana cultivation in mexico ; and coca cultivation in peru. .

ondcp also noted that more improvement is needed in preventing youth marijuana use and changing youth perceptions that marijuana is not harmful .

in 1970 , the controlled substances act designated marijuana as a schedule i controlled substance .

this legislation officially prohibited the unauthorized manufacture , distribution , dispensation , and possession of marijuana .

current law also requires the director of national drug control policy to ( 1 ) ensure that no federal funds appropriated to ondcp are expended for any study or contract relating to the legalization of a substance listed in schedule i of the controlled substances act and ( 2 ) oppose any attempt to legalize the use of any such substance that the food and drug administration has not approved for use for medical purposes .

despite federal restrictions on marijuana , states have deviated by establishing a range of laws and policies allowing its medical and recreational use .

some states have pursued decriminalization initiatives , legal exceptions for medical use , and legalization of certain quantities for recreational use .

as such , in considering ondcp's reauthorization , congress may choose to address ondcp's ability to support or oppose marijuana legalization .

should congress choose to reauthorize ondcp , it may wish to consider the role of ondcp and the director .

the obama administration has stressed the need for a more comprehensive approach to drug control and its desire to shift more resources toward treatment and prevention ; however , enforcement of federal drug laws and the allotment of federal drug control funds for drug demand versus drug supply have not significantly changed over the last decade .

the federal government has strict criminal enforcement measures in place in prohibiting the manufacture , distribution , sale , and possession of illicit drugs such as marijuana and heroin .

the majority of federal drug control funds continues to go toward law enforcement efforts to reduce the supply of illicit drugs .

ondcp has distanced itself from the seemingly outdated term "war on drugs," but the office is arguably a product of the war on drugs .

in considering reauthorization , congress may choose to question the modern role of ondcp in determining u.s. drug policy or reconsider the nature of the organization altogether .

