hamas , or the islamic resistance movement , is a palestinian islamist military and sociopolitical movement that grew out of the muslim brotherhood , a sunni religious and political organization founded in egypt in 1928 that has branches throughout the world .

the united states , israel , the european union , and canada consider hamas a terrorist organization because of ( 1 ) its violent resistance to what it deems israeli occupation of historic palestine ( constituting present - day israel , west bank , and gaza strip ) , and ( 2 ) its rejection of the off - and - on peace process involving israel and the palestine liberation organization ( plo ) since the early 1990s .

hamas seeks assistance and training from other arab , islamic , and international actors and organizations , and receives it from iran , syria , and the lebanese shiite militant group hezbollah ( see " iran , syria , and hezbollah " below ) .

the overarching u.s. goal regarding hamas is to deter , transform , marginalize , or neutralize it so that it no longer presents a threat to israel's security , to a peaceful and lasting resolution of the israeli - palestinian conflict , or to other u.s. interests — either in its own right or as a proxy of iran or other actors .

various legislative and policy initiatives designed to accomplish this goal have at most achieved temporary or partial success .

hamas's activities present challenges for u.s. policymakers and members of congress , including countering hamas's military and terrorist threats to israel , its financial and smuggling networks , and its political influence ; determining under what circumstances and the manner in which the united states might accept the participation of hamas or hamas representatives in a palestinian authority ( pa ) government and / or in israeli - palestinian peace negotiations ; de - linking hamas from its connections with iran and syria ; and encouraging humanitarian relief efforts and economic development in gaza without bolstering hamas .

u.s. efforts and policy debates on these issues , which include foreign aid strategies , financial sanctions , and bilateral , regional , and international political approaches , are discussed further below ( see " possible options for congress " ) .

since hamas's inception in 1987 , it has maintained its primary base of political support and its military command in the gaza strip — a territory it has controlled since june 2007 — while also having a significant presence in the west bank .

the movement's political leadership is currently headquartered in exile in damascus , syria .

hamas's military wing , the izz al din al qassam brigades , has killed more than 400 israelis , and at least 25 u.s. citizens ( including some dual u.s. - israeli citizens ) in attacks since 1993 .

as the qassam brigades developed from a small band of guerrillas into a more sophisticated organization with access to greater resources and territorial control , its methods of attack evolved from small - scale kidnappings and killings of israeli military personnel to suicide bombings and rocket attacks against israeli civilians .

hamas also has frequently attacked or repressed palestinian political and factional opponents , particularly in its struggle with fatah and other groups for control in the gaza strip since israel's military disengagement in 2005 .

for further information on these points , see " threats hamas poses ," appendix a , and appendix b below .

hamas emerged as the main domestic opposition force to palestinian nationalist leader yasser arafat and his secular nationalist fatah movement in the west bank and gaza strip in the 1980s and 1990s — largely by using violence against israeli civilian and military targets just as arafat's plo began negotiating with israel .

in 2006 , a little more than a year after arafat's death and the election of fatah's mahmoud abbas to replace him as pa president , hamas became — by most analysts' reckoning — the first islamist group in the arab world to gain power democratically after a stunning electoral upset of fatah gave it control of the palestinian legislative council ( plc ) and of palestinian authority government ministries .

subsequent efforts by israel , the united states , and the international community to neutralize or marginalize hamas by military , political , and economic means may have changed the outward nature of its influence , but have failed to squelch it .

in 2007 , hamas seized control of the gaza strip through decisive armed victories over pa and fatah forces loyal to abbas ( causing abbas to dismiss hamas's pa government in the west bank and appoint a "caretaker" non - hamas government in its stead ) .

hamas has since consolidated its power in gaza despite considerable damage visited on gaza's people and infrastructure by an israeli invasion in december 2008-january 2009 ( also known as operation cast lead , which was launched by israel in response to repeated rocket attacks by hamas and other palestinian militants ) and despite ongoing restrictions ( often termed the "blockade" or "closure regime" ) by israel and egypt on the flow of people and goods into and out of the territory .

by consolidating its control over gaza and pursuing popular support through resistance to israel , hamas seeks to establish its indispensability to any arab - israeli political arrangement .

many analysts believe that hamas hopes to leverage this indispensability into sole or shared leadership of the pa in both the west bank and gaza — either through a power - sharing arrangement with abbas and his fatah movement , or through presidential and legislative elections ( which were supposed to take place in january 2010 under pa law , but have been postponed pending factional agreement on conditions for holding them ) — and to gain membership in or somehow supplant the fatah - dominated plo , which remains internationally recognized as the legitimate representative of the palestinian people .

fatah's political hegemony inside the occupied territories has been undermined by the inability of the fatah - dominated plo to co - opt or incorporate hamas , which has proved more resistant than secular palestinian factions to the plo's inducements .

egyptian - mediated efforts to forge a pa power - sharing arrangement in the west bank and gaza between hamas and its traditionally dominant rival faction , the secular nationalist fatah movement , have stalled repeatedly .

hamas also has gained popularity among many palestinians at fatah's expense because of its reputation as a less corrupt provider of social services ( funded by donations from palestinians , other arabs , and international charitable front groups ) and because of the image it cultivates of unflinching resistance to israeli occupation .

some palestinians perceive that hamas is more rooted in the experiences and attitudes of west bankers and gazans than fatah .

most leaders from fatah's historic core , including current pa president / plo chairman mahmoud abbas , spent decades in exile with yasser arafat's plo in various arab states .

although many from hamas's top leadership , including political bureau chief khaled meshaal , also have lived in exile for 30-plus years , hamas has maintained a strong presence within the palestinian territories since its inception .

for additional information on hamas's historical background and on u.s. policy regarding hamas , see appendix a .

in considering legislative and oversight options , congress can assess how hamas has emerged and adapted over time , and also scrutinize the track record of u.s. , israeli , and international policy to counter hamas .

there have been multiple attempts to marginalize hamas through a variety of measures — political and foreign aid strategies , financial sanctions , arrests and deportations , physical blockades and border closures , and israeli military operations and assassinations .

some of these measures have achieved temporary or partial success , but none has yet prevented hamas from playing a major role in israeli - palestinian politics or prevented assistance to hamas from states and other non - state actors in its region .

some might contend that u.s. policy with respect to hamas since its initial u.s. terrorist designation in 1995 has strengthened instead of weakened the organization given its increased regional and international profile .

perhaps u.s. policy also has increased hamas's reliance on the type of grassroots support that is not easily countered by governmental means .

others might say that the proper goal is to further strengthen the measures that have achieved temporary or partial success .

the following questions could be useful in evaluating legislative or oversight options: is hamas stronger than it was five years ago ? .

15 years ago ? .

why or why not ? .

have its rivals become stronger or weaker over that same period of time ? .

 ( strength could be measured by one of more of the following factors: popularity , military force , leverage with israel , regional and global influence. ) .

what are the united states' ultimate goals for israel , the palestinians , and the broader region ? .

how do particular options regarding hamas fit into these goals ? .

what are hamas's ultimate goals and how might hamas act proactively to achieve these goals ? .

how might it react to particular u.s. options that it perceives could serve or frustrate these goals ? .

once implemented , when are various options likely to produce results ? .

what are u.s. capacities and political will for implementing and monitoring various options over time ? .

what are intervening variables ( i.e. , other relevant actors , other issues that might distract from those addressed by various options , political timelines ) and how might their potential negative impact on different options be minimized ? .

how would the success of various options be measured ? .

hamas's integral role in palestinian society and politics is seen by many as problematic because it is devoted to violent opposition to israel .

u.s. efforts to deter , transform , marginalize , or neutralize hamas have at most achieved temporary or partial success .

it is possible to conclude that u.s. and other international support for israel and the pa / plo / fatah has been counterproductive to some extent when comparing hamas's domestic , regional , and international strength in the early 1990s — measured by factors such as popularity , military force , and leverage with other actors ( including israel and fatah ) — to its current strength .

hamas routinely portrays u.s. efforts to counter its influence as part of an agenda to weaken palestinians at the expense of israel , hoping to convince palestinians of israel's implacability and of the futility of peace negotiations aimed at palestinian statehood .

factional and geographical divisions — reflected in hamas's control of gaza and the abbas - led pa's control of the west bank — present fundamental dilemmas both for prospects for a two - state solution and for the future of palestinian democracy .

u.s. policy and law reject dealings with and aid to hamas or any pa government that includes hamas without the acceptance of conditions that appear antithetical to hamas's core principles .

this could limit the administration's ability to offer incentives even if regional conditions present possible advantages to doing so for u.s. , israeli , and / or palestinian interests .

the israeli - egyptian closure regime in gaza and various u.s. and international initiatives constrain and isolate hamas to a point and may exacerbate internal organizational tensions and tactical disagreements .

overall , however , hamas maintains a unified public stance on its core principle of violent opposition to israel .

it continues to threaten israel through its rockets and the possibility of other attacks and to receive assistance from iran , syria , hezbollah , and private individuals and organizations .

additionally , gaza's poor humanitarian conditions and morale contribute to an image of hamas - as - victim and to local and international hostility toward israel .

in this context , any u.s. policy decision going forward will likely present considerable risks and difficult trade - offs .

appendix a .

historical background and u.s. policy pre - 1987: hamas's emergence hamas's politicization and militarization can be traced to the first palestinian intifada ( "uprising" ) that began in the gaza strip in 1987 in resistance to the israeli occupation .

its precursor , al mujamma al islami ( known simply as mujamma , or "the islamic center" ) , was established in israeli - occupied gaza in the 1970s under the auspices of the palestinian muslim brotherhood , which had links to muslim brotherhood chapters in egypt and jordan and later developed links to branches elsewhere — most notably among palestinian refugees and expatriates living in kuwait .

sheikh ahmed yassin , the group's leader , concentrated the mujamma's activities on religious and social services , following some models provided by the egyptian and jordanian muslim brotherhood branches , whose open political activism was repressed by state authorities .

yassin's and his associates' activities — which led to hamas's founding — were countenanced and sometimes supported by israel , which believed the islamists to be a convenient foil for the secular nationalist factions such as fatah that israel then perceived to be greater threats .

motivation to become more politically active grew within mujamma and the palestinian muslim brotherhood after the 1979 iranian revolution led many in the middle east to imagine the possibilities of political islam , and in light of increased palestinian concern for the status of the west bank , gaza , and palestinian refugees following the deferral of the palestinian question by the israel - egypt peace treaty of 1979 and israel's 1982 invasion of lebanon that forced the palestine liberation organization ( plo ) into exile in tunisia .

the formation in gaza of other armed resistance groups such as palestinian islamic jihad ( pij ) created pressure for the palestinian brotherhood to arm .

yassin's efforts to help the organization stockpile weapons led to his arrest by israel in 1984 , but the brotherhood's gradual transformation into a militant organization regained momentum following yassin's release in a 1985 prisoner swap .

yassin and his associates , who proceeded with outside support from their colleagues in kuwait and elsewhere , officially established hamas in 1987 when the first palestinian intifada ( or uprising ) provided widespread palestinian support for resistance against israel .

1987-1995: gaining attention in hamas's early years during the first intifada , international political attention remained focused on yasser arafat's fatah movement and the plo , under the rationale that other palestinian groups had marginal political legitimacy or would take cues from arafat .

when israel deported several top hamas leaders to southern lebanon in december 1992 ( along with several other palestinian islamists — more than 400 total ) in response to a number of hamas kidnappings and killings of israeli soldiers , the united states joined human rights organizations in pressuring israel to repatriate the leaders to the west bank and gaza , which it did in late 1993 .

following the signing of the israel - plo declaration of principles ( or oslo accord ) in september 1993 , hamas joined with other islamist and some leftist palestinian factions in rejecting oslo framework limiting palestinian national aspirations to the west bank and gaza ( and thus giving up the national dream for all of "palestine" as it existed under the british mandate ) and creating multi - tiered zones of palestinian self - rule circumscribed by a continuing israeli occupation whose future remained subject to negotiation .

hamas also refused to participate in elections for the new palestinian authority ( until subsequent developments led to a change of strategy in 2005-2006 ) .

hamas and other rejectionist groups engaged in sporadic attacks on israeli targets inside the palestinian territories .

however , following a february 1994 shooting and grenade attack by an israeli settler that killed 29 and injured several more palestinians worshiping at the historic mosque of abraham in the west bank city of hebron , hamas significantly shifted its strategy .

it began a spate of attacks aimed at civilians in israel , including its first use of suicide bombings in crowded public places .

meanwhile u.s. federal bureau of investigation investigations , israeli investigations , and media reporting revealed that hamas had apparently been recruiting and fundraising on u.s. soil since its inception .

as mentioned in the main body of the report ( see " charities and individuals " ) , an alleged hub of hamas financing was the holy land foundation for relief and development headquartered near dallas , tx , and which had offices in california , new jersey , and illinois .

as this information became public and hamas and other palestinian groups continued attacks on israeli targets ( sometimes killing or injuring u.s. citizens ) , pressure mounted for the clinton administration to act .

1995-2004: violence and international opposition in january 1995 , then president bill clinton signed executive order 12947 , which blocked the assets of and prohibited u.s. transactions with hamas and 11 other specially designated terrorist organizations ( sdts ) deemed threats to the middle east peace process , including the israeli extremist groups kach and kahane chai .

meanwhile , israel was vigorously pursuing operatives from hamas and pressuring the newly formed palestinian authority ( pa ) led by yasser arafat to crack down as well .

israel had allowed the pa to establish internal security forces in gaza and the west bank from former plo and fatah militias .

arafat encouraged the formation of additional paramilitary and intelligence organizations populated with many close arafat associates that israel tolerated ( despite their not being sanctioned under the oslo agreements ) with the hope that they would help neutralize hamas and other terrorist organizations .

in addition to targeting hamas militants , the pa forces periodically suppressed the activities of hamas - affiliated charities and social organizations .

in early 1996 , following another round of hamas suicide bombings , the united states became actively involved in fostering israeli - palestinian security cooperation in combating terrorism .

likely determining that the paramilitary and intelligence organizations with personal ties to arafat and patronage networks were more relevant than the official police , the clinton administration reportedly began providing these organizations with tens of millions of dollars in covert assistance through the central intelligence agency ( cia ) , according to the new york times .

the european union also reportedly began a counterterrorism program .

additionally , in october 1997 , the state department listed hamas as a foreign terrorist organization ( fto ) , shortly after a major september suicide bombing in a jerusalem pedestrian shopping area that left one u.s. citizen among the dead and several others among the injured .

the fruits of u.s. counterterrorism assistance to the pa continue to be debated .

although hamas suicide and other attacks did not immediately cease , they abated from the end of 1998 until the second palestinian intifada ( also known as the al aqsa intifada ) began in september 2000 .

the effects of u.s. assistance are unclear partly because of its covert nature , and because of several other intervening factors — including israeli counterterrorism actions and ongoing israeli - palestinian negotiations .

some observers point to the drop - off in attacks as evidence that u.s. assistance helped the pa prevent and deter terrorist attacks until the collapse of peace process negotiations in 2000 .

others believe that although pa capacities were enhanced , arafat's on - again , off - again crackdowns on hamas and other militants were of little lasting value .

suspects detained to placate u.s. and israeli pressure were often released shortly thereafter due to internal political pressure on arafat and the pa not to appear to be "collaborating" with the israelis or because of insufficient evidence owing to the political nature of the arrests .

upon the outbreak of the second intifada in september 2000 , hamas demonstrated that it still had the capacity to carry out attacks inside israel .

following al qaeda's attacks against multiple u.s. targets on september 11 , 2001 , then president george w. bush issued executive order 13224 authorizing his administration to take action domestically and in concert with international actors to suppress the activities and block the financing of a list of specially designated global terrorist individuals and organizations ( sdgts ) .

hamas was added to the list in october 2001 , and the holy land foundation for relief and development was added in december 2001 .

six hamas leaders ( including khaled meshaal , musa abu marzouk , and osama hamdan — see appendix c ) , along with five hamas - affiliated charities ( four based in europe , one based in lebanon ) were later added in august 2003 .

al aqsa television and hamas's islamic national bank were added in march 2010 .

as discussed in the main body of the report ( see " charities and individuals " ) , a hamas - related , saudi arabia - based organization known as the union of good was added to the list in november 2008 .

although some u.s. counterterrorism assistance to the arafat - led pa continued during the second intifada , such assistance was complicated by the fact that offshoots ( known as tanzim and the al aqsa martyrs' brigades ) from arafat's own fatah faction that included former pa security force commanders were participating in attacks on israeli military and civilian targets — possibly with arafat's tacit approval .

following the deadliest attack of the intifada in march 2002 , a hamas suicide bombing of the park hotel in netanya during a passover seder that killed 22 israelis and injured over 100 more , israel mounted operation defensive shield .

during march and april of 2002 , the israel defense forces ( idf ) moved into major west bank cities , established martial law , destroyed much of the pa's security and civilian infrastructure , and besieged arafat's compound in ramallah .

in the post - september 11 environment , the bush administration acquiesced to israel's characterization of operation defensive shield as a necessary counterterrorism operation .

in june 2002 , president bush indicated that arafat was no longer a trusted part of the peace process , and that future u.s. support for the pa would need to come through another leader .

hamas did not escape israeli countermeasures .

israel embarked on a targeted assassination campaign , killing many top hamas leaders in gaza between 2002-2004 , including co - founders sheikh ahmed yassin and abdel aziz al rantissi .

as a natural consequence , the geographical locus of hamas's leadership shifted to khaled meshaal and the political bureau in damascus , where it is less vulnerable to israeli assassination operations than in gaza .

even though hamas had to absorb the shock of losing much of its founding core , its reputation and institutions were strengthened relative to fatah and the pa owing to the damage done to pa infrastructure and security institutions and to public confidence in palestinian leadership .

additionally , hamas was able to elevate its cause in the eyes of many palestinians by portraying its assassinated leaders as lionized martyrs .

2005-2006: israel's gaza disengagement and the palestinian legislative council election campaign during the second intifada , the popularity of hamas began to increase as fatah's fell .

at the same time , the israel defense forces ( idf ) effectively dismantled the security organizations and infrastructure of the fatah - dominated pa , which had the unintended consequence of leaving fatah more vulnerable to domestic security threats .

cognizant of its increasing strength and popularity relative to fatah , hamas's leaders made the momentous decision in the spring of 2005 to participate in palestinian authority elections even as they maintained hamas's rejection of the principle of israeli - palestinian agreement that had established the pa. hamas made a strong showing in a series of municipal elections held in 2005 .

still , many observers were surprised when hamas won a controlling majority in the plc in its first - ever national election campaign in january 2006 , leading to its heightened international profile and current situation .

after yasser arafat's death in november 2004 , the united states encouraged the emergence of a successor committed to the peace process .

with the central figure of palestinian nationalism gone , hamas saw an opportunity .

mahmoud abbas was elected to succeed arafat as pa president in january 2005 , an election that hamas did not contest .

hamas had not participated in the initial palestinian legislative council ( plc ) elections of 1996 because of its opposition to the oslo framework that created the pa and plc .

yet , by late 2004 , the situation was different .

hamas may have been feeling pressure to transform its international image from that of a militant group operating in the shadows to that of a political movement with domestic legitimacy .

u.s. and international efforts to curb hamas's activities and financing , combined with israeli opposition , also may have played a part in hamas's thinking , which one palestinian analyst in gaza explained as follows in 2006: for two years now hamas has been feeling that the jihadi approach was reaching a dead end… .

it was classified as a terrorist movement by the us and some other countries .

from this point it decided to log into the palestinian political system .

it felt besieged by the outside world .

they froze all their money and stopped all its institutions .

so they started seeking new legitimacy through the ballot box… .

not , i think , because they believe in democracy , but because they want legitimacy , to say to the world that they are a party or a movement that represents the palestinian people through democratic elections .

the 2006 plc election ( the first plc election in 10 years ) took place at a time when the bush administration was advocating for democratic elections throughout the arab world , including in post - invasion iraq , lebanon , egypt , and the gulf .

abbas wanted to include hamas in order to erase all doubt that fatah remained the palestinian people's clear choice to succeed arafat , and hamas agreed to participate as the "change and reform" party .

the united states , the international community , and israel acceded to this plan without preconditions for hamas's involvement , partly because of the plan's popularity among palestinians and the outside actors' desire to avoid interfering in internal palestinian politics , and partly because the outside actors underestimated hamas's prospects .

most pollsters and observers also underestimated hamas's prospects , even if some had misgivings and forecast a close election .

many analysts believe that hamas received a boost from israel's august 2005 disengagement from gaza because it was amenable to the interpretation that hamas precipitated it through resistance .

the bush administration provided direct financial assistance to the pa to boost its public profile during the run - up to the elections , knowing that palestinians closely identified the pa with fatah given their overlapping leadership cadres .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) allocated $2 million — purportedly at least double hamas's entire campaign budget — for this media , public outreach , and public services initiative .

it was coordinated by a u.s. contractor and palestinian subcontractors through abbas's office .

according to the washington post , some involved in the project debated its wisdom , and the post itself expressed concerns: the program highlights the central challenge facing the bush administration as it promotes democracy in the middle east .

free elections in the arab world , where most countries have been run for years by unelected autocracies or unchallenged parties like fatah , often result in strong showings by radical islamic movements opposed to the policies of the united states and to its chief regional ally , israel .

but in attempting to manage the results , the administration risks undermining the democratic goals it is promoting .

when elections took place in january 2006 , hamas only outpolled fatah in the party - list vote 44% to 41% .

yet , hamas deployed a superior campaign strategy that took advantage of division and complacency among fatah and its candidates to win individual geographical districts in greater proportion to hamas's overall share of the vote and secure a majority of seats in the plc .

it is unclear whether u.s. involvement made a difference , but the perception that hamas lunged ahead at campaign's end in the face of significant u.s. backing for its opponent fed claims that the u.s. strategy had backfired with the palestinian public , negatively impacting views of u.s. competence in the region .

2006-2010: confronting an empowered hamas once hamas's electoral victory was clear , israel insisted that it would not cooperate with a pa that included a hostile hamas , even discontinuing transfer of customs revenues it collected for the pa .

the united states and other members of the international quartet ( european union , russia , united nations ) announced that hamas would have to meet three conditions in order for a pa under its control to receive aid and political support: ( 1 ) recognize israel's right to exist , ( 2 ) renounce violence , and ( 3 ) accept prior israeli - palestinian agreements .

hamas and its incoming government ministers — led by prime minister ismail haniyeh — rejected the quartet principles , and therefore began their term leading the pa government without access to u.s. and european aid .

they turned to gulf states , iran , and russia ( despite russia's status as a member of the quartet ) , all of which were willing to provide funding under the rationale that hamas had entered power legitimately through the established political process .

the united states' and european union's unwillingness to provide financial assistance to the elected government , on the heels of their support for the elections , was seen by many analysts as inconsistent with the principle of democracy both claimed to advocate for the region .

not wanting to contribute to possible destabilization of the west bank and gaza through an aid cutoff , congress and the bush administration devised a way to bypass the hamas - led pa ministries in delivering aid to palestinians .

they continued humanitarian and development assistance through unrwa and other international and non - governmental organizations that were subjected to increasing levels of u.s. government scrutiny to guard against enriching hamas or its supporters .

factional tensions worsened considerably following fatah's defeat at the hands of hamas .

although abbas and fatah formally accepted the plc election results , fatah loyalists with key roles in the pa civil service and security forces refused to accede to hamas's control and actively sought to undermine it .

the rivalry played out dramatically in gaza , where hamas was more strongly rooted than in the west bank , and where the recent israeli disengagement had left an uncertain security situation amid widespread political corruption and clan - dominated lawlessness .

congress and the administration addressed this situation by enacting the palestinian anti - terrorism act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-446 ) , which approved funding pa offices and security forces under the control of president abbas , as contrasted with those controlled by hamas - led government ministries .

lines of command and control over existing pa forces remained blurred , a legacy from yasser arafat's rule , so fatah played on the loyalties of personnel to align most of the security forces with abbas , and hamas organized its own shadow "executive force" from its loyalists in gaza .

instead of containing the situation , these developments appear to have escalated it .

tensions did not abate significantly after the mecca accord of february 2007 , a saudi arabia - brokered power - sharing deal that brought some fatah members and independents into the hamas - led government .

this may have been the case in part because the united states and european union did not believe the agreement changed the nature of the pa government sufficiently to justify the resumption of direct budgetary assistance to the pa .

the story of hamas's takeover of the gaza strip and subsequent dismissal from power in the west bank by abbas in june 2007 is told in different ways from different perspectives .

some have cited u.s. deliberations with abbas to support the idea that an offensive move against hamas's government and security forces in gaza was imminent .

others say that hamas was judiciously biding its time for the right moment to strike , but debate whether it intended to seize power in gaza or simply weaken the pa forces targeting it .

most can agree on certain basic facts .

u.s. , canadian , and european training and consulting was provided to strengthen pa forces — headed by fatah strongman muhammad dahlan — loyal to abbas in gaza .

these forces , still systematically weakened from the second intifada , were less - than - optimally equipped , organized , and disciplined .

when directly engaged by the qassam brigades and other hamas - led forces , the pa forces loyal to abbas gave way within a week , with many personnel fleeing to the west bank or abstaining from the fight ( including some who later chose to stay with the security forces after hamas assumed their command ) .

hamas then seized the opportunity to secure full control over gaza .

the subsequent bifurcation of palestinian leadership in the west bank and gaza resulted in u.s. and international support for the "caretaker" west bank pa government led by prime minister salam fayyad that abbas appointed , and even in renewed israeli ties with the pa and plo .

support for the pa remains a strategy the international community , with some exceptions , generally pursues in tandem with isolation of hamas .

many palestinians fear that the longer the west bank and gaza remain under divided leadership , the less likely restoration of unitary government over both territories will be , and the easier it could be for the societies to drift apart economically and culturally as well .

as presidential , legislative , and even local elections continue to be postponed , some analysts warn of growing authoritarianism in both territories .

facing international isolation and the israeli - egyptian border closure regime , hamas focused its energies on consolidating its control within gaza .

to preserve its status as an organization committed to resistance against an israel that it cannot confront easily in a conventional warfare setting , hamas has relied on smuggling rockets and mortars through the tunnels and firing them in concert with other militant groups .

when these attacks led to operation cast lead in 2008-2009 , hamas's forces were shown to be little match operationally for the idf , but relatively few of its personnel were killed and the idf did not attempt to eliminate its presence in gaza or seize control of the territory .

hamas has portrayed its survival as victory , but many believe that hamas did not expect the intensity of the israeli operation and genuinely feared for the survival of its rule in gaza , and , as a result , has since been more cautious about possible provocations .

u.s. humanitarian assistance to gaza and comprehensive assistance to the west bank continues , as does u.s. political support and assistance for anti - smuggling efforts on land and at sea .

under the various terrorist designations it has attached to hamas , the united states collaborates with israel and other governments to thwart hamas financing and attack capabilities .

attempts at forwarding israel - plo peace negotiations are being facilitated by the united states , with hamas conspicuously uninvited .

nevertheless , events such as the may 2010 mavi marmara flotilla incident and the reaction it provoked complicate u.s. policy towards hamas because they demonstrate divisions in international approaches toward gaza .

appendix b .

key dates in hamas's history appendix c. major hamas leaders political leaders outside of gaza khaled meshaal khaled meshaal , based in damascus , is the chief of hamas's politburo .

he was named a specially designated global terrorist ( sdgt ) by the treasury department in august 2003 .

born in 1956 near ramallah , meshaal ( alternate spellings: mishal , mashal ) moved with his family to jordan in 1967 following israel's occupation of the west bank in the six - day war .

as a student and schoolteacher in kuwait , he became a leader in the palestinian islamist movement .

after the founding of hamas in 1987 , meshaal led the kuwaiti branch of the organization , then moved to jordan in 1991 after iraq's invasion of kuwait .

he took over as hamas politburo chief following the 1995 u.s. arrest of then chief musa abu marzouk .

in september 1997 , meshaal was targeted in amman by the mossad ( israel's foreign intelligence service ) in an assassination attempt that became a major international incident — culminating in king hussein of jordan threatening to abrogate the 1994 israel - jordan peace treaty in order to get binyamin netanyahu ( in his first stint as israeli prime minister ) to supply an antidote to the nerve toxin to which meshaal had been exposed .

after the hamas leadership was expelled from jordan in november 1999 , meshaal first moved to doha , qatar , then settled two years later in damascus , syria .

he became acknowledged as hamas's overall leader in 2004 , following the assassination of abdel aziz al rantissi by israel .

meshaal also serves as hamas's top diplomat , traveling and meeting with various governments and political leaders ( including his political rival mahmoud abbas , iran , turkey , arab countries , russia , european legislators , and former u.s. president jimmy carter ) .

musa abu marzouk musa abu marzouk , born in 1951 in the rafah refugee camp in gaza , and now based in damascus , is a deputy chief of hamas's politburo .

he was named an sdt in august 1995 and an sdgt in august 2003 by the treasury department .

marzouk , a legal u.s. resident for 15 years during the 1980s and early 1990s , also played a key role in defining the relationship between hamas's gaza organization and its outside political leadership following the mass arrests of hamas leaders in gaza during the first intifada .

marzouk himself headed the outside leadership until 1995 .

he is credited as the mastermind behind the construction of hamas's financial networks in the united states , including involvement with the holy land foundation for relief and development .

marzouk was detained in new york's kennedy airport in july 1995 ( after arriving on a flight from jordan ) following the naming of hamas as an sdt in january 1995 .

israel sought his extradition , but later dropped its request due to retaliation concerns and marzouk rejoined hamas's political bureau in jordan in 1997 , becoming deputy chief to khaled meshaal .

osama hamdan osama hamdan , a member of hamas's politburo , has led hamas's branch office in beirut , lebanon since 1998 , and has been a sdgt since august 2003 .

he was born in 1965 in the bureij refugee camp in gaza , but became active in islamist movements while a student and young professional in jordan and kuwait .

he relocated to beirut after having spent six years during the 1990s based in iran .

hamdan often represents hamas in palestinian factional talks with fatah and in discussions with western officials .

he and mahmoud al zahar have reportedly met periodically with former u.s. officials since 2009 .

in gaza ismail haniyeh ismail haniyeh is hamas's "prime minister" in gaza .

haniyeh was born in or around 1955 in the shati refugee camp in the gaza strip .

in 1989 , he was imprisoned for three years by israeli authorities for participation in the first intifada .

following his release in 1992 , he was deported to lebanon along with approximately 400 other hamas activists , but was eventually allowed to return to gaza in 1993 .

upon his return , he was appointed dean of the islamic university , and became the leader of hamas's student movement .

he was closely associated with hamas co - founder and spiritual leader sheikh ahmed yassin , and , following the assassination of yassin and much of the hamas leadership in 2004 , became a prominent hamas leader in gaza .

haniyeh favored hamas's participation in the 2006 plc elections , and headed the hamas list of candidates .

following hamas's victory , he served as pa prime minister from march 2006 until june 2007 .

following hamas's takeover of gaza and its dismissal from the pa government in the west bank , hamas has continued to insist that haniyeh is the pa prime minister , and he is treated as such in gaza .

some observers believe that haniyeh is more responsive to political realities than hamas's leadership - in - exile , and use this rationale to argue that haniyeh and / or other gaza - based hamas leaders might be persuaded to moderate their goals and tactics , even though he continues to advocate violent resistance against israel .

in palestinian opinion polls for hypothetical presidential elections , haniyeh consistently gets the most support among hamas leaders , and sometimes runs close to mahmoud abbas in head - to - head pairings .

mahmoud al zahar mahmoud al zahar , is a medical doctor born in 1945 and based in gaza , and also was one of the 400-plus deportees to lebanon in 1992 .

thought to have close ties with the politburo in damascus , zahar appears to have played a key role in the decision for hamas to participate in the 2006 plc elections .

after being elected to the plc , he served as foreign minister from 2006-2007 in the hamas - led pa government , and continues to serve in that capacity for the hamas - led regime in gaza .

he is one of the most outspoken members of hamas's gaza leadership with international media .

ahmed yousef ahmed yousef ( born 1950 in gaza ) is deputy foreign minister and a prominent media spokesman for the hamas - led regime .

yousef lived in the united states from the 1980s until his return to gaza around 2005 .

while a u.s. resident , yousef earned multiple graduate degrees , and then served as director of the allegedly hamas - linked united association for studies and research in northern virginia and as editor - in - chief of the middle east affairs journal .

one journalist has described yousef's role in hamas as follows: on the one hand , some people regard him as the representative of the moderate face of the movement capable of interacting with the world , while others believe his proposals are different to those held by the rest of the movement's leadership… .

in any case , we are confronted by a talented man who bears the ideology of hamas and deals with the media in an 'american' manner .

fathi hamad fathi hamad ( born 1961 in gaza ) is the hamas - led regime's interior minister , with charge over the regime's security forces .

he became interior minister in 2009 after his predecessor said siyam was killed in an israeli airstrike during operation cast lead .

previously , he was the director of hamas's public affairs department , which includes hamas's al aqsa satellite television channel .

he was elected to the plc in 2006 .

hamad is thought by many to be a proponent of using both media and the security forces to effect greater islamization of gaza , although he has issued contradictory statements on the subject .

a statement he made in 2008 has fueled allegations by israel and others that hamas uses civilians in gaza as "human shields" to enable its militancy .

military leaders in gaza ahmed al jaabari ahmed al jaabari is thought to be the gaza - based commander of the izz al din al qassam brigades , hamas's military wing .

jaabari , who has reportedly escaped multiple assassination attempts , does not make public appearances .

muhammad deif , jaabari's predecessor ( and possibly still his equal or superior ) , has kept an even lower profile in recent years , possibly as the result of injury from a 2006 israeli airstrike .

raed al atar raed al atar is the commander of the rafah company of the qassam brigades .

his command is important due to rafah being the destination point for the smuggling tunnels from egypt .

reports claim that atar authorized the august 2010 firing of grad - style rockets from the sinai peninsula at eilat , israel and aqaba , jordan , possibly raising questions about atar's accountability and leverage within the qassam brigades chain of command and hamas political - military structure .

appendix d. congressional actions pertaining to hamas appendix e. selected bibliography on hamas biersteker , thomas j. and sue e. eckert ( eds .

 ) , countering the financing of terrorism , routledge , new york , 2008 .

brown , nathan j. and amr hamzawy , "hamas: battling to blend religion , politics , resistance , and governance," between religion and politics , carnegie endowment for international peace , washington , dc , 2010 .

chehab , zaki , inside hamas: the untold story of the militant islamic movement , nation books , new york , 2007 .

cohen , yoram and matthew levitt ( with becca wasser ) , deterred but determined: salafi - jihadi groups in the palestinian arena , washington institute for near east policy policyfocus #99 , january 2010 , available at http: / / www.w a shingtoninstitute.org / pubpdfs / policyfocus%2099.pdf .

cohen , yoram and jeffrey white , hamas in combat: the military performance of the palestinian islamic resistance movement , washington institute for near east policy , policy focus #97 , october 2009 , available at http: / / www.washingtoninstitute.org / pubpdfs / policyfocus97.pdf .

gold , dore , et al .

 ( eds .

 ) , iran , hizbullah , hamas and the global jihad : a new conflict paradigm for the west , jerusalem center for public affairs , jerusalem , 2007 .

gunning , jeroen , hamas in politics: democracy , religion , violence , columbia university press , new york , 2008 .

hroub , khaled , hamas: a beginner's guide , pluto press , ann arbor , michigan , 2006 .

human rights watch , internal fight: palestinian abuses in gaza and the west bank , july 29 , 2008 , available at http: / / www.hrw.org / en / reports / 2008 / 07 / 29 / internal - fight - 0 .

human rights watch , rockets from gaza: harm to civilians from palestinian armed groups' rocket attacks , august 6 , 2009 , available at http: / / www.hrw.org / en / reports / 2009 / 08 / 06 / rockets - gaza - 0 .

human rights watch , under cover of war: hamas political violence in gaza , april 20 , 2009 , available at http: / / www.hrw.org / node / 82366 .

jensen , michael irving , political ideology of hamas: a grassroots perspective , palgrave macmillan , new york , 2009 .

kepel , gilles , jihad: the trail of political islam , harvard university press ( belknap press ) , cambridge , massachusetts , 2003 .

levitt , matthew , hamas: politics , charity , and terrorism in the service of jihad , yale university press , new haven , connecticut , 2006 .

levitt , matthew and michael jacobson , the money trail: finding , following , and freezing terrorist finances , washington institute for near east policy , policy focus #89 , november 2008 , available at http: / / www.washingtoninstitute.org / pubpdfs / policyfocus89.pdf .

levy , gideon , the punishment of gaza , verso books , new york , 2010 .

lia , brynjar , building arafat's police: the politics of international police assistance in the palestinian territories after the oslo agreement , ithaca press , reading , uk , 2007 .

lia , brynjar , a police force without a state: a history of the palestinian security forces in the west bank and gaza , ithaca press , reading , uk , 2006 .

milton - edwards , beverley and stephen farrell , hamas : the islamic resistance movement , polity press , malden , massachusetts , 2010 .

mishal , shaul and avraham sela , the palestinian hamas: vision , violence , and coexistence , columbia university press , new york , 2006 .

mcgeough , paul , kill khalid: the failed mossad assassination and the rise of hamas , the new press , new york , 2009 .

nüsse , andrea , muslim palestine: the ideology of hamas , harwood academic publishers , amsterdam , 1998 .

perry , mark , talking to terrorists: why america must engage with its enemies , basic books , new york , 2010 .

rubin , barry ( ed .

 ) , the muslim brotherhood: the organization and policies of a global islamist movement , palgrave macmillan , new york , 2010 .

schanzer , jonathan , hamas vs. fatah: the struggle for palestine , palgrave macmillan , new york , 2008 .

shachar , nathan , the gaza strip: its history and politics: from the pharoahs to the israeli invasion of 2009 , sussex academic press , eastbourne , uk , 2010 .

shamir , jacob and khalil shikaki , palestinian and israeli public opinion: the public imperative in the second intifada , indiana university press , bloomington , indiana , 2010 .

tamimi , azzam , hamas: a history from within , olive branch press , northampton , massachusetts , 2007 .

united nations , report of the u.n .

fact finding mission on the gaza conflict ( the "goldstone report" ) , september 25 , 2009 , available at http: / / www2.ohchr.org / english / bodies / hrcouncil / specialsession / 9 / factfindingmission.htm .

yousef , mosab hassan with ron brackin , son of hamas , salt river , carol stream , illinois , 2010 .

zuhur , sherifa , hamas and israel: conflicting strategies of group - based politics , u.s. army war college strategic studies institute , carlisle , pennsylvania , december 2008 .

