president barack h. obama issued executive order 13526 on "classified national security information" on december 29 , 2009 .

in the months succeeding the issuance of e.o .

13526 , multiple incidents have further heightened congressional , media , and public interest in the issue of classified information policy: 1 .

shamai leibowitz , a former federal bureau of investigation contractor , was sentenced to prison for divulging classified materials to a blogger .

2 .

wikileaks .org , an organization that describes itself as a "public service designed to protect whistleblowers , journalists and activists who have sensitive materials to communicate to the public," published online more than 600,000 classified diplomatic cables and government documents produced during the wars in afghanistan and iraq .

these disclosures have been condemned by the obama administration and other officials .

3 .

an august 6 , 2010 , memorandum indicates that the department of defense ( dod ) is purchasing and destroying the entire first edition of a book by a former employee .

the agency believes the book reveals classified information regarding military and intelligence operations in afghanistan .

4 .

jack goldsmith , a former u.s. assistant attorney general , has alleged that "senior government officials" have leaked classified information to journalist bob woodward .

these incidents occurred in the wake of other information releases in the past few years .

this report addresses classified information policy , including its history , costs , and the agencies assigned a role in it .

the report focuses on executive order 13526 , which establishes the current policy , and identifies possible classified information policy oversight issues for congress .

when president obama took office in january 2009 , classified information policy was established by e.o .

12958 as amended by e.o 13292 .

president william j. clinton issued e.o .

12958 on april 17 , 1995 , and his successor president george w. bush amended it via e.o .

13292 on march 28 , 2003 .

president obama ordered a review of classified information policy on may 27 , 2009 .

the president wrote , [m]y administration is committed to operating with an unprecedented level of openness .

while the government must be able to prevent the public disclosure of information where such disclosure would compromise the privacy of american citizens , national security , or other legitimate interests , a democratic government accountable to the people must be as transparent as possible and must not withhold information for self - serving reasons or simply to avoid embarrassment .

to achieve these goals , the assistant to the president for national security affairs ( commonly known as the national security advisor ) was to submit to the president "recommendations and proposed revisions" to the current policy ( e.o .

12958 ) regarding ( i ) establishment of a national declassification center to bring appropriate agency officials together to perform collaborative declassification review under the administration of the archivist of the united states ; ( ii ) effective measures to address the problem of over classification , including the possible restoration of the presumption against classification , which would preclude classification of information where there is significant doubt about the need for such classification , and the implementation of increased accountability for classification decisions ; ( iii ) changes needed to facilitate greater sharing of classified information among appropriate parties ; ( iv ) appropriate prohibition of reclassification of material that has been declassified and released to the public under proper authority ; ( v ) appropriate classification , safeguarding , accessibility , and declassification of information in the electronic environment , as recommended by the commission on the intelligence capabilities of the united states regarding weapons of mass destruction and others ; and ( vi ) any other measures appropriate to provide for greater openness and transparency in the government's security classification and declassification program while also affording necessary protection to the government's legitimate interests .

the national security advisor's response was due in 90 days .

at the request of the national security advisor , the public interest declassification board established a website to solicit public input on improving classified information policy .

the pidb asked the public to limit their comments to ( 1 ) declassification policy , ( 2 ) a national declassification center , ( 3 ) classification policy , and ( 4 ) technology issues and challenges .

approximately 150 comments were submitted to the pidb during the two weeks of the submission period ( june 29 , 2009 to july 10 , 2009 ) .

the pidb also held a public meeting in washington , dc , on july 8 , and then transmitted the comments it received to the national security advisor .

after an interagency review process , the obama administration issued its revisions to classified information policy in executive order 13526 on december 29 , 2009 , along with an accompanying memorandum and order .

e.o 13526 revoked e.o .

12958 as amended by e.o .

13292 and "prescribe[d] a uniform system for classifying , safeguarding , and declassifying national security information. .

the major components of this new policy are enumerated below .

e.o .

13526 and its accompanying memorandum and order were issued less than a year ago , so it may be premature to attempt an assessment of its success as a policy .

however , several aspects of its implementation may be worthy of congressional attention .

1 .

e.o .

13526 continues the tradition of congressional deference to the executive branch in setting classified information policy .

since 1995 , three presidents ( clinton , bush , obama ) have issued three executive orders ( e.o .

12958 , e.o .

13292 , and e.o .

13526 ) requiring agencies to make significant revisions to their security classification policies and practices .

congress may opt to reevaluate the benefits and costs of the decision to permit significant changes in classified information policy via executive order .

2 .

as with previous executive orders , e.o .

13526 bases the classification levels on the criterion of damage .

the differing levels of classification markings represent varying levels of possible "damage to national security. .

thus , the classification marking of "'confidential' shall be applied to information , the unauthorized disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the national security that the original classification authority is able to identify or describe. .

meanwhile , a document may be given the highest security protection if its release "could reasonably be expected to cause exceptionally grave damage. .

no other values or criterion are to be taken into account .

the terms damage and national security are inherently broad concepts .

neither damage nor the state of relations among nations are easily quantified or determinable with precision .

e.o .

13526 carries these two terms under a unified definition that defines national security to include the united states' international relations .

"damage to the national security" means harm to the national defense or foreign relations of the united states from the unauthorized disclosure of information , taking into consideration such aspects of the information as the sensitivity , value , utility , and provenance of that information .

congress might examine the utility of the continued use of the singular criterion of harm and the concept of damage to national security .

it also could assess the utility of the parameters of the term damage to the national secu rity to determine whether they are overly or insufficiently broad .

3 .

as described above , e.o .

13526 assigns significant classified information policy responsibilities to the isoo , ndc , and nara .

an executive order cannot be used to appropriate funds from the u.s. treasury ; hence , congress may assess whether these agencies have sufficient resources to carry out their work .

4 .

e.o .

13526 , section 1.9 requires classifying agencies to review their classification guides to ensure they comport with current classified information policy .

this must be done within two years .

one objective of this practice is to reduce the incidences of information being classified needlessly .

over - classification , or the act of classifying material that need not be classified , not only is a violation of government policy , it also creates unnecessary costs related to safe - keeping , handling , and declassification .

congress may ask agencies to report on their progress toward completing this task .

5 .

in the memorandum accompanying e.o .

13526 , the president ordered the national declassification center to clear the more than 400 million pages of classified records more than 25 years old by december 31 , 2013 .

the ndc's role is to facilitate agencies' review of these documents and their determinations to release records ( in whole or in part ) , or to keep them classified .

to date , agencies' declassification of information has lagged behind their production of it .

according to an ndc estimate , each year 15 million new pages of classified material are accessioned to the nara , and only 11 million pages complete the declassification process and are made available to the public .

the president's memorandum would require more than 400 million pages of information to move through this process in four years , a rate of approximately 100 million pages per year .

congress may choose to monitor the ndc's progress toward achieving the reduction of the backlog .

6 .

congress enacted the reducing over - classification act in october 2010 , four months after the isoo released its regulations ( 32 c.f.r .

2001 ) for implementing e.o .

13526 .

the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs wrote: the committee wishes to emphasize that none of the provisions in this act is intended to supplant the executive branch's longstanding authority to determine what information should be appropriately classified within the framework established in executive order 13526 and its predecessors .

indeed , the committee believes that the provisions of the act complement and do not conflict with executive order 13526 , and that both the order and the act will promote the goals of increased transparency , information sharing , and security .

section 4 of this new statute requires the secretary of dhs to appoint a classified information advisory officer , who has the authority to "develop and disseminate educational materials and to develop and administer training programs" to assist sub - federal actors ( i.e. , state , local , and tribal governments and private - sector firms ) that utilize classified information .

it is unclear whether this new official must have these materials and programs approved by the isoo , which is authorized to set the standards for agencies' security education and training programs ( e.o .

13526 , part 5 ) .

congress may consider examining whether agencies have faced any challenges in implementing the new law and the executive order consonantly .

7 .

the reducing over - classification act aims to increase information - sharing among agencies .

the illicit release of over 250,000 state department cables , possibly by a department of defense employee , may indicate the inherent difficulty of balancing information sharing and information protection .

already , some agencies have announced new security controls .

furthermore , the office of management and budget has ordered agencies that handle classified information to "establish a security assessment team consisting of counterintelligence , security , and information assurance experts to review the agency's implementation of procedures for safeguarding classified information against improper disclosures. .

congress may move to hold a hearing where it can aggregate agency reports on their improvements to classified information safeguarding .

8 .

the incidents of unauthorized leaks cited at the beginning of this report appear to share a common feature — they involve persons authorized to have access to classified information .

congress may wish to survey these and other cases to determine whether there were further commonalities in these instances .

were , for example , the individuals' motivations similar ? .

were these individuals little supervised in their handling of classified information ? .

would increasing the negative consequences for the unauthorized release of classified information be likely to discourage further incidents ? .

was most of the information in electronic format ? .

