on november 3 , 2010 , the federal reserve ( fed ) announced that it would purchase an additional $600 billion of treasury securities , an action that has popularly been dubbed quantitative easing or "qe2. .

this announcement followed purchases of $300 billion of treasury securities , $175 billion of agency debt , and $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) since march 2009 .

while there may not be a universally accepted definition of quantitative easing , this report defines quantitative easing as actions to further stimulate the economy through growth in the fed's balance sheet once the federal funds rate has reached the "zero bound. .

by this definition , quantitative easing has not been tried in the united states before , although it was implemented in japan from 2001 to 2006 .

congress has given the fed a statutory mandate to "promote effectively the goals of maximum employment , stable prices , and moderate long - term interest rates," and the fed has made the case that quantitative easing can help it to fulfill its mandate .

in its announcement of qe2 , the fed explained its decision by citing "disappointingly slow" progress toward achieving a reduction in unemployment and stable inflation , which has been falling .

by contrast , critics argue that unconventional monetary actions such as qe2 could be destabilizing and ultimately result in high inflation .

for example , an open letter from a group of economists to fed chairman ben bernanke on november 15 stated , "the planned asset purchases risk currency debasement and inflation , and we do not think they will achieve the fed's objective of promoting employment. .

this report discusses the fed's actions to stimulate the economy through quantitative easing from september 2008 to the announcement of a further round of quantitative easing in november 2010 ( popularly referred to as qe2 ) .

this report evaluates arguments for and against qe2 in the context of the current economic outlook , the intended and estimated economic effects of quantitative easing , as well as future concerns regarding the "exit strategy" for eventually returning to a more conventional monetary policy .

it also addresses concerns about whether the fed is monetizing the federal debt and what effects qe2 might have on the federal budget deficit .

normally , monetary policy is conducted by setting a target for the federal funds rate , the overnight inter - bank lending rate .

to keep the actual federal funds rate ( determined by the supply and demand for bank reserves ) near the target , the fed regularly buys and sells treasury securities .

before 2007 , the fed's balance sheet consisted overwhelmingly of treasury securities , with a very modest growth in the portfolio over time .

while the fed has always lent to banks at its discount window , the amount of loans outstanding has typically been less than $1 billion .

it had not lent to non - banks since the 1930s .

beginning in december 2007 , the fed undertook a series of unprecedented policy steps that fundamentally departed from traditional policy .

beginning in 2007 , the fed reduced its target for the federal funds rate in a series of steps to a range of 0% to 0.25% on december 16 , 2008 .

since the federal funds rate cannot be reduced below zero , the fed could deliver no additional stimulus through conventional policy .

deeming conventional policy to be insufficient given the state of the economy in september 2008 , the fed turned to quantitative easing even before its federal funds target reached to zero , as will be discussed below .

congress has given the fed a statutory mandate to pursue stable prices and maximum employment .

in the fed's view , further stimulus is required to meet both goals — unemployment is too high and price inflation is uncomfortably close to zero and falling .

in its november 3 , 2010 , announcement , the fed gave the following reason for pursuing qe2: currently , the unemployment rate is elevated , and measures of underlying inflation are somewhat low , relative to levels that the committee judges to be consistent , over the longer run , with its [statutory] dual mandate .

although the committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability , progress toward its objectives has been disappointingly slow .

to promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation , over time , is at levels consistent with its mandate , the committee decided today to expand its holdings of securities .

the national bureau of economic research ( nber ) dated the end of the recent recession as june 2009 .

beginning in the third quarter of 2009 , gross domestic product rose , and it has grown modestly each quarter since then .

unemployment has fallen from a high of 10.1% in october 2009 to 9.8% in november 2010 .

since world war ii , the only other period when unemployment was above 9.5% was from 1982 to 1983 .

most economic forecasters are predicting that the economy will continue to grow at a similar pace through 2011 , and that unemployment will continue to top 9% through the end of 2011 .

there are two downside risks to the consensus view on the economic outlook that can be considered unlikely but not implausible .

there is a fear the economy will experience "double dip" recessions , meaning a return to economic contraction in the near term .

by historical standards double dips are rare — in the 20 th century , there were two cases where the economy emerged from a recession , only to be quickly followed by another recession ( beginning in 1920 and 1981 ) .

in 1981 , a large tightening of monetary policy is seen as playing a key role in the economy's return to recession , unlike today .

the usual pattern is that once the expansion takes root ( as the nber has determined has happened ) , it continues for some time .

for the expansion to be knocked off course and the economy to return to recession , some new "shock" to the economy would likely be needed , such as economic crisis throughout europe , perhaps following a sovereign default .

by their nature , shocks are hard to foresee , but large shocks are relatively infrequent .

another scenario is that the economy does not re - enter recession , but nor does it experience its usual steady return to full employment and normal growth rates .

instead , it experiences long - term stagnation , sometimes referred to as a deflationary or liquidity trap , where overall spending does not grow quickly enough to reduce significantly the slack in the economy .

evidence in favor of this scenario is the weakness of the expansion to date and the fact that the economy may still be suffering from a debt overhang , where businesses and consumers are "deleveraging" ( increasing saving , and in some cases selling assets , to reduce debt ) .

while the united states has not experienced such stagnation in the post - world war ii period , japan's experience since its equity and real estate bubbles burst in the early 1990s illustrates that this scenario is possible in a modern economy .

from 1980 to 1991 , gdp growth in japan averaged 3.8% .

since 1991 , gdp growth has never exceeded 2.9% in a year , and from 1992 to 2003 , gdp growth was below 2% in all but two years .

from a low starting point , japan's unemployment rate rose each year from 1991 to 2002 .

from 1995 to 2009 , japan experienced 10 years of deflation ( falling prices ) and low inflation in the other years , which indicates that japan's low growth was in part due to inadequate aggregate demand .

although the central bank lowered overnight interest rates to low nominal levels and budget deficits were large ( 5.6% of gdp on average from 1993 to 2009 ) , japan was not able to break out of its deflationary trap .

the bank of japan eventually tried quantitative easing in 2001 , but on a smaller scale than the fed ( its balance sheet increased by about 70% overall ) .

further , some economists believe that japan's deflationary trap was prolonged by sporadic attempts by the government to withdraw fiscal and monetary stimulus prematurely .

balance sheet growth was withdrawn in 2006 when inflation was still below 1% and economic growth was about 2% ; prices and output began shrinking again following the 2008 financial crisis .

many economists believe it was prolonged by japan's failure to address problems in its financial system following its financial crash .

as discussed below , one often - mentioned concern is that qe2 will lead to high inflation .

while this is possible , the larger qe1 has not resulted in any increase in inflation in any of the major indices so far .

on the contrary , inflation has been below average and falling .

for example , in the last 12 months , the consumer price index has risen by 1.2% and the core consumer price index has risen by 0.6% .

for most of 2009 , the consumer price index fell compared to the previous 12 months , meaning the economy experienced deflation .

inflationary expectations have also remained low so far , despite the attention that qe2 has brought to the issue .

based on the consensus forecast , qe2 has been justified on the grounds that the pace of the economy's return to full employment is intolerably slow and inflation has persistently been lower than the fed's "comfort zone. .

alternatively , qe2 could be opposed on the grounds that it is not needed because the economic recovery is firmly rooted .

in that view , if the only benefit of qe2 is to return to full employment a little quicker , it is better not to risk fueling inflationary pressures or undermining the fed's credibility , since both would be costly to reverse in the future .

both of the downside risks to the forecast — a double dip recession or a deflationary trap — argue more strongly in favor of pursuing qe2 .

if these scenarios materialized , there would arguably be little harm in qe2 as announced , and it might be criticized for being insufficient to ward them off .

it is unclear whether opponents of qe2 believe that the projected pace of recovery is sufficient , or if they believe that unconventional monetary policy is inappropriate even if economic conditions are still sluggish once the federal funds rate has reached the zero bound .

while both of the downside scenarios are seen as unlikely , there appear to be even fewer forecasters who are predicting that the economy will grow so much more quickly than the consensus forecast that inflationary pressures will become a problem in the short run , or that inflationary expectations will become ungrounded in the short run .

therefore , arguments against qe2 on inflationary grounds are more persuasive in the context of long term rather than imminent problems with inflation .

if the stimulus from qe2 could be effectively unwound in time , then these long - run fears need never be realized .

thus , whether or not qe2 poses long - term risks to price stability revolve around whether the fed has a viable exit strategy .

this is discussed below in the section entitled " exit strategy . .

some forecasters have tried to estimate how much quantitative easing will affect interest rates and economic growth .

former fed vice chairman donald kohn , while acknowledging great uncertainties , estimated that qe1 could increase nominal gdp by as much as $1 trillion over the next several years relative to a baseline forecast .

goldman sachs estimated that the fed's previous actions were equivalent to an easing in financial conditions of 1.6 percentage points and predicts that qe2 had an effect equivalent to a 0.8 percentage point easing in financial conditions , which could boost gdp growth by 0.5 percentage points over the next year .

given that this was the estimated effect that occurred between august ( when the fed first began hinting at qe2 ) and november 4 ( when it was officially announced ) , it remains to be seen whether this estimate will prove accurate and whether the effect will be long lasting .

the forecasting firm macroeconomic advisors predicts that qe2 – which they believe will be expanded in the future – would raise gdp growth by 0.3 percentage points next year .

given there is no previous experience with quantitative easing in the united states , these estimates are highly speculative .

uncertainty about the effectiveness of quantitative easing makes it difficult to accurately estimate the magnitude of asset purchases needed to achieve the intended stimulus .

furthermore , monetary policy's effect on the economy is gradual , so qe2's full effects will take time and qe1's effects may not yet have completely materialized .

unless there has been a fundamental change in the economic environment , the effects of qe2 could be expected to be similar to those of qe1 , but proportionately smaller .

this section discusses four transmission channels through which quantitative easing could affect the economy , and reviews data and research that have attempted to estimate how much qe1 affected the economy .

once the economic outlook improves , banks may decide to use their reserve holdings to rapidly increase their lending .

at that point , if the fed found itself fighting inflationary pressures , it would have to find a way to prevent banks from lending those reserves to prevent an excessive increase in the money supply .

the most straightforward method to achieve this would be for the fed to withdraw those reserves from the banking system by selling some of its assets or not replacing assets that mature .

this would reduce both the assets and liabilities on its balance sheet .

some of the fed's outstanding assets can be sold relatively quickly in theory , although there could be political resistance in reality .

by april 2010 , the fed's balance sheet consisted predominantly of securities that could be sold in secondary markets .

but the fed has pledged to hold these assets long term .

given the fed's concerns about the fragility of housing markets , it is not clear how its mortgage - related holdings could be reduced quickly if the fed became concerned about rising inflation .

selling only treasury securities might not be sufficient , given the size of the balance sheet compared to the amount of treasury securities the fed might feel comfortable selling .

in 2008 , the fed was only comfortable reducing its holdings of treasury securities to approximately $480 billion .

another option would be to give banks incentives not to lend out reserves by raising the interest rate that the fed pays on reserves , thereby keeping the larger monetary base from increasing the broader money supply .

since there is no domestic and very little international experience with first increasing the monetary base and then tightening policy without reversing the increase in the monetary base , this strategy can be considered untested .

to better prevent these reserves from being lent out if necessary , the fed began offering "term deposits" with a one to six month maturity for bank reserves .

the interest rate on these term deposits would be set through auction ; banks would presumably be willing to bid for term deposits only if the interest rate exceeded the rate paid by the fed on normal reserves .

the fed could also attempt to reduce liquidity by lending its assets out through "reverse repos. .

this would change the composition of liabilities on the fed's balance sheet , replacing its other liabilities with reverse repos .

it is unlikely that reverse repos operations could be large enough to remove most of the new liquidity , however .

cash balances held at the fed through the treasury supplemental financing program could also be used to tie up excess liquidity if needed .

the treasury announced the supplementary financing program on september 17 , 2008 , as an alternative method for the fed to increase its assistance to the financial sector without increasing the amount of money in circulation .

under this program , the treasury has temporarily auctioned more new securities than it needs to finance government operations and has deposited the proceeds at the fed .

 ( the operations do not affect inflation because the money received by the treasury is held at the fed and not allowed to circulate in the economy. ) .

since 2009 , $200 billion has been kept in this account , except at times when the federal debt has approached the statutory debt limit .

given that the size of this program is constrained by the debt limit , it would be insufficient to significantly reduce liquidity without a large increase in the debt limit .

if the fed decides to pursue an exit strategy based on raising rates while maintaining a large balance sheet , economic theory casts some doubt on whether it would have any overall effect on the economy .

any stimulative effect of a larger balance sheet on the economy would be offset by the effects of paying interest on reserves , reverse repos , the treasury supplemental program , or issuing fed bonds .

the large balance sheet would have no positive effect on aggregate demand if it is offset by any of these actions that drain liquidity from the economy .

if investors have rational expectations , it is not clear how this strategy could flatten the yield curve either , since the long end of the yield curve is determined primarily by expectations of future interest rates , and sterilized purchases of assets in the present should not change those expectations , all else equal .

previous experience suggests that sterilized attempts to flatten the yield curve have failed to stimulate the economy .

for example , a study by ben bernanke ( before he became fed chairman ) and other economists concluded that a similar policy in the 1960s called "operation twist" is "widely viewed today as having been a failure. .

to date , quantitative easing has not had any noticeable effect on the public's inflationary expectations .

if inflationary expectations remain low , it would be expected to make an exit strategy , and monetary policy generally , more effective .

on the other hand , one criticism of quantitative easing is that it could undermine expectations of low and stable inflation , and the fed's credibility on inflation .

if inflationary expectations rise , larger - scale operations could become necessary for an exit strategy .

in a worst case scenario , a rise in inflationary expectations could force the fed to pursue an exit strategy before the economy has recovered , or risk "stagflation" ( stagnant growth with high inflation ) .

by december 2008 , the fed had reduced the federal funds rate to zero , thereby exhausting its ability to stimulate the economy through conventional policy .

the fed could have stopped there , but instead took a series of creative and aggressive unconventional policy actions to stimulate an economy that , following the financial crisis , experienced the deepest and longest recession since the great depression .

qe2 took place in a somewhat different context — the recession had ended , and liquidity in key financial markets had been restored , but employment growth was still sluggish and inflation was close to zero .

qe2 can be thought of as qe1 on a smaller scale .

thus , assuming the economic context has not changed fundamentally , arguably the best way to predict the effects of qe2 is to look at the effects of qe1 , and adjust them proportionately downward .

the direct effect of qe1 was to increase excess bank reserves from almost zero to over $1 trillion , which , in essence , is how the fed's loans and asset purchases were financed .

in normal conditions , banks would be expected to lend out these reserves relatively quickly , which would boost economic growth and result in a rapid increase in the money supply through a money multiplier effect , that would increase inflation .

instead , bank lending fell 0.3% over the past year , and the doubling in the portion of the money supply controlled by the fed ( roughly equivalent to the growth in the fed's balance sheet ) , did not translate into large increases in overall measures of the money supply .

some would point to the $1 trillion in bank reserves as evidence that quantitative easing is "pushing on a string. .

even if this bank lending channel does not work , the fed has stressed that quantitative easing can still stimulate the economy through an interest rate channel .

purchasing treasury securities of longer maturities should reduce long - term treasury yields .

but to stimulate the broader economy , two additional steps are necessary .

first , it is necessary for the decline in interest rates to spread to private assets that were not purchased .

second , businesses and consumers must be willing and able to respond to lower interest rates by increase their interest - sensitive investment and consumption spending , respectively .

although interest rates did not fall after qe1 in absolute terms , most research indicates it resulted in a modest decrease in interest rates , relative to if the fed had not purchased these assets , that modestly increased economic growth relative to what would have occurred in the absence of qe1 .

some critics have complained that qe2 will lead to a weaker dollar .

most macroeconomic models would predict that qe2 would lead to a weaker dollar , and this would stimulate the overall economy by stimulating net exports , assuming other central banks do not take steps that depreciate their currencies at the same time .

though there is a consensus that the benefits of qe1 outweighed the risks , the fed's decision to increase its balance sheet further through qe2 is less clear cut .

the recession has officially ended , and the consensus forecast is that the economy will continue to grow in the next year .

a case could be made that qe2 is not necessary because the economy is already on the road back to full employment , so the benefits of trying to get there a little faster do not outweigh the risks .

on the other hand , although it is growing , the economy is expected to grow relatively slowly , and unemployment is expected to remain above 9% through the end of next year .

inflation is still close to zero , and has been falling .

if this forecast is accurate , a case can be made that qe2 would be expected to help the fed meet its dual mandate .

furthermore , there are downside risks to the economy , which can be considered improbable , but not implausible .

the economy could experience a "double dip" into another recession .

alternatively , it could keep growing , but not quickly enough to return to full employment or keep prices from falling .

in other words , it could fall into a "deflationary trap" of the type experienced by japan after its asset bubble collapsed , where unemployment rose for 11 consecutive years and prices fell in 10 out of 14 years .

the lesson from japan seems to be that conventional fiscal and monetary stimulus that would be considered fairly aggressive in normal conditions are not enough to overcome a deflationary trap , particularly if withdrawn prematurely .

japan even tried quantitative easing on a smaller scale than qe1 from 2001 to 2006 , and was unable to generate more than modest economic growth and inflation .

qe2 could be seen as insurance against a double dip recession or deflationary trap , and if the economy were to experience either , the worst that might be said about it is that its effects would be too small to make a difference .

while those predicting a double dip and deflationary trap are in the minority , there are arguably even fewer economists who are predicting that the economy will grow so rapidly next year that high inflation will become a problem .

nevertheless , a lesson that could be taken from the last recession is it can be dangerous to leave monetary policy too loose for too long .

there is a risk that qe2 will eventually lead to excessive inflation because it leads to an increase in bank reserves .

eventually , banks may decide to use those reserves to rapidly increase lending , in which case the growth in the monetary base would translate into a large increase in the overall money supply .

the fed has acknowledged this risk and has devoted considerable efforts to developing an "exit strategy" from quantitative easing when appropriate .

but will the exit strategy work ? .

the most straightforward exit strategy would be for the fed to sell its assets , thereby automatically reversing the growth in its balance sheet and the money supply .

the fed seems somewhat reluctant to pursue this strategy as long as the housing market remains fragile because it would likely involve the sale of its mortgage - related assets .

its other main proposal is to give banks an incentive to keep those reserves sitting at the fed by raising the interest it pays on reserves , a power that congress granted the fed in 2008 .

this approach is largely untested in the united states or abroad , so its potential effectiveness is unproven .

at current reserve levels , it would involve considerable expenditure if interest rates returned to levels closer to their long - term averages , and that expense would ultimately be borne by the taxpayer , since it would reduce the fed's profits , which are mostly remitted to the treasury .

