in the last two decades , organized crime has grown more complex , posing evolving challenges for u.s. federal law enforcement .

this is largely because these criminals have transformed their operations in ways that broaden their reach and make it harder for law enforcement to define and combat the threat they pose .

globalization and technological innovation have not only impacted legitimate commerce , but they have simultaneously revolutionized crime .

in response to these forces , organized criminals have adopted more - networked structural models , internationalized their operations , and grown more tech savvy .

criminals have become more elusive .

they see international borders as opportunities while law enforcement views them as obstacles .

criminals have expanded their range of tools and targets as well .

meanwhile , law enforcement "plays by yesterday's rules and increasingly risks dealing only with the weakest criminals and the easiest problems," according to the strategic alliance group , a partnership of seven law enforcement agencies from five nations .

motivated by money , organized crime fills needs not met by licit market structures and / or exploits businesses , consumers , and nations for profit .

organized criminals have capitalized on commercial and technological advances that have bolstered communication and international business .

they use innovative methods of moving illegal proceeds around the world .

some nations have also witnessed the creation of ties between powerful business figures , politicians , and criminals .

modern organized criminals may prefer cellular or networked structural models for their flexibility and avoid the hierarchies governed by elaborate initiation rituals that were favored by their predecessors .

fluid network structures make it harder for law enforcement to infiltrate , disrupt , and dismantle conspiracies .

many 21 st century organized crime groups opportunistically form around specific , short - term schemes .

further , these groups may outsource portions of their operations rather than keeping all of their expertise "in - house. .

in july 2011 , to address these and other issues , the obama administration issued its strategy to combat transnational organized crime ( 2011 strategy ) .

it described transnational organized crime ( toc ) as a strategic threat to national security , laid out a definition of toc , and set forth five policy objectives and six categories of priority actions in an attempt to devise a cohesive federal response to transnational organized crime .

complicating all of this , since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) , there has been a shift in law enforcement attention and resources more toward counterterrorism - related activities and away from traditional crime fighting activities — including the investigation of organized crime .

this report provides an analysis of how organized crime has capitalized on globalization by using borders as opportunities , relying on fast - paced technological change , and adapting its organizational structures .

it illustrates how these transformations can impact u.s. persons , businesses , and interests .

the report includes a discussion of how u.s. law enforcement conceptualizes organized crime in the 21 st century and concludes by examining potential issues for congress , including the extent to which organized crime is a national security threat ( partly to be tackled by u.s. law enforcement agencies ) , congressional oversight regarding the federal coordination of organized crime investigations , and the utility of current resources appropriated to combat organized crime .

this report employs a broad conceptualization of organized crime in its narrative discussion of criminal activity .

in other words , the analysis includes groups engaged in sustained criminal enterprises , such as — but not limited to — drug traffickers , mafia families , smugglers , violent gangs , and fraudsters .

these operations may or may not have a transnational dimension to them ( which is a requirement under the guidelines of the 2011 strategy ) , but they directly impact u.s. persons , businesses , and / or interests .

while this conceptualization may be broader than the definition laid out in the 2011 strategy , it incorporates a range of criminality that may inform congress in future legislation impacting organized crime .

the cases and examples discussed in this report are not intended to set definitional boundaries for organized crime .

organized crime targeting the united states has internationalized , and its structures have flattened .

the popular image of mobsters employing elaborate initiation rituals and strict codes of conduct to control crews that assail their own communities is outmoded .

today , nimble , adaptive , loosely structured small groups with global reach harm consumers , businesses , and government interests on a daily basis .

commercial and technological innovations are behind this transformation .

they have helped to reduce national trade barriers , widen transportation infrastructure , and bolster volumes of international business .

smugglers have taken advantage of growing international commerce to hide illicit trade .

the internet and extensive cellular telephone networks have fostered rapid communication , simultaneously revolutionizing licit and illicit commerce .

for example , integrated financial systems allow for easy global movement of money .

estimates suggest that money laundering annually equals between 2% and 5% of world gdp .

criminal organizations targeting the united states operate in many of the world's nations .

areas wracked by social disorder , inadequate policing , and poor governance offer opportunities for organized crime to take root .

these groups exploit diaspora communities in the united states as cover for their operations , situating elements of their global operations among immigrant enclaves .

organized crime groups are becoming more entrepreneurial or market focused , reacting to changes in both illicit and licit economies .

of course , they are still heavily involved in activities such as narcotics trafficking and money laundering ( which have been greatly impacted by globalization ) , but organized criminals are increasingly involved in less "traditional" high - tech operations encompassing identity theft , counterfeiting of goods , and various types of fraud .

clearly , organized crime can be seen as a public security concern , largely endangering people , businesses , and property .

in fact , in 1995 the national intelligence council ( nic ) produced a national intelligence estimate ( nie ) on international organized crime that emphasized just this .

however , the u.s. intelligence community's view of international organized crime has shifted critically in the intervening years .

in early 2010 , the nic issued a second nie on the topic .

while , according to doj officials , most of the salient issues in the 2010 nie are consistent with those discussed in the 1995 nie , a key difference emerged .

the 2010 nie argues that international organized crime has evolved into a national security concern as well .

doj officials have described these national security threats in five broad categories: ( 1 ) penetrating or influencing state institutions — particularly in those states with weak governance ; ( 2 ) threatening the global economy by infiltrating financial and commercial markets , driving out legitimate businesses , and using a variety of illegal business practices ; ( 3 ) engaging in cybercrimes across a range of fraudulent activities impacting individuals , businesses , and global trust systems ; ( 4 ) partnering with terrorist organizations and insurgent groups such as the revolutionary armed forces of colombia ( farc ) , taliban , and hezbollah ; and ( 5 ) expanding the reach of drug trafficking such that dtos ally with other criminal organizations — regardless of ethnic background — and with local drug distributors .

alleged eurasian mob boss semion mogilevich embodies both the public and national security dimensions of organized crime .

in october 2009 , the fbi placed mogilevich on its ten most wanted fugitives list .

he is wanted for leading a financial scheme that defrauded investors of $150 million between 1993 and 1998 .

the company that he allegedly controlled at the heart of the operation , ybm magnex , was based in newtown , pa , and was incorporated in canada .

mogilevich was also likely involved in laundering money through ybm magnex and a network of offshore companies .

by purportedly swindling investors , mogilevich ran an operation that harmed members of the public .

more broadly — and involving national security interests — the fbi and doj have suggested that the reputed mob boss also has his hands in eastern european natural gas markets and that he uses his ill - gotten gains to influence "governments and their economies. .

russian law enforcement arrested mogilevich in january 2008 on tax evasion charges but released him in july 2009 on an oath not to flee .

although analysts have assessed organized crime as being a threat to both public security as well as a national security , these threats cannot be fully evaluated without a clearer understanding of the scope of organized crime .

currently , there is no statutory definition of organized crime .

rico provisions describe organized crime in terms of an "enterprise" and a "pattern of racketeering activity. .

the u.s. code does not , however , provide guidance and information surrounding the nature of criminal organizations and their operational structure .

there also appears to be a divergence between the rico provisions and what federal law enforcement — namely the fbi — considers to be organized crime .

for instance , patterns of racketeering activity specified under rico indicate that criminal organizations may be engaged in a host of crimes including , but not limited to , an act or threat involving murder , kidnapping , gambling , arson , robbery , bribery , extortion , dealing in a controlled substance , and other illegal activities .

although drug trafficking is included in rico's predicate offenses , law enforcement does not necessarily consider drug trafficking or dtos to be within the purview of organized crime investigations .

one reason for this may be that federal law enforcement tends to segment investigations more on the basis of the criminal violation than on the basis of the criminal actor .

while legislating a federal definition of organized crime may not necessarily solve this disconnect with law enforcement , it might lead to changes in the way law enforcement views and investigates organized crime .

a second statutory issue that congress may consider is that of organized crime in the u.s. criminal code .

for instance , while there is a chapter ( 113b ) in title 18 that deals specifically with terrorism and related crimes , there is no centralized section that speaks specifically to organized crime .

yet organized crime has been described as a leading threat to u.s. security .

though the lack of centralization of organized crime - related statutes may not impact law enforcement's abilities to investigate and prosecute organized crime , it is indicative of the approach by which the federal government views it .

and , as mentioned , the harm caused by organized crime may not be clearly estimated without a common understanding of what defines organized crime .

building on this , accurately gauging the public and national security threat posed by organized crime may be complicated without a solid notion of the harm it routinely causes .

beginning in the 1950s , congressional concern about organized crime has resulted not only in legislative efforts to combat it , but in commissions and in various series of hearings aimed at gathering information on the scope of organized crime .

one of the first such efforts was the senate special committee to investigate organized crime in interstate commerce in 1950 and 1951 led by senator kefauver .

another example of such congressional attention is the series of senate hearings on organized crime in 1958 and 1963 led by senator mcclellan .

there was also the 1967 commission on crime in the united states led by attorney general katzenbach .

more recently , and particularly since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , congressional attention has shifted away from traditional crime fighting — including organized crime — toward counterterrorism .

of the more recent hearings involving organized crime topics , focus has primarily been on threats posed by the dtos in mexico .

while this is one of the most visible organized crime threats — not only are some of the actors exceedingly violent , but this violence is seen directly along the u.s. southwest border — it is likely not the sole serious organized crime threat to the united states .

as discussed , numerous other organized crime groups , though perhaps not as violent , commit crimes that impact the economic stability , public safety , and domestic security of the united states .

as such , one option that congress may ultimately consider is the convening of a congressional commission to evaluate the scope of organized crime .

such an evaluation might help policymakers determine whether they have provided law enforcement with the appropriate tools to combat today's threats posed by organized crime .

it may also result in a clarification of how the federal government defines organized crime and consequently how investigative efforts at the federal level are organized .

the administration has also proposed a legislative package related to the 2011 strategy .

in light of this , congress may consider exploring the issue of transnational organized crime more extensively .

while the effects of certain , high - profile crimes — such as terrorism — are readily seen , the aftermath of organized crime is not always as striking , nor does it produce the same negative visceral reactions .

some argue that this may be one reason for the shift in law enforcement attention and resources more toward counterterrorism - related activities and further away from traditional crime fighting activities since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

however , although the effects of organized crime may not be seen in a consolidated attack resulting in the physical loss of life , the effects are far - reaching .

as mentioned , organized crime impacts economic stability , public health and safety , and national security .

consequently , some experts argue that there should be some form of incentive ( as well as disincentive ) to entice law enforcement to target more monetary and manpower resources toward investigating organized crime .

one such form of incentive that congress may consider is federal grants to state and local law enforcement for training and technical assistance to investigate and prosecute organized crime .

there are several grant programs — such as the community oriented policing services ( cops ) grant program and the edward byrne memorial justice assistance grant ( jag ) program — through which state and local law enforcement assistance is available for a variety of purpose areas .

however , these purposes do not directly specify as a purpose area the use of funds for combating organized crime .

therefore , policymakers may consider a specific grant program providing not only funding , but technical training and assistance .

other suggestions that experts have put forward involve the use of negative peer reviews to incentivize law enforcement around the world to focus resources toward combating organized crime .

as discussed , various state and federal law enforcement agencies investigate organized crime in the united states .

as such , one option congress may consider could be to direct the formation of a domestic peer review system for law enforcement agencies charged with investigating organized crime .

participation in some form of peer review system could be tied to law enforcement assistance and grant funding eligibility .

congress may wish to consider oversight of the national strategy's implementation by federal law enforcement agencies .

in part , the strategy involves many law enforcement agencies , their investigative resources , and their intelligence collection efforts .

a critical issue may be the coordination of these activities .

as mentioned , the federal investigation of organized crime matters has not historically been a centralized effort , and even with the 2011 strategy , there is no single lead agency charged with investigating organized crime .

specific agencies have had jurisdiction over an organized crime case based on the criminal violations involved .

for instance , organized crime cases built around drug trafficking offenses have generally been investigated by the dea , whereas those cases built around human trafficking cases are typically investigated by ice .

however , many organized crime cases may involve offenses that fall under the jurisdiction of multiple investigative agencies .

for example , organized crime groups involved in crimes ranging from counterfeiting and financial institution fraud to identity crimes , computer crimes , and money laundering may be investigated by the u.s. secret service ( usss ) , fbi , ice , and any number of other federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies .

as a result of structuring organized crime investigations around the alleged crimes , it is not always clear which agency will take the lead on a particular case .

this can lead to inter - agency conflicts , and if case information is not effectively communicated between agencies , each agency involved may not have a comprehensive view of the case .

there are , however , several law enforcement fusion centers , such as the organized crime drug enforcement task force ( ocdetf ) fusion center ( ofc ) , the international organized crime intelligence and operations center ( ioc - 2 ) , and the el paso intelligence center ( epic ) , that are charged with consolidating and disseminating intelligence on various organized crime matters .

additionally , different agencies across federal , state , and local levels participate in these centers .

for instance , the ofc assimilates information for the ocdetf program , which targets major drug trafficking and money laundering organizations .

federal agencies that participate in the ocdetf program include the dea ; fbi ; ice ; bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives ( atf ) ; u.s .

marshals ; internal revenue service ( irs ) ; u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) ; 94 u.s .

attorneys offices ; and doj's criminal and tax divisions .

these federal agencies also collaborate with state and local law enforcement .

in may 2009 , doj announced the creation of the ioc - 2 — housed at the ofc — which brings together the fbi ; ice ; dea ; irs ; atf ; u.s. secret service ; u.s .

postal inspection service ( uspis ) ; u.s. department of state , bureau of diplomatic security ; u.s. department of labor , office of the inspector general ; and doj's criminal division in partnership with the 94 u.s .

attorneys' offices and the u.s. department of the treasury , office of terrorism and financial intelligence .

unlike the ofc , the ioc - 2 has yet to be funded .

it is charged with analyzing and resolving conflicts in information on a host of organized crime cases , not solely those that center on drug trafficking .

epic was originally established as an intelligence center to collect and disseminate information relating to drug , alien , and weapon smuggling in support of field enforcement entities throughout the southwest border region .

following 9 / 11 , counterterrorism also became part of its mission .

though these crimes are not exclusively committed by organized crime groups , they may be , and thus epic is involved in combating organized crime .

epic is jointly operated by the dea and u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , and other participating agencies include ice , uscg , u.s. secret service , department of defense ( dod ) , department of the interior , fbi , atf , u.s .

marshals service , federal aviation administration , national drug intelligence center ( ndic ) , irs , national geospatial - intelligence agency , joint task force - north , joint interagency task force - south , texas department of public safety , texas air national guard , and el paso county sheriff's office .

in evaluating the most effective means to share organized crime intelligence , congress may consider several options .

one option may include increasing support for intelligence fusion centers such as the ofc , ioc - 2 , and epic .

another option could involve the creation of an interagency organization similar to the national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) , but centered around organized crime .

such an organization would be responsible for "analyzing the [organized crime] threat , sharing that information with … partners , and integrating all instruments of national power to ensure unity of effort" against organized crime .

on the prosecution end , doj has already consolidated the organized crime and racketeering section ( ocrs ) , the criminal division's gang unit , and the national gang targeting , enforcement , and coordination center ( gangtecc ) into a single organized crime and gang section .

this harmonizes the prosecution of organized crime and gang cases , which doj has cited as being similar .

one non - legislative option that congress may consider regarding the coordination of federal law enforcement efforts to combat organized crime is enforcing its oversight over existing fusion centers .

in june 2010 , the doj office of the inspector general ( oig ) issued a review of epic .

the oig found that epic's users value its products , but that epic could benefit from improvement in fully developing the national seizure system and coordinating the high intensity drug trafficking area ( hidta ) program , consistently coordinating with intelligence organizations across the country , maintaining and analyzing current information from all available sources , and creating objective performance measures by which to evaluate its programs , among other things .

similarly , in november 2009 the oig reviewed doj's anti - gang intelligence and coordination centers .

as a result of the review , the oig determined that the national gang intelligence center had not created a gang information database , as had been directed by congress .

