over the past year , there has been increasing congressional interest in steps being taken by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to address emissions of greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) .

during that time , epa has promulgated rules to ( 1 ) require reporting of ghg emissions by stationary sources that emit 25,000 tons or more of carbon dioxide equivalents ( co 2 e ) ; ( 2 ) set ghg emission standards for light duty motor vehicles ( cars , minivans , suvs , and light trucks ) ; and ( 3 ) address several issues related to permit requirements for stationary sources of ghgs .

stationary sources — a term that includes electric power plants , petroleum refineries , manufacturing facilities , and other non - mobile sources of air pollution — have not yet been subject to any ghg emission standards issued by epa ; but because of the clean air act's wording , such stationary sources will become subject to permit requirements for their ghg emissions beginning on january 2 , 2011 .

among the sources likely to be affected by implementation of the prevention of significant deterioration ( psd ) permit requirements are new and modified electric generating units of all kinds , but particularly those fired by coal .

these sources emit substantially more than epa's threshold of 100,000 metric tons of co 2 annually: for example , a 500 megawatt ( mw ) coal - fired baseload power plant would emit on the order of 3 million metric tons of co 2 annually .

the coal mining industry and coal - fired electric utilities face at least half a dozen major regulatory actions over the next few years ; industry supporters view these rules collectively as a significant threat to the future of coal .

viewed in this context , the psd permit requirement is one more nail in what increasingly appears to them as coal's future coffin .

of particular concern is section 165's requirement that psd permits require new and modified major sources to install the best available control technology ( bact ) for each pollutant subject to regulation under the act .

this report reviews the development of epa's november 10 , 2010 ghg bact guidance and discusses the elements of the guidance , with particular attention to their potential impact on coal - fired electric generating units .

to assist states in making bact determinations , epa has provided a recommended procedure for states to use and guidance with respect to acceptable methodologies and requirements in making a determination .

in addition , epa reviews state determinations for bact and hears appeals from parties dissatisfied with the state's determination .

the epa procedure for determining bact ( required for federally run programs , encouraged for epa - approved , state - run programs ) is a fairly straightforward "top - down" process .

the overall presumption of the process is that the measure that results in the maximum reduction in the pollutant should be installed unless energy , environmental , and economic impacts of that choice justify its rejection .

the five - step process , as used by epa is as follows: 1 .

identify available control options — there are at least five categories of control options that states can review in identifying possible bact in an individual case: ( a ) existing control technologies for sources of that type ; ( b ) technically feasible options that are used on other source categories , but not the one under review ; ( c ) innovative control technology that has never been commercially demonstrated ( inclusion not required ) ; ( d ) inherently lower polluting production processes , fuels , and coatings that can be evaluated alone or in combination with other control devices ; and ( e ) specific design or operational parameters that may include such factors as combustion control techniques .

these categories of options are not mutually exclusive .

as stated by epa in its guidance: "combinations of inherently lower - polluting processes / practices ( or a process made to be inherently less polluting ) and add - on controls are likely to yield more effective means of emission control than either approach alone. .

data for control options include epa's bact / laer clearinghouse , existing epa or state permits , equipment vendors , trade associations , permitting engineers , and technical papers and journals .

2 .

eliminate technically infeasible control options — control options need to be either demonstrated on a like facility or determined to be both available and applicable in the particular case .

if not , the option is eliminated from the list .

3 .

rank remaining options based on pollutant reduction — a variety of performance metrics may be necessary to determine comparative control efficiencies among different options .

4 .

eliminate options that f ail energy , environmental , or economic criteria — the permitting agency has discretion in weighting the three statutory criteria for exclusion .

5 .

determine bact — the most effective option remaining after the steps above have been taken is determined to be bact and the permitting agency establishes a corresponding emissions limit .

a substantial record is built during the nsr process .

a completed permit application is reviewed not only by the permitting agency , but also by the regional epa office , federal land managers ( if a psd class i area is involved ) , and by the public .

conflicts among these parties and the applicant can send the permit application through a series of state and federal administrative appeals processes , along with state and federal litigation .

the specifics on this process vary from state to state .

epa provides guidance to the states in determining bact by identifying appropriate methodologies and requirements to assist the states in identifying all potential bact options and in eliminating options that don't meet statutory criteria .

much of the discussion about epa's guidance for ghg bact has focused on coal - fired power plants .

coal - fired electric generating facilities are responsible for about 28% of the country's total greenhouse gas emissions .

as noted , in general , there are five categories of control options that are considered in a bact analysis: a review of the categories of ghg control options for coal - fired facilities reveals few readily available alternatives to significantly reduce emissions .

1 .

existing control technology : a technology proven to work for the particular source category being permitted .

there are no existing add - on technologies to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from coal - fired facilities .

2 .

technically feasible technology : a technology proven to work for other source categories , but not demonstrated on the particular source category being permitted .

while an argument could be made that capture technology is commercially available for industrial facilities ( to separate carbon dioxide from a facility's other emissions ) , there is no such available technology with respect to the storage of any captured carbon dioxide .

it is possible in some cases that the carbon dioxide could be piped to a facility needing carbon dioxide ( such as an oil field using enhanced oil recovery ( eor ) ) , but those opportunities would be very site - specific .

3 .

innovative control technology : a technology that has never been commercialized on any source category ; it is in the pilot - plant or demonstration stage of development or deployment ( for example , oxygen combustion [also called oxy - fuel] ) .

deployment of an innovative technology on a coal - fired power plant would likely involve substantial costs and risks — costs and risks that could jeopardize the facility's viability .

4 .

inherently lower polluting production processes , fuels , and coatings : an individual adjustment or combination of adjustments in a facility's production process , its source of fuel , and its use of coatings .

inherently lower emitting fuels are available that could either partially ( co - fired ) or completely replace coal .

two such alternatives would be natural gas and biomass .

however , these alternatives could arguably change ( or "redefine" ) the fundamental purpose of the source ( a change epa does not require under its bact guidance ) , and eliminate some of the advantages of building a coal - fired facility .

5 .

specific design or operational parameters : adjustments in a facility's design and / or inclusion of inherently less polluting work practices in the facility's operation .

for a coal - fired facility , the bact analysis would probably focus on this last category — specifically , either changing the coal - fired design to better accommodate future technology advancements ( such as using integrated gasification combined cycle technology ) or employing energy - efficient control measures , as discussed later .

with a multi - billion dollar investment in a project designed to operate for decades at stake , the lack of a definitive option arguably adds more uncertainty to future coal - fired power plants .

with the options currently limited with respect to bact for coal - fired power plants , much of epa's work has focused on energy efficiency and innovative control measures , as discussed below .

on november 10 , 2010 , the epa released its package of guidance and technical information to assist local and state permitting authorities in implementing psd and title v permitting for greenhouse gas emissions .

the four primary elements of the guidance with respect to psd permitting are: 1 .

basic guidance on implementing psd permitting , entitled: psd and title v permitting guidance for greenhouse gases , that focuses on the five - step permitting process favored by epa , with particular attention given to determining bact .

2 .

ghg control measures white papers that summarize basic technical information on control techniques and measures to reduce ghg emissions from various industries .

the information is general and does not define bact for any sector .

the november 10 , 2010 release includes white papers for electric generating units , large industrial / commercial / institutional boilers , pulp and paper , cement , nitric acid , and iron and steel .

3 .

ghg mitigation strategies database that provides data on performance , cost , and environmental effects on available and developing ghg control measures .

data are currently available for electric generating and cement production .

4 .

enhancements to the control technology clearinghouse to assimilate information and decisions about ghg control measures required by permits used by state and local authorities .

this package is not a formal rulemaking , although epa is taking public comment on it and may release a refinement of the package if warranted .

epa will focus on comments pertaining to calculations and other technical errors .

because the guidance is not a formal rulemaking action , while epa states it will consider other comments as the process proceeds , it does not intend to formally respond to them .

in february 2010 , california's bay area air quality management district ( baaqmd ) finalized the nation's first psd permit that includes ghgs in its bact analysis .

the russell city energy center is a 612 mw natural gas - fired combined cycle project to be constructed in hayward , ca , by an affiliate of calpine corporation .

in addition to agreeing to greenhouse gas emission limitations , calpine will also have to install dry low nox combustors , selective catalytic reduction ( scr ) , and an oxidation catalyst to limit emissions of other pollutants ( particularly nox ) .

petitions to the eab by environmental groups challenging the permit were rejected by the eab on november 18 , 2010 .

the permit places limits on greenhouse gas emissions in carbon dioxide equivalence from the facility's two gas turbines and heat recovery steam generators ( i.e. , the combined - cycle ) , its fire pump diesel engine , and its five circuit breakers .

for the combined - cycle , the limitations are 242 metric tons hourly , 5,802 metric tons daily , and 1,928,182 metric tons annually .

in addition , the heat rate of the power plant is not allowed to exceed 7,730 btu per kilowatt - hour .

if the power plant maintains the efficiency required by the permit , it would be allowed to operate at about an 85% capacity factor .

in making this determination , the five - step bact approach was used .

in identifying potential control technology , the technologies identified were thermal efficiency and carbon capture and storage .

some commenters argued in favor of non - fossil electricity generation as an alternative to the proposed plant .

however , baaqmd noted that the 1990 draft epa guidance does not require consideration of non - fossil - fuel - fired alternatives and deferred to the california energy commission .

the ccs option was eliminated in step 2 as ccs was considered not commercially available , and no appropriate storage option had been demonstrated .

this left efficiency as the only option to achieve ghg reductions .

for those looking for bright lines and specific recommendations with respect to ghg bact technologies , particularly with respect to coal - fired facilities , the released package does not provide them .

indeed , epa's supplemental "questions and answers" release on the guidance seems to stress that it did not draw such conclusions .

for example: do these tools identify bact for specific types of industrial facilities ? .

no .

does this guidance say that fuel switching ( coal to natural gas ) should be selected as bact for a power plant ? .

no .

does this guidance say that carbon capture and storage ( ccs ) should be selected as bact ? .

no .

likewise , the guidance provides no cost thresholds for permitting authorities to consider in determining the economic impacts of alternatives or propose a new approach to selecting bact for ghg emissions .

instead , the guidance focuses on the discretionary authority that states have in determining bact ; discretion that ensures that bact will continue to be determined on a case - by - case basis , with states differing in some cases in what they consider appropriate control measures and what constitutes bact .

whether industry will find such discretion provides sufficient regulatory certainty for it to invest billions in new plant remains to be seen .

in short , the epa ghg guidance is a simple expansion of the five - step bact process that has been used for two decades to include greenhouse gases .

whether that is an adequate response will be determined by applicants , state authorities , and future epa regulatory actions under related parts of the act , such as section 111 ( nsps ) , to which bact is linked .

