although the economic recession that began in december of 2007 officially ended in june 2009 , it has been a "jobless recovery" with unemployment rates near historical highs .

especially hard hit have been older workers , aged 55 and older .

this report first looks at historical trends in unemployment and labor force participation among older workers , the reasons for their unemployment , and the duration of unemployment .

it then identifies the challenges that certain subgroups of older workers may face and the availability of financial resources and health insurance coverage during their spell of unemployment .

unemployment is defined as not having a job but actively looking for work .

the share of those aged 16 and older in the labor force , without a job and actively looking for work equaled the reported unemployment rate of 9.8% in november 2010 , a nearly doubling of the 5.0% rate experienced when the recession began in december 2007 .

compared with previous years , the unemployment rate for older workers has reached historical highs ( see figure 1 ) .

at the same time , unemployment rates for younger workers aged 25 to 54 are similar to levels experienced in 1982 and have not yet reached historical highs .

younger workers , those aged 25 to 34 years old , generally experience the highest unemployment rates ( in absolute terms ) during both good and bad economic times .

for all age groups under age 65 , unemployment rates have more than doubled since the recession began in december of 2007 ( see figure 2 ) .

when looking at the unemployment rate , two key numbers are used .

the numerator is the number of workers unemployed and actively looking for work and the denominator is the population considered part of the workforce ( i.e. , the labor force ) .

since as they age , many older workers retire and exit the labor force , the labor force participation rate ( which determines the size of the labor force ) becomes an important indicator of unemployment among older workers .

as shown below , during the recent economic recession , the reason unemployment rates have reached historical highs for older workers is not only a weak demand for labor but also increased labor force participation among older workers .

workers who become unemployed at older ages may experience a less secure retirement .

first , job loss at older ages results in less time to replenish lost income before retirement .

second , those older workers looking for employment are experiencing longer durations as compared with their younger counterparts .

both of these reasons can adversely affect long - run retirement security .

older unemployed workers face a unique set of challenges , distinct from their younger counterparts .

these include age discrimination and difficulty accessing affordable health insurance coverage outside of the employer market .

the magnitude of these challenges will vary depending on their individual circumstances .

for example , although age discrimination laws may benefit those older workers in retaining a job , these laws are less effective for those older workers who have become unemployed and are searching for a new job .

furthermore , most public programs providing income support and health insurance for the unemployed are targeted toward those who have recently lost their jobs ( regardless of age ) .

these programs generally do not provide assistance to the older unemployed who may be returning to the workforce after an extended absence ( eg , retirement ) .

the following discusses these challenges in greater detail .

unemployed older workers have some options to supplement their income and to access affordable health insurance coverage during their spell of unemployment .

in many cases , their ability to access these resources will depend on their age .

for example , some older workers may be eligible for public programs such as social security and medicare when they reach a certain age .

in addition , restrictions on access to retirement savings and home equity under a reverse mortgage are also tied to a certain age .

the following section briefly summarizes the various resources available to older unemployed workers given their age and other factors .

more detailed information about each of these options can be found in the crs reports cited under each option .

older unemployed workers will have a shorter time period to replenish their lost wage income as compared with their younger counterparts .

available options to supplement their income during a spell of unemployment will depend on their individual circumstances .

those who are involuntarily terminated will face similar options as their younger counterparts , that is , they may be eligible for unemployment compensation .

in addition , older workers who have lost their jobs due to adverse trade conditions may be eligible for re - employment trade adjustment assistance ( rtaa ) .

these types of programs , though , only assist workers who recently lost their job and do not apply to those workers re - entering the workforce after an extended period of time .

older workers between the ages of 55 and 62 who have not worked recently will not have access to unemployment compensation or social security benefits and must rely on retirement savings ( if they exist ) , or tap into their home equity .

those older workers who have reached the age of 62 may be eligible for public programs like social security , but there are disadvantages to taking social security at younger ages .

table 3 summarizes eligibility and the select features of each of these resources .

access to health insurance coverage among older americans is strongly correlated with full - time employment .

studies have found that , in 2007 , 45% of the uninsured aged 55 to 64 have no full - time workers in their households .

recent increases in unemployment of older workers may increase the share of uninsured in this age group .

similar to the discussion on financial resources , access to health insurance coverage for the unemployed older worker will depend on their individual circumstances .

those under 65 years old and not yet eligible for medicare may have access to retiree health coverage from their prior employer at full or a subsidized rate , and others may qualify for tax credits for health insurance coverage .

those unable to rely on either of these sources could purchase health insurance in the individual market , which could become costly for older workers especially those with pre - existing conditions .

although the recent enactment of health care reform will improve access to health insurance coverage for the older unemployed under the age of 65 , most of these provisions will not be effective until 2014 ( see discussion below about the patient protection and affordable care act ) .

finally , although the older unemployed over 65 years old most likely have access to medicare , premiums and cost - sharing can consume a growing share of income over time .

table 4 summarizes potential options available to insuring older unemployed workers or older workers who have left the labor market ( eg , retired ) .

in march of 2010 , president obama signed into law h.r .

3590 , the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ; p.l .

111-148 ) and h.r .

4872 , the health care and education reconciliation of 2010 ( p.l .

111-152 ) .

the reconciliation bill amends provisions in ppaca .

the new laws will , among other things , provide immediate reforms to the health insurance market .

these provisions are intended to increase consumer access to health insurance , especially for persons with pre - existing conditions and for other higher - risk groups .

ppaca will also provide premium and cost - sharing subsidies for certain eligible individuals , which could include some unemployed individuals .

in addition , ppaca will expand medicaid to non - traditional groups and as noted earlier will cover households earning less than 138% of the federal poverty level , or $20,107 ( in 2010 ) for a two - person family .

beyond the retiree reinsurance program discussed above , these provisions , would not be implemented until 2014 and beyond .

this would result in an interim period between enactment of the legislation and the date it becomes operational when unemployed older workers may need assistance .

