domestic energy policy has historically been , and continues to be , motivated by two goals .

first , u.s. energy policy has sought to promote domestic energy security .

uncertainty surrounding energy prices and imports generates interest in further developing domestic energy - generation capacity .

with respect to energy security , the concern is greatest in the transportation sector , where 94% of the sector is powered using petroleum .

renewable energy resources have the potential to play an important role in developing domestic generation capability .

second , u.s. energy policy is driven by a desire to address environmental concerns .

one environmental goal is the reduction of greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions .

approximately 48% of electric power in the u.s. is produced using coal .

producing electricity and fuels using renewable energy technologies offers the possibility of production with low ghg emissions .

despite energy policy objectives , growth in renewable energy production has been slow .

figure 1 illustrates domestic energy production by source over the past 50 years .

in 1949 , nearly 32 quadrillion btus of energy were produced .

more than 9% of the energy produced was from a renewable energy source ( 4.5% from hydro electric power and 4.8% from biomass ) .

by 2009 , energy production had more than doubled to 73 quadrillion btus .

in 2009 , 10.6% of energy production came from a renewable source ( 3.7% from hydro electric power , 5.3% from biomass , with less than 1% coming from wind , geothermal , or solar sources ) .

more recent evidence , however , suggests that the use of renewables is growing and overall energy consumption is decreasing .

for example , in 2009 , 39% of all new electric generating capacity installed was wind power .

this new capacity was the result of $21 billion in investment .

overall , wind power's share in domestic energy production increased by 28% .

despite this increase , wind power accounts for less than 1% of domestic energy production .

in 2008 , wind power was 0.73% of domestic energy production , increasing to 0.96% in 2009 .

while domestic energy production ( figure 1 ) has continued to increase in recent years , domestic energy consumption has declined .

in 2009 , domestic energy consumption was less than 95 quadrillion btus , down from 99 quadrillion btus in 2008 .

renewables , as a share of energy consumption , were 7.4% in 2008 and 8.2% in 2009 .

the increased share of domestic energy consumption from renewable sources is partially due to increased production from these sources .

the overall decline in energy consumption from all sources , however , also increased the renewables' relative share .

there are several federal policies that could potentially increase energy production from renewables .

one option is to establish a national renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) , which would require that a certain share of energy supplied come from renewable sources .

a number of states have an rps in place .

legislative proposals to establish a federal rps date back to at least the 105 th congress .

legislation introduced during the 111 th congress , if enacted , would have required that 25% of energy be generated using renewable resources by 2025 .

proposals in the 110 th congress sought to enact an rps of 15% by 2020 .

while congress continues to explore the possibility of a federal rps through various hearings , it does not appear that adoption of such a standard is imminent .

while adoption of a federal rps does not appear likely in the near future , strong interest remains in increasing the use of renewables and in increasing investments in energy efficiency .

current policies , including tax incentives , loan guarantees , and federal grants , have promoted renewables and energy efficiency in the past , and are expected to play an important role in shaping future energy policy .

current policies recognize the important role private capital plays in renewable energy investments , and seek to mobilize and attract such capital to renewables and energy efficiency projects .

promotion of both renewables and energy efficiency is consistent with the long - standing energy policy goals of enhancing domestic energy security while simultaneously addressing ongoing concerns regarding the environment .

as such , it is expected that congress will continue to look for ways to encourage these investments .

understanding how to best encourage investments in renewable energy involves understanding what has been done in the past , evaluating the success of these initiatives , and evaluating whether previous initiatives should play a role in future energy policy .

this report focuses specifically on federally subsidized or supported debt designed to promote investment in renewables and energy efficiency .

these instruments have played an important role in the renewable energy financing landscape in recent years .

understanding what types of debt instruments currently are and previously have been available , the degree of federal subsidization contained within these instruments , and what types of investments have resulted from these programs , will help policymakers evaluate if and how these tools can be used in the future to promote renewables and efficiency .

an economic justification for government intervention in energy markets is to address market failures arising due to externalities .

these externalities may lead to over consumption of some energy sources generating a loss in economic efficiency .

government policy , in particular tax policy , may be capable of guiding the market toward a more economically efficient allocation of resources by internalizing the externalities .

both the production and consumption of energy may be associated with negative externalities .

for example , burning fossil fuels contributes to air pollution and generates greenhouse gasses , both widely considered negative externalities .

imposing a tax on the polluting activity can improve economic efficiency by forcing polluters to face the total costs associated with polluting activities .

fossil fuels used to produce energy , specifically traditional coal and crude oil , generate environmental costs that are not directly borne by either the energy producer or the energy consumer .

because producers and consumers do not bear the full cost of fossil fuel energy production , the market outcome results in more energy from fossil fuels being produced than would have been the case if environmental costs were taken into account .

imposing a tax on ( or regulating ) polluting activities would increase the cost associated with such activities , and ultimately decrease the quantity of the polluting activity .

in theory , if the tax is equal to the external social costs not previously considered , the tax will guide the market to a more economically efficient allocation of resources .

while taxes or similar instruments are the most economically efficient mechanisms for addressing market failures stemming from negative externalities , an alternative policy option is to subsidize a non - externality - generating alternative .

in other words , instead of increasing the cost of fossil fuel sources , decrease the cost of renewable sources .

energy tax policy in the united states has tended toward this alternative approach , providing a number of tax credits and other tax preferences for investments in renewables and energy efficiency .

by making renewables cheaper relative to traditional energy sources , investment in renewable alternatives is expected to increase .

critics of tax preferences for renewables and efficiency , however , maintain that preferences are not likely to be economically efficient for a number of reasons .

they note that first , tax subsidies reduce government revenues , while taxes that correct for negative externalities increase government revenues .

tax subsidies for renewables , therefore , can require the government to raise taxes by taxing other activities , such as labor , through an income tax .

second , tax subsidies may distort investments , directing resources toward technologies that may not be the most cost - effective mechanism for greenhouse gas emissions reduction or for achieving other goals , such as job creation .

supporters of setting a price on greenhouse gas emissions assert that it would allow the market to select the most cost - effective alternatives .

with tax subsidies , the government is choosing the preferred technology , and may "pick winners" rather than allowing the market to identify the most cost - effective energy resources .

finally , they note that tax subsidies for renewable energy reduce the average cost of energy resources .

as the average cost of energy falls , the quantity of energy demanded from all energy sources , including non - renewable sources , increases .

thus , while subsidizing renewables increases investment in renewables by reducing their cost relative to non - renewable alternatives , a possible unintended consequence of such incentives could be additional fossil fuel consumption resulting from reduced energy costs broadly .

overall , it seems likely that tax incentives for renewables will increase investment in renewables , but that some of those gains may be reduced by increased fossil energy consumption resulting from reduced energy prices .

investments in energy projects are generally capital intensive .

one method for promoting renewables investments is through tax incentives that reduce a project's cost .

historically , tax incentives have been available for the investment in and production of renewable energy .

as noted above , u.s. energy tax policy has tended to use the tax code to subsidize certain energy resources as a mechanism for achieving energy policy goals .

federally subsidized financing offers an alternative to direct tax incentives for renewable energy and energy efficiency projects .

subsidized financing reduces the cost of capital , making these capital - intensive investments more attractive .

in recent years , various forms of federally subsidized financing have been available to promote investments in renewable energy and energy efficiency .

the following sections provide an overview and analysis of federally subsidized financing programs for renewables and efficiency .

in addition to the programs discussed above , there are other policy options for federally supported renewable energy financing .

examples of such options are briefly discussed below .

as noted in this report , financing many existing tax - favored or otherwise federally favored financing programs does not currently exist .

for example , creb financing is not currently an option for tax - exempt entities considering undertaking a renewable energy investment .

babs were no longer available as of december 31 , 2010 .

policymakers looking to encourage investment in renewables and efficiency may begin to start by looking at existing programs and deciding which , if any , programs should be extended and funded in the future .

tax favored financing is one of many policy options for encouraging investment in renewables and energy - efficiency technologies .

in markets that may fail to consider the full costs associated with fossil energy sources , renewables may be disadvantaged .

one option to promote renewables that has been considered by congress is a renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) .

requiring that some level of electricity be produced using renewable resources would drive markets to invest more in renewables and may lead to energy efficiency investments .

in the absence of such market drivers , tax - subsidized financing is another option for promoting investment in the renewable sector .

further , the use of tax - credit bonds addresses some of the economic efficiency and equity concerns that have been raised with respect to the use of tax - exempt bonds in the past .

the goal of tax favored financing is to reduce the cost of borrowing for those investing in renewables and efficiency , making it easier for such projects to attract investors .

while federally subsidized financing may attract investment , there is also the possibility that investment would have taken place without subsidization .

in this case , tax favored bonds may reduce a project's borrowing costs , rewarding bond issuers at taxpayer expense without creating additional renewable energy capacity .

energy tax subsidies reduce federal revenues , an issue that is of growing concern in an era of high budget deficits .

well designed tax favored financing options should strive to achieve technology neutrality .

oftentimes , in practice , tax favored investment opportunities are given to specific types of technologies .

when policymakers select the types of technologies eligible for various forms of subsidized financing , there is a danger of "picking winners. .

subsidizing one technology may lead to additional investments in the subsidized technology , at the expense of non - subsidized , but potentially promising alternatives .

 figure a - 1 illustrates the distribution of the 2007 and 2009 creb allocations by state .

california received the largest allocation , receiving $822 million .

a number of states did not receive any creb allocations .

as noted above , crebs are not awarded to states based on population as is the cast for other types of tax credit bonds .

while this may prevent some states from receiving creb allocations , it may also result in a more efficient allocation of creb financing , as financing is more likely to be concentrated in states better suited for creb - eligible projects .

figure a - 2 illustrates 2007 and 2009 creb allocations per capita .

while california received the largest allocation of crebs in absolute terms , alaska received the largest allocation ( $202 ) on a per capita basis .

washington state also received a large per - capita allocation ( $77 ) .

