for at least a decade , policymakers have been discussing the potential to shift freight from roads to rivers and coastal waterways as a means of mitigating highway congestion .

while u.s. waterways carry substantial amounts of bulk commodities , such as grain , coal , and fuel oil , they are seldom used to transport containerized cargo between points within the lower 48 states .

trucks , which carry most domestic container shipments , and railroads , which carry a large proportion of containers imported or exported by sea , offer much faster transit .

yet , at a time when many highways and rail lines are congested , a parallel river or coastal waterway may be little used .

with passage of the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 , specifically subtitle c , 121 stat .

1760 ) , congress pushed for greater use of marine transportation by requiring the department of transportation's ( dot's ) maritime administration ( marad ) to identify waterways that could potentially serve as "short sea" shipping routes .

subsequently , in the national defense authorization act for fy2010 ( p.l .

111-84 , specifically section 3515 , 123 stat .

2724 ) , congress authorized federal grants for financially viable short sea routes covering up to 80% of total project cost .

in april 2010 , marad issued a final rule implementing the program , along with the following explanation: in recent years , it has become increasingly evident that the nation's existing road and rail infrastructure cannot adequately meet our future transportation needs .

land based infrastructure expansion opportunities are limited in many critical bottleneck areas due to geography or very high right - of - way acquisition costs .

this is particularly severe in urban areas where there are additional concerns about emissions from transportation sources .

marad uses the term "marine highways" instead of "short sea" shipping to convey the purpose of the program , which is to mitigate landside freight bottlenecks .

for this reason , projects relating to waterborne shipment of dry and liquid bulk products and oversize cargo too large to fit into a container are not eligible , as these products already move on waterways .

also , freight ferry service to an island without a bridge is ineligible , because no roadway congestion would be relieved .

as specified by congress , shipments to or from mexico do not qualify , nor do shipments to or from canada , except those across the great lakes .

project eligibility requires a demonstration of public benefits and long - term sustainability without future federal operational support .

dot has provided grants to several existing or prospective domestic container shipping services , not only under the marine highway initiative but also the transportation investment generating economic recovery ( tiger ) grant program and the congestion mitigation air quality improvement program ( cmaq ) , as indicated in table 1 .

relative to dot's total budget , the amount of funding is small and could be viewed as seed money for exploring the feasibility of marine highways .

the funding recipients are public entities , and can be states , metropolitan planning organizations , or port authorities , which must find other funding sources to cover a share of a project's total projected cost .

these entities are encouraged to develop public / private partnerships with vessel owners and operators , truck and rail carriers , and shippers .

these projects represent departures from the federal government's traditional role in domestic marine transportation , which has involved financing navigation infrastructure but generally has not provided vessel operating grants or funds for landside marine terminal infrastructure , such as wharves and cranes .

a prevailing perception is that the slow speed of barges and the additional cargo transfer costs at ports deter use of marine highways .

the fact that few containers are transported on such expansive internal u.s. waterway systems as the mississippi river ( including the illinois , ohio , and missouri rivers ) and the great lakes suggests that there are deterrents .

however , there are also highly specific conditions under which barges might be an attractive option for container shippers .

a brief survey of existing and defunct domestic waterborne container services points to specific circumstances in which this could occur .

three market segments can be identified and described as ( 1 ) short - distance ferries , ( 2 ) upriver inland container - on - barge ( cob ) , and ( 3 ) coastal feeder services .

technological developments have been instrumental in helping railroads compete to carry truck trailers and containers .

proponents of marine highways have suggested that similar developments might occur in the maritime sector , with changes in port or vessel technologies potentially driving down the cost of short - sea shipping .

funding technological development could be an option for promoting marine highways .

one such technology is "fast ferries," ships with speeds of 40 knots or greater , which have been proposed as a way to make coastal shipping more attractive .

however , the fuel costs of these vessels could be prohibitive .

for shippers , transit time on short - sea routes is much more a function of service frequency than of vessel speed: the need to wait one or two days for a scheduled vessel departure more than cancels out any gain from a faster vessel .

another technological approach would be renewed emphasis on roll - on / roll - off ( ro / ro ) vessels , which have ramps to allow trucks to drive on and off , leaving just the trailer on the vessel .

ro / ro vessels first came into wide use during world war ii , and at various times have been used for coastal shipping .

the advantage of ro / ros is that they do not require expensive gantry cranes to load and unload containers and can be loaded or unloaded quickly .

however , because the containers or truck trailers carried on the ships have wheels attached , they cannot be stacked on the ship or in the port , making the ro / ro concept much less space efficient .

regardless of ship type , the matson experience on the west coast suggests that the capital costs of a dedicated ship can be a difficult hurdle , even in the u.s. coastal container market with the largest volume .

perhaps for this reason , u.s. coastal shipping services typically use oceangoing barges , with a tug either pulling or pushing the barge tow , rather than self - propelled containerships .

crew size requirements are based on the tonnage of a vessel , which in the case of tug and barges is the tonnage of the tug , not the barge .

for this reason , tug - and - barge combinations offer substantial savings in crewing costs , requiring crews of six to eight instead of 20 to 23 for self - propelled vessels .

the lesson of avoiding high capital costs seems also to be relevant to cargo - handling equipment in ports .

rather than more expensive gantry cranes , reach stackers appear to be the prevalent means of loading and unloading container barges .

a reach stacker is similar to a large fork lift but is mounted with a crane instead of a lift .

reducing cargo handling costs at ports is key to marine highway development .

the main issue for congress with respect to short - sea shipping is whether federal investment in marine highways will produce public benefits that outweigh the costs .

as the above analysis suggests , marine highways may be commercially viable in certain circumstances .

in many instances , however , they have succeeded in capturing only a negligible share of container shipments along a given route .

there are questions , therefore , whether marine highways will divert enough trucks to provide public benefits commensurate with their costs .

for instance , at the height of its service , the albany express barge was diverting 10 trucks a day .

to put this number in perspective , the port of new york and new jersey handles , on average , about 10,000 containers per day .

most of the marine highway services that have received federal grants are carrying , or seem likely to carry , no more than a few thousand containers annually .

on a per truck basis , therefore , the federal cost of diversion is likely to be in the neighborhood of several hundred dollars .

using the example of albany express barge again , the $5.3 million of federal funding provided for this service enabled the transportation of 8,486 containers over the service's three - year life .

this equates to a federal outlay of $625 per container , which is in the neighborhood of what a shipper would pay for trucking a container between new york and albany .

thus , the federally supported project roughly doubled the nation's freight bill for these container movements .

another means of promoting short - sea shipping would be to repeal the existing harbor maintenance tax as it pertains to containerized domestic shipments , although the tax remains largely unenforced with respect to domestic shippers .

the harbor maintenance tax , enacted in 1986 , is essentially a federal port use charge intended to recover some of the costs incurred by the u.s. army corps of engineers to operate and maintain waterside infrastructure in coastal and great lakes ports .

these costs consist mostly of dredging navigation channels , but also maintaining breakwaters and jetties and operating several locks .

 ( the harbor maintenance tax does not recover the corps of engineers' costs associated with the infrastructure of the inland waterway system , which is funded from a separate barge fuel tax. ) .

the harbor maintenance tax is assessed at 0.125% of shipment value ( $1.25 per $1,000 of shipment value ) on imported waterborne and domestic cargo .

it is not assessed on waterborne exports , as a 1998 supreme court decision found this tax on exports to be unconstitutional .

in addition to the amount of the tax , some have claimed that the administrative burden of payment on the part of the shipper discourages would - be waterborne shippers .

while highway users also pay federal user charges ( taxes on diesel fuel , new truck equipment , and truck weight charges ) , shippers do not pay these taxes directly ; motor carriers do .

waterborne importers pay the harbor maintenance tax as part of the customs clearance process upon arrival of the shipment , while domestic shippers pay the tax on a quarterly basis .

domestic shippers are charged only once for each shipment , not at both ports .

however , if imported goods are offloaded from a vessel at one port and then shipped to another u.s. port on a different vessel , such as a feeder ship or barge , the tax would be assessed at both ports .

the tax thus discourages domestic water shipment of import and export containers .

the tax could also be particularly cumbersome for domestic vessel operators carrying containers of mixed cargo assembled by consolidators , because these typically hold shipments from multiple customers .

before using a marine highway , the vessel operator would need to assure that each shipper was advised that it would be subject to the tax .

in the 111 th congress , bills were introduced that would have exempted containerized domestic shipments from paying the harbor maintenance tax .

however , according to preliminary estimates by the corps of engineers , only about 10% of what is potentially owed is being collected from domestic shippers .

the corps also estimates that waterborne shippers pay about 10% of the federal cost of providing navigation infrastructure , either through the harbor maintenance tax or the barge fuel tax .

this compares with highway user fees ( including truck - specific taxes and fees ) that cover most of the federal cost of highway infrastructure and railroads , which by and large privately finance their infrastructure .

thus , legislation that further reduces the financial burden on waterway users raises equity and economic efficiency issues with respect to competing modes .

a long - standing u.s. law commonly referred to as the jones act ( 46 u.s.c .

ยง 55102 ) requires that only american - built , - owned , and - crewed vessels can operate between two u.s. ports .

the law dates back to 1920 and was enacted on the grounds that a domestic maritime industry is necessary for national and economic security .

if not for the jones act , domestic containers could be shipped between u.s. coastal ports on existing services provided by international carriers .

foreign containerships carrying u.s. imports and exports already sail frequently between u.s. ports , providing an almost continuous conveyor belt of vessel space along each coast .

these ships typically call at three or four ports along a coastal region , and since they generally unload a good portion of the ship's cargo at the first port call , they would have empty space to carry domestic containers to the other u.s. ports on their schedule .

however , because they are not in compliance with the jones act , these vessels are not allowed to pick up shipments in one u.s. port and unload them at another .

since the construction cost of u.s. - flag deepwater cargo ships is generally believed to be three or four times that of ships in the world market , the jones act may be a significant barrier to domestic shipping in oceangoing vessels .

as of year - end 2008 ( latest data available ) , there were 42 active jones act - compliant ships suitable for deepwater marine highway service , including 27 containerships and 15 ro - ro ships .

of these , 29 ( 70% ) were built before 1984 and thus approaching the end of their useful lives , normally 20 to 25 years for saltwater vessels .

the united states is the only industrialized nation that has a domestic build requirement for domestic shipping , and no such requirement exists for other u.s. freight modes .

the use of barges in marine highway services is also subject to jones act requirements , but the additional construction and manning costs may be less significant than is the case with oceangoing ships .

