from the mid - 1970s to the mid - 1990s , economic and trade relations between the united states and the socialist republic of vietnam ( vietnam ) remained virtually frozen , in part a legacy of the vietnam war .

on may 2 , 1975 , after north vietnam defeated u.s. ally the republic of vietnam ( south vietnam ) , president gerald r. ford extended president richard m. nixon's 1964 trade embargo on north vietnam to cov er the reunified nation .

under the ford embargo , bilateral trade and financial transactions were prohibited .

economic and trade relations between the two nations began to thaw during the clinton administration , building on joint efforts during the reagan and george h. w. bush administrations to resolve a sensitive issue in the united states — recovering the remains of u.s. military personnel declared "missing in action" ( mia ) during the vietnam war .

the shift in u.s. policy also was spurred by vietnam's withdrawal from cambodia .

president bill clinton ordered an end to the u.s. trade embargo on vietnam on february 3 , 1994 .

on july 11 , 1995 , the united states and vietnam restored diplomatic relations .

two years later , president bill clinton appointed the first u.s. ambassador to vietnam since the end of the vietnam war .

bilateral relations also improved in part due to vietnam's 1986 decision to shift from a soviet - style central planned economy to a form of market socialism .

the new economic policy , known as doi moi ( "change and newness" ) , ushered in a period of nearly 30 years of rapid growth in vietnam .

since 2000 , vietnam's real gdp growth has averaged over 6% per year , second only to china .

much of that growth has been generated by foreign investment in vietnam's manufacturing sector , particularly its clothing industry .

the united states and vietnam signed a bilateral trade agreement ( bta ) on july 13 , 2000 , which went into force on december 10 , 2001 .

as part of the bta , the united states extended to vietnam conditional most favored nation ( mfn ) trade status , now known as normal trade relations ( ntr ) .

economic and trade relations further improved when the united states granted vietnam permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) status on december 29 , 2006 , as part of vietnam's accession to the world trade organization ( wto ) .

over the last five fiscal years , congress has appropriated over $10 million each year to support vietnam's economic reforms .

in addition , the two nations have set up a ministerial - level trade and investment agreement ( tifa ) council to discuss issues related to the implementation of the bilateral investment treaty ( bit ) and wto agreements , as well as trade and investment policies in general .

u.s. and vietnamese official trade data are comparatively close and reflect a similar pattern in the growth of bilateral trade ( see figure 1 ) .

for the first few years following the end of the u.s. embargo in 1994 , trade between the two nations grew slowly , principally because of vietnam's lack of ntr .

however , following the granting of conditional ntr in december 2001 , trade flows between the united states and vietnam grew quickly .

merchandise trade nearly doubled between 2001 and 2002 , regardless of which nation's figures one uses .

bilateral trade rose again in 2007 , following the united states granting pntr status to vietnam .

u.s. imports from vietnam slid 4.7% in 2009 because of the u.s. economic recession , but have rebounded sharply since 2010 .

both nations are parties to the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) , a regional trade agreement awaiting approval of implementing legislation by the respective legislatures of both nations .

for its part , vietnam also has indicated a desire to foster closer trade relations by applying for acceptance into the u.s. generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program and negotiating a bilateral investment treaty ( bit ) , but both those initiatives have receded in light of the tpp agreement .

the united states also has expressed an interest in closer economic relations , including the possible elimination of restrictions on arms sales to vietnam , but has previously told the vietnamese government that it needs to make certain changes in the legal , regulatory , and operating environment of its economy to conclude either the bit agreement or to qualify for the gsp program .

the growth in bilateral trade also has created sources of trade friction .

a rapid increase in vietnam's clothing exports to the united states led to the implementation of a controversial monitoring program from 2007 to 2009 .

the growth in vietnam's catfish exports ( known as basa , swai , and tra ) also has generated tensions between the two nations .

other economic issues have had an indirect effect on bilateral relations , such as the united states' designation of vietnam as a "non - market economy," and allegations of inadequate intellectual property rights ( ipr ) protection in vietnam .

in 2008 , the bush administration notified congress of its intention to enter into negotiations with the four members of the trans - pacific strategic economic partnership agreement — brunei , chile , new zealand , and singapore — to form a larger and more ambitious trade agreement .

the u.s. announcement of interest in joining the renamed trans - pacific partnership was quickly followed by similar expressions of interest by australia , malaysia , peru , and vietnam .

the nine countries formally agreed to accept mexico and canada into the ongoing negotiations on june 18 and 19 , 2012 , respectively .

japan was accepted into the negotiations on april 21 , 2013 .

the 12 nations signed the agreement on february 4 , 2016 .

vietnam's membership in the tpp could complicate the congressional support for the trade agreement .

whereas the other parties involved in the negotiations are generally viewed as having comparatively open trade policies , vietnam remains a mixed economy with considerable government intervention .

backers of vietnam's participation in the negotiations maintain that it would further open a sizeable market to u.s. exports and investments , and could accelerate economic reforms in vietnam .

opponents cite vietnam's human rights record , including with respect to workers' rights , and alleged unfair government support for certain industries as reasons for not entering into a trade agreement with vietnam .

according to u.s. trade statistics , vietnam is the fifth - largest u.s. trading partner ( after canada , mexico , japan , and singapore , respectively ) among the 12 tpp nations .

catfish have been and continue to be a regular source of trade friction between the united states and vietnam .

vietnam is a major exporter of frozen fish fillets using certain varieties of fish — known as basa , swai , and tra in vietnamese — that are commonly referred to as catfish in the global fish market .

since 1999 , vietnamese exports of basa , swai , and tra frozen fish fillets have secured a growing share of the u.s. market , despite the objections of the u.s. catfish industry and the actions of the u.s. government .

in 2015 , the united states imported over $320 million of bas a , swai , and tra from vietnam .

over the last 13 years , the united states has taken several actions that have had an impact on the import of vietnamese basa , swai , and tra .

in 2002 , congress passed legislation that prohibited the labeling of basa , swai , and tra as "catfish" in the united states .

in august 2003 , the u.s. government imposed antidumping duties on "certain frozen fish fillets from vietnam," including basa , swai , and tra .

in june 2009 , the itc determined to keep the duties in place "for the foreseeable future. .

according to the vietnam association of seafood exporters and producers ( vasep ) , the number of companies exporting catfish to the united states declined from 30 to 3 following the imposition of antidumping duties .

despite the reported decline in exporters , u.s. imports of basa , swai , and tra from vietnam continued to rise .

the ongoing tensions around catfish trade were heightened by the passage of the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) by the 110 th congress in june 2008 .

the 2008 farm bill transferred catfish inspection ( including basa , swai , and tra ) from the food and drug administration ( fda ) to the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the transfer was confirmed in the agriculture act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-79 ) .

as discussed in more detail below , the new inspection regime took effect on march 1 , 2016 .

in the eyes of the vietnamese government , the u.s. response to the growth of vietnam's basa , swai , and tra exports constitutes a case of trade protectionism designed to shelter u.s. catfish producers from legitimate competition .

vietnam also points to u.s. anti - dumping measures on vietnamese shrimp and plastic bags as an indication of u.s. protectionism ( see " non - market economy designation " ) .

supporters of u.s. trade policies against vietnam's exports of basa , swai , and tra say the measures are designed to defend u.s. consumers and businesses from the unsafe products and unfair business practices of vietnam .

restrictions on the sales of military equipment and arms are one of the few u.s. trade restrictions with vietnam that remains in place since the end of the vietnam war in 1975 .

in 1975 , u.s. military sales to all of vietnam were banned as part of the larger ban on bilateral trade .

in 1984 , the u.s. government included vietnam on the international traffic in arms regulations ( itar ) list of countries that were denied licenses to acquire defense articles and defense services .

the restrictions on arms sales remained in effect after president clinton lifted the general trade embargo in february 1994 .

to the vietnamese government , the continuing restrictions on trade in military equipment and arms are a barrier to the normalization of diplomatic relations and constrain closer bilateral ties .

in april 2007 , the department of state amended itar to permit "on a case - by - case basis licenses , other approvals , exports or imports of non - lethal defense articles and defense services destined for or originating in vietnam. .

vietnam was subsequently permitted to participate in the foreign military financing ( fmf ) program , administered by the state department .

vietnam was able to purchase spare parts for huey helicopters and m113 armored personnel carriers captured during the vietnam war .

until 2013 , the obama administration generally tied arms sales to human rights conditions .

in 2010 , then u.s .

ambassador to vietnam michael michalak said: we would very much like to expand our military to military relationship to include the sale of arms , but until we are more comfortable with the human rights situation in vietnam , that's just not going to be possible .

since 2013 , another factor has inserted itself into the u.s. debate over arms sales to vietnam: rising u.s. concerns about china's increased assertiveness over disputed islands and waters in the south china sea have led the obama administration to see vietnam as a partner on maritime security issues .

as a result , on october 2 , 2014 , the state department announced that the united states would "allow the future transfer of maritime security - related defense articles to vietnam. .

the announcement came alongside the official meeting of secretary of state john kerry and foreign minister pham binh minh in washington .

the state department and the defense department reportedly await details from their vietnamese counterparts in terms of the types of maritime security - related defense articles the nation would like .

in november 2015 , the white house announced that it would provide $19.6 million in maritime assistance to vietnam in fy2015 and would seek to provide $20.5 million in fy2016 .

the administration says that it hopes to use the funds to help vietnam "bolster its maritime intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) " and boost "command and control within vietnam's maritime agencies. .

in a february 2016 hearing before the senate armed services committee , admiral harry harris jr. , the head of u.s. pacific command , said: i believe that we should improve our relationship with vietnam .

i think it's a great strategic opportunity for us , and i think the vietnamese people would welcome the opportunity to work closer with us as their security partner of choice .

since the partial lifting of the arms sales embargo , the vietnamese government , and some u.s. observers , have called for a complete end to the arms sales restrictions .

during a joint presentation in washington with u.s .

ambassador to vietnam ted osius , vietnam's ambassador to the united states pham quang vinh said the end of the arms embargo would show that relations were fully normalized .

ambassador osius proceeded to state that human rights remain a difficult issue in bilateral relations , and that more progress on human rights is needed for the relationship to reach its fullest potential .

speaking in hanoi in august 2015 , secretary of state kerry stated that additional relaxation of the arms sales restrictions would be "tied to further progress" on human rights .

there are reports that the united states and vietnam are discussing whether to end the restrictions on bilateral arms sales before or during president obama's scheduled trip to vietnam in may 2016 .

the sale of arms to vietnam may be a source of some controversy for congress .

while some members support the provision of lethal assistance , others object in part because of vietnam's alleged human rights record .

for now , the provision of maritime security - related defense articles appears acceptable because of the tensions in the south china sea .

until vietnam indicates in more detail the types of military assistance it seeks , the issue is likely to remain on a back burner .

some sources indicate that vietnam may request advanced radar equipment , which may test the limits of partial lifting of the restrictions on arms sales for both the obama administration and congress .

vietnamese leaders would like the united states to change vietnam's official designation under u.s. law from "nonmarket economy" to "market economy. .

under u.s. trade law ( 19 u.s.c .

1677 ) , the term "nonmarket economy country" means "any foreign country that the administering authority determines does not operate on market principles of cost or pricing structures , so that sales of merchandise in such country do not reflect the fair value of the merchandise. .

"nonmarket economy" status is particularly significant for antidumping ( ad ) and countervailing duty ( cvd ) cases heard by the u.s. international trade administration .

in making such a determination , the administrating authority of the executive branch is to consider such criteria as the extent of state ownership of the means of production , and government control of prices and wages .

however , the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) implicitly defines a "non - market economy" for purposes of trade as "a country which has a complete or substantially complete monopoly of its trade and where all domestic prices are fixed by the state. .

for over 20 years , vietnam has been transitioning from a centrally planned economy to a market economy .

under its doi moi policy , vietnam has allowed the development and growth of private enterprise and competitive market allocation of most goods and services .

although most prices have been deregulated , the vietnamese government still retains some formal and informal mechanisms to direct or manage the economy .

in may 2008 , vietnam formally requested to be added to the u.s. generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program as a "beneficiary developing country" ( bdc ) .

the u.s. gsp program authorizes the president to grant duty - free treatment for any eligible product from any beneficiary country .

on june 20 , 2008 , the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) announced that it was initiating a formal review of vietnam's eligibility for gsp benefits and would accept public comments on the application until august 4 , 2008 .

since then , there has been no formal announcement from ustr regarding the status of vietnam's gsp application .

u.s. officials have indicated that they told the vietnamese government that its labor standards must improve in order to qualify for the gsp program .

vietnam has already been accepted into several other gsp programs , including those of canada , the european union ( eu ) , and japan .

vietnam continues to inquire about the status of its gsp application , but reportedly sees inclusion in the proposed tpp as a preferable alternative .

according to sources in vietnam's ministry of foreign affairs ( mofa ) , the vietnamese government sees its acceptance into the gsp program as another step in the normalization of bilateral relations .

vietnam's interest in qualifying for the u.s. gsp program waned as the tpp negotiations neared completion , presumably because the conclusion of the trade agreement would provide better trade conditions than afforded under gsp .

if the tpp agreement is not implemented in the near future , the vietnamese government's interest in the gsp program may revive .

also , if vietnam complies with the bilateral labor agreement accompanying the tpp agreement , it is uncertain if vietnam's labor standards will be sufficient to qualify for the gsp program .

during their june 2008 meeting , president bush and prime minister dung announced the launch of talks to establish a bilateral investment treaty ( bit ) .

bits are designed to improve the climate for foreign investors by establishing dispute settlement procedures and protecting foreign investors from performance requirements , restrictions on transferring funds , and arbitrary expropriation .

the united states currently is a party to 40 bits in force ; vietnam has signed over 50 bits .

the first round of bit negotiations was held in washington , dc , on december 15-18 , 2008 .

the vietnamese delegation included representatives from the ministry of planning and investment , the ministry of industry and trade , the ministry of finance , the ministry of justice , and the state bank of vietnam .

the u.s. delegation included representatives of the u.s. trade representative's office , the department of state , the department of commerce , and the department of the treasury .

since then , two more rounds of talks have been held — one on june 1-2 , 2009 , in hanoi , and another on november 17-19 , 2009 , in washington , dc .

a proposed fourth round of talks that was to be held in early 2010 did not happen .

according to the state department , bilateral bit talks have not been held since the two nations joined the tpp negotiations , presumably because the tpp agreement would encompass those issues that would be addressed in the bit .

if implementation of the tpp agreement appear to be running into problems , vietnam may seek to restart the bit talks .

the existing 2001 bilateral trade agreement ( bta ) between the united states and vietnam included provisions in chapter 4 governing investment and the future negotiation of a bilateral investment treaty .

article 2 commits both nations to providing national and mfn ( ntr ) treatment to investments .

article 4 provides for a dispute settlement system for bilateral investments .

article 5 requires both nations to ensure that the laws , regulations , and administrative procedures governing investments are promptly published and publicly available .

article 11 pertains to compliance with the provisions of wto agreement on trade - related investment measures ( trims ) .

article 13 states that both nations "will endeavor to negotiate a bilateral investment treaty in good faith within a reasonable period of time. .

the preceding issues are topics where there has been or continues to be direct bilateral interaction .

in addition , there are several economic issues that influence relations between the united states and vietnam indirectly .

of these , the most prominent issues for the 114 th congress likely include clothing imports from vietnam and ipr protection .

the preceding sections of the report have focused on current and past issues in u.s. - vietnam trade relations .

the final section of the report attempts to identify potential sources of future trade friction by examining trends in bilateral trade figures .

the focus will be on three aspects of recent trade relations — merchandise trade , trade in services , and foreign direct investment ( fdi ) .

over two decades has passed since trade relations between the united states and vietnam have opened .

as previously mentioned , the rapid growth in vietnam's export of two types of products — clothing and catfish — quickly made them sources of trade tension between the two nations .

however , other commodities that contribute more to u.s. - vietnam trade flows could also become touch points for trouble in bilateral trade relations .

according to u.s. trade statistics , the top u.s. imports from vietnam in 2015 , besides clothing , were ( in order ) : electrical machinery ; footwear ; and furniture and bedding ( see table 1 ) .

the top u.s. exports to vietnam included ( in order ) aircraft ; electrical machinery ; cotton ; machinery and mechanical appliances ; and oil seeds .

the juxtaposition of these two lists reveals product categories that may warrant watching , as well as a connection between some of the top trade commodities .

particularly noticeable in 2015 was the jump of electrical machinery as the leading import from vietnam ; in 2014 , it was the 3 rd largest import after the two apparel categories .

similarly , footwear rose from being the 4 th largest import in 2014 to the 3 rd largest import in 2015 .

there is also a discernable interplay between vietnam's top exports to the united states and the top u.s. exports to vietnam .

vietnam imports substantial amounts of cotton from the united states , which is then used to manufacture clothing to be exported to the united states .

similarly , vietnam imports wood from the united states that may end up in the furniture that is imported by the united states from vietnam .

there is also a significant amount of cross - trade in electrical machinery as parts and components are shipped back and forth across the pacific ocean .

electrical machinery is among the top five exports for both countries to each other .

the implication is that efforts to curtail the growth of certain top exports of vietnam to the united states could result in a decline in u.s. exports to vietnam and possible job losses in the united states .

vietnam's electrical machinery exports to the united states has grown dramatically since 2001 , from less than $1 million to just under $1 billion in 2011 and then increasing to more than $8.3 billion in 2015 .

electrical machinery constituted nearly 22% of total u.s. imports from vietnam in 2015 .

according to interviews with foreign investors in vietnam , there is great potential for growth in this sector because of vietnam's relatively inexpensive , skilled workers .

vietnamese economic officials have indicated that expanding the nation's production of higher - valued consumer electronics and other electrical devices is a priority for the nation's transition to a middle - income economy .

while most of the focus has been on clothing imports from vietnam , footwear constituted nearly 12% of total u.s. imports from vietnam in 2015 .

vietnam was the second - largest source of footwear imports for the united states in 2015 ( after china ) , more than three times the size of imports from indonesia ( the next largest source ) .

over a decade ago , the u.s. footwear industry reached a general agreement on its trade policy position in trade agreements .

under this agreement , the membership of the american apparel and footwear association ( aafa ) and the rubber and plastics footwear manufacturers association ( rpfma ) supported the elimination of nearly all footwear tariffs immediately in future trade agreements , except for tariffs on certain types of rubber / fabric and plastic / protective footwear that were determined to be manufactured in the united states .

pursuant to this agreement , the two associations are supporting the tpp .

since 2004 , vietnam has risen from being the 62 nd - largest source for furniture and bedding imports for the united states to being the 4 th - largest source — surpassing past leaders such as italy , malaysia , and taiwan .

furniture and bedding provided over 10% of total u.s. imports from vietnam in 2015 .

the united states perceives a trade advantage in several of the services sectors , especially financial services .

in the latest u.s. national trade estimate ( nte ) , the office of the u.s. trade representative indicated that as part of the implementation of the 2001 bta , vietnam has committed to greater liberalization of a broad array of its services sectors , including financial services , telecommunications , express delivery , distribution services , and certain professions .

it is likely that the united states will press vietnam for more access during talks over the tpp , as well as during the bit negotiations .

in 2014 , vietnam licensed 1,843 foreign direct investment ( fdi ) projects worth $21.9 billion .

the leading source of fdi in 2014 was south korea , with 588 projects worth $7.7 billion .

the united states was the 10 th - largest source of fdi in 2014 with 43 projects worth $310 million .

the accumulated value of fdi in vietnam for the period 1989-2014 is $252.7 billion .

south korea was the leading investor during this period , followed by japan and singapore .

the united states was the 7 th - largest investor , with 725 projects worth $11.0 billion .

growing u.s. interest in investment opportunities in vietnam could have an impact on the tpp and bit negotiations .

in addition , as more u.s. companies invest in vietnam , there is the possibility of more business - to - business disagreements between u.s. and vietnamese companies , and more constituent pressure on congress to address perceived shortcomings in vietnam's treatment of foreign - owned enterprises .

the table below provides the official merchandise trade data for the united states and vietnam .

