this report presents data on average member tenure over time , analyzes several factors that affect tenure in any given congress , and examines historical patterns of congressional service , including the distribution of years served within each congress , and the cross - chamber experience of representatives and senators .

during much of the 19 th century , the average tenure of representatives and senators remained relatively steady , with incoming representatives generally averaging between two and three years of prior service in most congresses , and senators averaging between three and five years .

beginning in the late 19 th and through much of the 20 th century , average tenure for members in both chambers steadily increased .

the average years of service for members of the 116 th congress , as of january 3 , 2019 , when the congress convened , was 8.6 years for the house and 10.1 years for the senate .

two factors that affect average years of service are examined in this report: the percentage of members choosing to seek reelection , and the success rate of members who do seek reelection .

the findings presented here align with scholarly assessments of congressional history , which conclude that during the early history of congress , turnover in membership was frequent and resignations were commonplace .

many lawmakers in the 18 th and early 19 th centuries might be characterized as "citizen legislators," holding full - time nonpolitical employment and serving in congress on a part - time basis for a short number of years .

during the 20 th century , congressional careers lengthened as turnover decreased and congress became more professionalized .

the report also examines two further issues related to member tenure , including the distribution of member service over time , as well as members' cross - chamber experience .

although the average tenure of members has increased since the late 19 th century , a substantial portion of representatives and senators in recent congresses have served for six years or less in their respective chambers .

with respect to cross - chamber experience , while a small proportion of representatives have historically had previous senate experience , a sizable percentage of senators throughout congressional history have had previous house experience .

as shown in figure 1 below , the average years of service of members in both chambers has generally increased over time .

the prior house service of incoming representatives increased from an average of 2.5 years in the 19 th century to 9.5 in the 21 st to date ; the average peaked at 10.3 years — just over five terms — during the 102 nd ( 1991-1992 ) , 110 th ( 2007-2008 ) , and 111 th congresses ( 2009-2010 ) .

incoming senators averaged 4.8 years of prior chamber service in the 19 th century , and 11.2 years during the 21 st century to date .

this figure peaked at 13.1 years during the 111 th congress ( 2009-2010 ) .

for both the house and senate , the congress with the fewest average years of prior experience was the 1 st , as all senators and representatives necessarily had zero years of experience upon arrival .

in the last 50 years , the congress with the lowest average years of service among representatives and senators was the 97 th congress ( 1981-1982 ) , in which incoming representatives had an average of 7.4 years of prior service in the house ( slightly more than 3.5 terms ) and senators had an average of 7.5 years of prior service in the senate ( 1.25 terms ) .

aggregate statistics on member service tenures tend to disguise the variety of congressional service records found among individual members .

some members have very short tenures of service and choose not to seek reelection ; other members have long tenures that end after reelection defeat .

at the aggregate level , average careers have become longer , but a great deal of variation in the length of congressional careers still persists .

additionally , the institutional and policy contexts that have shaped member decisions to seek or not seek reelection , and succeed or fail when seeking reelection , are not static factors .

just as the institutional contexts of elections and congressional operations have developed since the 19 th century , they continue to change in the contemporary congress .

to the degree that patterns of congressional service in part reflect the incentives provided to members by these institutional factors , it is likely that the patterns of member service tenure will also continue to change .

similarly , the continued development of the institutional environment suggests that there is no way to predict how the patterns of service tenure will change ; just as seemingly stable 19 th century patterns rapidly changed toward the end of the century , so could the service tenure patterns we observe today .

