the genetic information nondiscrimination act of 2008 ( gina ) , referred to by its sponsors as the first civil rights act of the 21 st century , was enacted on may 21 , 2008 .

gina , p.l .

110-233 , prohibits discrimination based on genetic information by health insurers and employers .

the sequencing of the human genome and subsequent advances raise hope for genetic therapies to cure disease , but this scientific accomplishment is not without potential problems .

an employer or health insurer could decide to take adverse action based on a genetic predisposition to disease , and situations have arisen where discriminatory action based on genetic information may have occurred .

in addition , there is evidence that the fear of genetic discrimination has an adverse effect on those seeking genetic testing , as well as on participation in genetic research .

gina was enacted to remedy these situations .

gina is divided into two main parts: title i , which prohibits discrimination based on genetic information by health insurers ; and title ii , which prohibits discrimination in employment based on genetic information .

title i of gina amends the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) , the public health service act ( phsa ) , and the internal revenue code ( irc ) , through the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) , as well as the social security act , to prohibit health insurers from engaging in genetic discrimination .

title ii of gina prohibits discrimination in employment because of genetic information and , with certain exceptions , prohibits an employer from requesting , requiring , or purchasing genetic information .

the law prohibits the use of genetic information in employment decisions — including hiring , firing , job assignments , and promotions — by employers , unions , employment agencies , and labor management training programs .

the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) promulgated final regulations under title ii of gina on november 9 , 2010 .

these regulations take effect on january 10 , 2011 , 60 days after publication in the federal register .

the eeoc noted that the regulations closely track the statutory language .

however , they do provide clarification regarding definitions in gina ; provide guidance regarding the exceptions in gina to employer liability for acquiring genetic information ; discuss the application of gina to wellness programs ; and discuss the interplay between gina and other statutes .

the regulations also provide specific examples to help clarify the requirements of the statute and regulations .

this report examines the final eeoc title ii regulations with an emphasis on areas where the regulations elaborate upon the statutory requirements .

the eeoc final regulations echo the statutory language regarding prohibitions against discrimination .

the statute and regulations provide that it is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an individual on the basis of genetic information in regard to hiring , discharge , compensation , terms , conditions , or privileges of employment ; for an employment agency to fail or refuse to refer any individual for employment or otherwise discriminate against any individual because of genetic information of the individual ; for a labor organization to exclude or to expel from the membership of the organization , or otherwise discriminate against , any member because of genetic information ; and for any employer , labor organization , or joint labor - management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training programs to discriminate against an individual because of genetic information of the individual .

the eeoc observes in its comments on the regulations that claims of harassment on the basis of genetic information may also be brought .

the final regulations also reiterate the statutory language prohibiting actions that may limit , segregate , or classify employees because of genetic information .

a clarifying statement provides that a covered entity is not in violation of the prohibition on actions that limit , segregate , or classify employees due to genetic information if the action was required by a law or regulation mandating genetic monitoring .

the gina regulations echo the statutory language prohibiting actions that cause a covered entity to discriminate , but also include employers in this prohibition .

the eeoc reasoned that although the gina statutory language regarding employers does not include this prohibition , jurisprudence under title vii of the civil rights act includes employers' agents in the definition of employer .

thus , gina would prohibit an employer from engaging in actions that would cause another covered entity acting as its agent to discriminate .

to illustrate this , the eeoc gave an example of an employer who directed an employment agency to ask applicants for genetic information , thereby causing the employment agency , if they complied with the request , to be in violation of gina .

gina prohibits retaliation against an individual because the individual has opposed any act or practice that is unlawful under gina or participated in an investigation , proceeding , or hearing concerning gina .

the final regulations track this statutory language .

in its comments , the eeoc notes that it believes the standard for retaliation under gina was intended to be the same as that under title vii as described in burlington northern & santa fe ry .

v. white .

in burlington , the supreme court found that an anti - retaliation provision protects an individual if the action might have dissuaded a reasonable worker from making a discrimination claim .

generally , title ii of gina requires that genetic information shall be maintained on separate forms and in separate medical files and be treated as a confidential medical record , and prohibits a covered entity from disclosing genetic information .

these entities are considered to be in compliance with the maintenance of information requirements if the genetic information is treated as a confidential record under §102 ( d ) ( 3 ) ( b ) of the americans with disabilities act .

however , the general prohibition on disclosure in gina is subject to six exceptions , including disclosure to the employee .

gina also contains a provision concerning the relationship of the confidentiality provisions with the hipaa privacy rule .

gina does not prohibit an entity covered under hipaa "from any use or disclosure of health information that is authorized for the covered entity under such regulations. .

the eeoc final regulations track the legislative language .

the eeoc in its discussion of the final regulations addresses several concerns raised by commenters .

for example , the eeoc states that genetic information that had been placed in a personnel file prior to the effective date of gina , need not be removed and its existence does not create a violation of gina .

however , disclosing such information to a third party would violate the law .

generally , gina uses the remedies and enforcement mechanisms available in title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , although for employees covered by the government employee rights act of 1991 , the congressional accountability act of 1995 , chapter 5 of title 3 of the u.s. code , or section 717 of the civil rights act of 1964 , the remedies and procedures track those acts and statutory provisions .

the final regulations mirror the statutory provisions , and add a specific subsection referencing the remedies applicable to gina .

these include compensatory and punitive damages , reasonable attorneys' fees , and injunctive relief .

section 209 of gina contains several rules of construction , including a provision concerning the relationship between title i and title ii of the act .

gina provides that nothing in title ii is to be construed to limit the rights or protections of an individual under any federal or state statute that provides equal or greater protection .

in addition , nothing in title ii is to limit the rights or protections of an individual to bring an action , or provide for enforcement of , or penalties for , any violation under title i of gina , certain sections of erisa , the public health service act , and the internal revenue code .

this provision has been referred to as a "firewall" between titles i and ii , and has been described as clarifying "that employers are not liable for health insurance violations under civil rights laws unless the employer has separately violated a provision of title ii governing employers. .

the final regulations mirror the statutory language and elaborate on the firewall provision .

the regulations note that , [t]he firewall seeks to ensure that health plan or issuer provisions or actions are addressed and remedied through erisa , the public health service act , or the internal revenue code , while actions taken by employers and other gina title ii covered entities are remedied through gina title ii .

employers and other gina title ii covered entities would remain liable for any of their actions that violate title ii , even where those actions involve access to health benefits , because such benefits are within the definition of compensation , terms , conditions , or privileges of employment .

for example , an employer that fires an employee because of anticipated high health claims based on genetic information remains subject to liability under title ii .

the eeoc's discussion of the final regulations also notes that over 30 states have laws concerning genetic discrimination .

the eeoc states that it will provide information on these state and local laws on its website .

section 210 of gina clarifies that the act does not cover medical information that is not genetic information about a manifested disease , disorder , or pathological condition , including a manifested disease , disorder , or pathological condition that has or may have a genetic basis .

the final regulations elaborate on the statutory language specifically stating that "the acquisition , use , and disclosure of medical information that is not genetic information about a manifested disease , disorder , or pathological condition is subject to applicable limitations under sections 103 ( d ) ( 1 ) - ( 4 ) of the americans with disabilities act ( 42 u.s.c .

12112 ( d ) ( 1 ) - ( 4 ) ) , and regulations at 29 cfr 1630.13 , 1630.14 , and 1630.16. .

in its discussion of the final regulations , the eeoc notes that one commenter had expressed concern that individuals who have a manifested genetic disease that is not yet substantially limiting may not be covered under either law .

the eeoc declined to address this issue , stating that it had no authority to expand the coverage of gina .

however , the eeoc observed that with the enactment of the ada amendments act ( adaaa ) , which expanded the definition of disability under the ada , it is less likely that there would be a significant number of individuals who would not be covered by either act .

