the census bureau's release of the first figures from the 2010 census on december 21 , 2010 , shifted 12 seats among 18 states for the 113 th congress ( beginning in january 2013 ) .

illinois , iowa , louisiana , massachusetts , michigan , missouri , new jersey , and pennsylvania each lost one seat ; new york and ohio each lost two seats .

arizona , georgia , nevada , south carolina , utah , and washington each gained one seat ; florida gained two seats , and texas gained four seats .

the reapportionment of house seats in 2010 was based on an apportionment population that is different from the actual resident population of each state .

for apportionment purposes since 1970 ( with the exception of 1980 ) , the census bureau has added to each state's resident population the foreign - based , overseas military and federal employees and their dependents , who are from the state but not residing therein at the time of the census .

in 2010 , these additional persons increased the census count for the 50 states by 1,042,523 , a little less than twice the number in 2000 .

if the foreign - based military and federal employees had not been included in the counts , there would have been no change in the 2010 apportionment of seats , although the order of seat assignment would have changed .

the reapportionment process for the house relies on rounding principles , but the actual procedure involves computing a "priority list" of seat assignments for the states .

the constitution allocates the first 50 seats because each state must have at least one representative .

a priority list assigns the remaining 385 seats for a total of 435 .

table 2 displays the end of the "priority list" that would be used to allocate representatives based on the 2012 census estimates of the state populations as of july 1 .

the law only provides for 435 seats in the house , but the table illustrates not only the last seats assigned by the apportionment formula ( ending at 435 ) , but the states that would just miss getting additional representation .

the apportionment counts transmitted by the census bureau to the president ( who then sends them to congress ) are considered final .

thus , most states that lost seats in the 113 th congress had only one possible option for retaining them: urge congress to increase the size of the house .

any other option such as changing the formula used in the computations , or changing the components of the apportionment population ( such as omitting the foreign - based military and federal civilian employees ) might only affect a small number of states if the house stays at 435 seats .

as noted above , the 435-seat limit was imposed in 1929 by 46 stat .

21 , 26-27 .

altering the size of the house would require a new law setting a different limit .

article i , section 2 of the constitution establishes a minimum house size ( one representative for each state ) , and a maximum house size ( one representative for every 30,000 , or 10,306 based on the 2010 census ) .

in 2013 , a house size of 468 would be necessary to prevent states from losing seats they held from the 108 th to the 112 th congresses , but , by retaining seats through an increase in the house size , other states would also have their delegations become larger .

at a house size of 468 , california's delegation size , for example , would be 56 instead of 53 seats .

the apportionment figures released on december 21 , 2010 , are made up of three components: total resident population figures for the 50 states and the district of columbia , the foreign - based military and overseas federal employees allocated to each state and dc , and the sum of these numbers ( excluding dc ) , which becomes the apportionment population .

these numbers ( minus dc ) are all that is needed to reapportion the house , but most states need figures for very small geographic areas in order to draw new legislative and congressional districts .

the census bureau must provide small - area population totals to the legislatures and governors of each state by one year after the census ( eg , april 1 , 2011 ) .

the census bureau data delivered by april 1 , 2011 ( some states started receiving the information in february 2011 ) , are often referred to as the p.l .

94-171 program data ( 89 stat .

1023 ) .

this program provides , to each state , information from the 2010 census .

as such , the information is very limited — including age , race , and hispanic origin .

no other demographic information that might be useful to the persons constructing political jurisdictions , such as income or employment status , is available in the p.l .

94-171 data .

such data , however , are available from the results of the american community survey for geographic areas with populations as small as 20,000 persons .

census data are usually reported by political jurisdictions ( states , cities , counties , and towns ) , and within political jurisdictions by special census geography ( such as census designated places , tracts , block numbering areas , and blocks ) .

the p.l .

94-171 program allows states , which chose to participate in it ( 49 in 2010 ) , to request census data by certain nontraditional census geography such as voting districts ( precincts ) and state legislative districts .

these special political jurisdiction counts enable the persons drawing the district lines to assess past voting behavior when redrawing congressional and state legislative districts .

in most states , redrawing congressional districts is the responsibility of the state legislature with the concurrence of the governor .

in seven states , arizona , california , hawaii , idaho , montana , new jersey , and washington , a non - partisan or bi - partisan commission is responsible for drawing and approving the plans .

some states have explicit deadlines in law to complete their congressional districting .

most do not , so the effective deadline for the legislatures or commissions to complete their work would have been whatever deadlines were established in the states for filing for primaries for the 2012 elections .

although many states have standards mandating equal populations , compactness , contiguousness , and other goals to not split counties , towns , and cities , federal law controls the redistricting process .

other than a requirement that multi - member states cannot elect representatives at - large ( 2 u.s.c .

2c ) however , no federal statutory law establishes explicit standards for redistricting .

the principal laws that apply are the supreme court decisions mandating one person , one vote and the voting rights act .

the fundamental federal rule governing redistricting congressional districts , one person , one vote , was promulgated by the supreme court in wesberry v. sanders ( 376 u.s. 7 , 1964 ) .

the court has refined that ruling in a series of cases culminating in karcher v. daggett ( 462 u.s. 725 , 1983 ) that one person , one vote means that any population deviation among districts in a state must be justified , but the deviations from absolute equality may be permitted if the states strive to make districts more compact , respect municipal boundaries , preserve the cores of prior districts , or avoid contests between incumbents .

section 2 of the voting rights act ( vra ) applies nationwide .

it prohibits states or localities from imposing a "voting qualification or prerequisite to voting or standard , practice or procedure ... in a manner which results in the denial or abridgement of the right to vote on account of race or color. .

the supreme court interpreted the vra's application to redistricting in a series of cases responding , in part , to the extraordinarily complicated districts created by many states in the 1990s to maximize minority representation ( beginning with shaw v. reno , 509 u.s. 630 , 1993 ) .

the court ended the decade by establishing new principles concerning such practices: ( 1 ) race may be considered in districting to remedy past discrimination ; ( 2 ) but , states must have a compelling state interest to ignore traditional redistricting principles and "gerrymander" to establish majority - minority districts ; ( 3 ) courts will apply "strict scrutiny" to such assertions that racial "gerrymanders" are necessary to determine whether such plans are narrowly tailored to achieve the compelling state interest .

