the nation's energy choices embody many tradeoffs .

water use is one of those tradeoffs .

the energy sector is the fastest - growing water consumer in the united states .

projections attribute to the energy sector 85% of the growth in domestic water consumption between 2005 and 2030 .

this projected growth derives from anticipated demand for more energy , increased development of domestic energy sources , and greater use of water - intense energy alternatives .

much of the energy sector's growing water demand is concentrated in water - constrained regions .

affordable water supplies are limited , and competition for water is becoming more intense .

whether the energy sector helps exacerbate or alleviate future water tensions is influenced by current energy policy and investment choices .

these choices also may determine whether water limits or harms the nation's ability to reliably meet energy demand .

water limitations may hinder some water - dependent energy activities in specific locations .

water already plays a significant role in the energy sector , and water use by the energy sector already shapes national water use .

for example , more than 80% of u.s. electricity is generated at thermoelectric facilities .

with few exceptions , these thermoelectric power plants are cooled with water .

in 2005 , withdrawal of water for cooling represented 41% of water withdrawn nationally , and 6% of the water consumed nationally .

the more water used by the energy sector , the more vulnerable energy production and reliability are to competition with other water uses and water constraints such as droughts .

climate change impacts on water supplies in some regions may exacerbate this vulnerability .

water availability can affect both existing and new energy activities , as well as all those economic activities that depend on the fuels and electricity produced .

the energy sector is changing .

paths chosen and capital investments made in the near term are likely to establish long - term trajectories for energy's water use .

trends indicate that energy's changing water use has national and regional significance for water consumption .

a question for congress is: what is the appropriate federal role in responding to energy's water demand ? .

in the aggregate , current federal energy policies contribute to energy's rising water demand , while energy interests and the state and local governments are responsible for managing and meeting water demands and resolving competition over water resources .

questions for congress include who is the most appropriate entity to respond to energy's growing water demand and water vulnerability and how to respond .

at present , little direct federal action is aimed at managing the energy sector's water demand ; instead , the current division of responsibilities relies on energy interests and state and local governments to meet and manage energy's water demand and resolve energy - water conflicts .

the role of federal policies in contributing to rising water demand is bringing into question the future federal role in this policy arena .

local or regional competition for water with existing users is often what makes energy's water demand significant ; at the same time , the regional and local scales of water resources availability and management complicate many federal water - related actions .

options for managing and meeting energy's water demand range from maintaining the current approach , with little federal action targeted at managing energy's water demand , to taking a variety of federal actions .

one option is to minimize growth in energy's freshwater use .

this could be accomplished through changes to broad policies ( eg , energy demand management ) or legislation specifically targeted at water use ( eg , promotion of water - efficient energy alternatives ) .

another option is to improve the energy sector's access to water .

access is generally a responsibility of the state , but some limited federal actions are possible .

an additional option is investing in data and research to inform decision - making and expand water - efficient energy technologies .

these alternative policy approaches , which are not mutually exclusive , represent different potential roles and costs for the energy sector ; energy consumers ; and federal , state , and local governments .

legislation in the 111 th congress proposed many of the above options ; examples include h.r .

469 , h.r .

2454 , h.r .

3598 , h.r .

1145 , s. 1462 , s. 1733 , s. 3396 , and subtitle iv of p.l .

111-11 ( h.r .

146 ) , the secure water act of 2009 .

during the 112 th congress , energy's water use may arise in a variety of contexts , including during consideration of energy , agriculture , public land , and water legislation and oversight .

while the water tradeoffs of energy choices may be raised in a variety of contexts , they are unlikely to be the focus of energy debates .

instead , the priority on and investments toward different policy goals — low - cost reliable energy , energy independence and security , climate change mitigation , and job creation — are likely to be more significant drivers in congressional energy deliberations .

trends in national energy investments , domestic energy use , population , and climate change impacts and responses can affect how much and where the energy sector uses water .

increased emphasis on domestic energy production and efforts to meet increasing energy demand are expected to increase freshwater use by the energy sector .

a shift in the electricity sector away from traditional coal power plants may result in either more or less water consumption , depending on alternative fuels or electricity technologies .

carbon capture and sequestration ( ccs ) by electric utilities has the potential to consume significant quantities of water .

actions such as substituting wind for thermoelectric electricity generation could potentially reduce energy's water demand , but may raise other challenges for energy reliability , dispatchability , and transmission .

other impacts , such as the movement of irrigated agriculture from food crops to energy crops , raise other concerns .

these and other examples of energy trends and their effects on energy's water use are summarized in table 1 .

appendix a has a more extensive list of trends .

whether and how much the energy sector's water demand grows in the next decades will be significantly influenced by whether energy demand increases .

projections of the size and mix of the future energy portfolio vary widely .

these projections are highly uncertain and are sensitive to many factors , including market and economic conditions , energy and agricultural policies , resource availability , technology developments , and environmental regulations .

by association , projections of energy's water demand also are highly uncertain .

the energy information administration ( eia ) in the department of energy ( doe ) projects that the united states will consume 22% more electricity and 12% more liquid fuel in 2030 than in 2010 .

population growth and increased electricity use per capita are some drivers of increasing demand .

significant shifts to more water - intense electricity generation ( eg , concentrating solar power facilities using evaporative cooling ) or more water - intense fuels ( eg , oil shale ) could increase energy's water demand in locations with these energy resources .

the significance of energy's water demand depends in part on local conditions — how much water is locally available and what its alternative uses would be .

the most growth in freshwater consumption by the energy sector is expected in the southwest , the northwest , and the high plains — that is , regions already experiencing intense competition over water and disputes over river and aquifer management .

the more freshwater used by the energy sector , the more the sector is vulnerable to water constraints .

however , as described above and in appendix a , major energy trends are pushing the sector to become more water - intensive .

water availability problems , especially regional drought and low streamflow , can pose a risk to energy production and reliability .

electricity generation is particularly sensitive to low - flow conditions .

more than 80% of u.s. electricity is generated at thermoelectric facilities that depend on access to cooling water .

low - flow conditions and water scarcity may constrain water - intense alternatives for thermoelectric cooling in counties across the country .

additional ways that water can constrain energy include a possible decrease in hydroelectric generation during drought .

bioenergy yields may be reduced by low precipitation , droughts , heat waves , or floods .

energy extraction , like coal mining , may be scaled back to avoid water quality impairments exacerbated by low water conditions .

while water constraints are often perceived as an issue for the western united states , an increasing number of water bodies in the east are experiencing diminished stream flows .

while multiple examples exist of water availability affecting siting and operations of thermoelectric facilities from new york to arizona , generally there are ways to reduce the use of water and the risk posed by water constraints .

water supplies often are most constrained during summer , when the energy sector's water use is at its height in many regions .

approximately 24 of the nation's 104 nuclear reactors are situated in drought - prone regions .

the nuclear regulatory commission sets minimum source water elevation levels for each plant , so that a plant does not operate when source water levels drop below plant cooling water intakes .

if cooling water sources fall below the established minimum water level , or if the maximum thermal threshold for the discharge of cooling water cannot be met , a facility is required to power down or go offline .

a commonly cited example of this occurred on august 16 , 2007 , when a nuclear reactor owned by the tennessee valley authority ( tva ) at the browns ferry nuclear power plant in alabama shut down for a day .

its cooling water discharge exceeded temperature regulations that protect the environment and wildlife of the tennessee river .

in the summer of 2010 , the same plant cut its electricity production to 45% of capacity when the cooling water temperature again exceeded discharge regulations .

the reduced generation resulted in $50 million in higher cost to customers .

tva subsequently initiated a $160 million upgrade and expansion of its cooling system to avoid similar cooling constraints in the future .

how much water will the energy sector use in the future ? .

in part , interest in answering this question is rooted in other questions of national significance , such as: will water limit u.s. capacity to meet the nation's energy demand ? .

will water constrain the transition to greater energy independence ? .

will water hamper adoption of some renewable energy alternatives ? .

quantification of energy's water demand and its significance is limited by significant gaps in available data and analyses .

water has no federal data agency comparable to the energy information administration that projects alternative demand scenarios .

there is no authoritative government source to cite for the level of water use by the energy sector or for projections of how that use may change in future decades .

for example , there are no forecasts that use multiple scenarios to identify sensitivity of water demand to multiple factors and policies , or that analyze energy's water use and water vulnerability in the context of factors significant to energy choices and policies , such as energy and transmission costs , emissions , and reliability .

for over 50 years , the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) of the department of the interior has collected and published water use data every five years ; however , the agency stopped collecting water consumption data after its 1995 survey due to funding constraints and data reliability problems .

 ( usgs continues to collect water withdrawal data. ) .

the 1995 usgs data are the basis of most projections of future water consumption in the united states .

in the secure water act of 2009 , congress authorized the usgs to perform a water use and availability assessment that includes water use trends in the energy sector ; however , to date the agency had received no congressional appropriations for this program .

every 10 years the forest service forecasts water resources trends based largely on extrapolations of the usgs data and using the usgs data categories .

the energy sector falls into a number of usgs water use categories , and it is impossible to disaggregate the categories to determine a value for the energy sector's water use .

 ( except for thermoelectric water withdrawals , the usgs water use data and forest service projections do not break out energy water use from other agricultural and industrial water uses. ) .

because of these limitations , the analysis herein relies on the most comprehensive projections available on the energy sector's water consumption , with the main source being a 2010 article by deborah elcock , an argonne national laboratory researcher , based on an updated and refined analysis from a report published by the lab in 2008 .

although currently available data are limited , there are prospects for improved data and analysis in the future .

the secretary of the interior announced in october 2010 that the usgs is undertaking a colorado river basin geographic focus study as part of the department's watersmart water availability and use assessments initiative ; this focus study may eventually comprise a component of the usgs water use and availability assessment congress authorized in 2009 , which would represent the first national water census since 1978 .

additionally , regional efforts may inform future decision - making .

for instance , the western governors' association initiated in 2010 an energy - water nexus project , as part of its renewable energy transmission expansion effort , which includes a water availability assessment .

the assessment is looking into projected water demands for large river basins and aquifer systems in the west and is expected to consider drought and potential climate change implications on the availability of river flows and water supply for energy development in the west .

the effort is anticipated to conclude with policy recommendations available in late 2012 , and is funded primarily by doe .

much of the anticipated growth in the energy sector's water demand is in water - constrained areas , potentially exacerbating competition and low flow condition for water during summer and droughts .

that is , while energy's water demand is anticipated to rise across the united states , the west is likely to experience some of the more significant constraints and conflicts in meeting this demand .

while local or regional competition for water is often what makes energy's water demand significant , the regional and local scales of water resources and how they are managed often complicate federal water - related actions .

to illustrate one aspect of how energy's growing water demand varies across the country , figure 3 shows projections for expanded electricity generation in many water - constrained states ( eg , california , texas , arizona ) , primarily owing to rising electricity demand .

the following examples of regional water consumption concerns are discussed in more detail: shale gas production in texas using hydraulic fracturing , solar electricity generation in the southwest ; and biofuel production in the high plains .

technologies and management practices exist for reducing water use in each of these energy activities ; however , these options generally come with energy cost , generation , and reliability penalties .

whether the benefits from the water savings of adopting these technologies and practices are viewed as outweighing these penalties often is a matter of perspective and is site specific .

moreover , little reliable and systematic data is available on the costs and benefits of adopting these measures in a variety of circumstances to better inform decision - making .

the previous sections described how energy's demand for water is increasing and provided some regional examples .

this section discusses options for meeting and managing that demand .

historically the energy sector and the states have determined how water is used in the energy sector , but the significant role that current federal policies are playing in driving up energy's water demand is raising questions about the federal role in meeting and managing that demand .

these questions include are states being unfairly burdened with the responsibility of increased water use and competition resulting from federal energy policies , or is this part of the responsibility that comes with state primacy in water allocation ? .

who is responsible for the vulnerability of the nation's energy system to water availability ? .

congress is faced with deciding not only whether , and if so how , to alter current policies to respond to energy's water demand , but also who is the most appropriate entity to respond to energy's growing water demand .

currently little direct federal action is aimed at managing the energy sector's water demand , although federal policies at times have significant indirect influence on this demand .

instead , present roles rely on the energy industry and the states and local governments to manage water constraints and to resolve energy - water conflicts .

the issue of the energy sector's water use may arise during the 112 th congress in a variety of contexts .

support or opposition for legislation affecting energy's water demand may be influenced by opinions about the proper federal role in water allocation and planning , as well as concerns about the cost of actions and who is responsible for those costs .

positions on the larger energy and climate debate and other factors may also be important .

federal responses to energy's water use are complicated by the wide - ranging and place - based nature of the issue , the variety of actors involved , the costs and other tradeoffs involved , and the existing institutions and divisions of responsibilities for water and energy .

if increased federal action to meet and manage energy's water demand is deemed appropriate , possible actions fall under a few broad options .

attempts can be made to minimize the growth in energy's freshwater use by adopting general energy policies that are less water intense and more sensitive to water constraints , or by specifically promoting activities that reduce energy's water use , such as incentives for adopting less water intense energy generation technologies .

another option is to make freshwater available for the energy sector ( eg , through allocations , permits , or facilitating water trading ) ; however , the majority of water quantity allocation and permitting decisions are up to the states .

an additional option is improving data and analysis on energy's water use to better inform decision - making ( eg , resource planning efforts and decision - support tools ) and enhancing the availability and dissemination of water - efficient technological alternatives .

these approaches are presented in table 2 , with examples of each from legislation reported by a congressional committee of the 111 th congress .

these options are not mutually exclusive and different options may be more or less appropriate and attractive for different components of the energy sector's water demand .

these options also represent different potential roles and costs for federal and state governments , the energy sector , and energy consumers .

no entity has performed a comparative analysis of these policy options using multiple criteria ( eg , cost - effectiveness ; who bears the cost ; risks , reliability , and vulnerability ; opportunity costs ; role of state entities ; role of federal entities ) .

one of the challenges of a federal response to energy's water demand is that the concerns , policy options , and technological options vary greatly by region .

whether these policy alternatives should be pursued at the local , state , or national level depends in part on perspectives on the appropriate role of each level of government .

perspectives on the policy options related to energy's water demand also are influenced by long histories of regulation , management , promotion , and oversight of the nation's energy and water resources and infrastructure .

current and evolving conditions also play a role: providing greater access to water for the energy sector ( which is primarily up to the states ) may be difficult and controversial in water - scarce , drought - prone , or environmentally sensitive areas , especially with climate change anticipated to affect the availability and reliability of water in some regions .

states have traditionally had primacy in water allocation , so decisions about permitting energy's water use largely have been non - federal .

state and federal laws and policies can affect the ease or difficulty of , and incentives for , transferring water from existing uses to energy .

the federal government can , if it chooses , promote change in state water laws , institutions , and decision - making .

some view this as infringing on states' rights .

similarly , while private entities make many of the decisions on the energy sector's water use , the public sector influences these decisions through numerous routes ( eg , tax incentives , loan guarantees , permits , regulations , planning , education ) ; this influence can come from local , state , or federal policies .

the federal role in water resource allocation and management increases as the federal interest increases — for example , when the use occurs on federal lands .

competing water demands , including those from the energy sector , are raising questions for federal agencies about the operations of federal facilities .

for instance , can water delivered to bureau of reclamation contractors ( eg , water delivered to irrigation districts in california's central valley ) be used not for agriculture , but for energy development ( eg , evaporative cooling of a concentrating solar power facility ) ? .

can water from an army corps of engineers dam that has multiple purposes ( eg , flood control , navigation , and / or municipal or agricultural water supply ) be used for the oil and gas development , and if so , how much water can the corps provide under existing authorities ? .

the energy sector has long been a major water user , so why the current concern ? .

major energy trends are pushing the energy sector to become more dependent on , and therefore vulnerable to , freshwater availability .

this is occurring at a time of increasing concerns about the adequacy and reliability of freshwater supplies due to population growth and climate change .

energy resource and technology paths chosen and capital investments made in the near term are likely to establish long - term trajectories for energy's water use .

many of the current trends are in part driven by federal policy .

the federal government partially shapes the energy sector and at times defines a vision for the nation's energy future ( eg , biofuel production targets ) .

some stakeholders have raised concerns about the feasibility and consequences of meeting various energy targets and policy proposals , including concerns about physical inputs like water , land , materials , and rare minerals .

because affordable freshwater is a finite resource , commitments of water supplies for the energy sector reduce availability for other sectors and for ecosystems .

local or regional competition for water is often what makes energy's water demand significant ; at the same time , it is the regional and local scale of water resources and how they are managed that often complicates many federal water - related actions .

the federal role in energy supply and demand raises questions about the policy direction for meeting and managing energy's water needs , among them: if energy security is a national security issue , is energy's water use by association a national security issue ? .

would this be a justification for federal spending on energy and water efficiency measures ? .

water supply concerns are not only being raised in the context of energy .

there also is growing concern about water availability and aquatic conditions for meeting the demands of the agricultural and municipal sectors and the needs of ecosystems and threatened and endangered species ; these concerns are raised particularly in the context of droughts and impacts of climate change on water resources .

given available freshwater resources , a challenge for the nation will be to cost - effectively , sustainably , and reliably meet energy demands while satisfying agricultural , municipal , and industrial water demand , as well as ecosystem needs .

this challenge raises fundamental and controversial questions about how u.s. freshwater resources are allocated and used for various purposes , and about the availability and value of water in different sectors of the economy and in the environment .

at issue for congress is the role that the federal government and federal funding plays in shaping , meeting , and managing energy's water demand , while accounting for the significant role of the states and private sector in water use decisions .

appendix a .

energy's water consumption trends ideally , policy and decision makers should know how energy choices and policies compare across a wide array of parameters ( eg , cost , reliability , dispatchability , emissions , land requirements , water use ) under different scenarios .

that is , informed decisions would require water use data , analyses of least - cost water and energy conservation and efficiency actions , understanding of other water uses and their costs and benefits , life - cycle assessments of energy's water uses and risks , and more .

such assessments are not available .

while not addressing this shortfall , table a - 1 and table a - 2 summarize the freshwater impacts of numerous shifts in transportation fuels and the electricity sector , respectively .

without such multi - variable assessments , it is difficult to understand the full implications of energy decisions .

while this report focuses on energy's water use , there are a host of other factors to consider when analyzing energy policy tradeoffs .

for example , fuel and technologies for generating electricity are not equally dispatchable ; that is , is they are not equally able to increase or decrease generation , or to be brought online or shut down to match demand .

thermoelectric facilities using fossil fuel or geothermal sources are advantageous because they can be operated to produce electricity constantly or dialed up or down with demand .

while electricity from hydropower , tidal , and wave energy generally can be produced fairly predictably , often the timing of operations is subject to the intensity of tides and waves , to water conditions such as drought or large storms , and to environmental restrictions regarding potential impacts on marine life and ecosystems .

in contrast , until more advanced storage technologies become commercially competitive , photovoltaics and wind , which require very little water , remain intermittent sources that generally cannot be dispatched when the sun is not shining or the wind is not blowing .

appendix b .

water use by transportation fuels d. elcock's study projects that the energy sector's consumptive water use will increase from 6 billion gallons per day ( bgd ) in 2005 to 10 bgd in 2030 in the areas of fossil fuel mining , production , and processing and bioenergy .

 ( see figure b - 1 . ) .

the growth is dominated by water consumed for bioenergy .

the elcock study and other sources show that the effect of bioenergy on energy's water use was already felt between 2005 and 2010 .

the projected water demand by bioenergy could drop , potentially significantly , if less - water intense bioenergy is developed and adopted .

this projection covers most of the water used to fuel transportation and the water used for obtaining and preparing fossil fuels for use in either transportation or the electricity sector .

figure b - 2 provides data from research on the comparative water intensity of different u.s. transportation fuels .

note that the figure has a logarithmic scale , and that the water consumed traveling on irrigated biofuels is orders of magnitude larger than the water embedded in other fuels .

appendix c. water use for electricity generation trends in the electricity sector contributing to increased water consumption currently overwhelm actions that reduce water consumption .

as a result , local water challenges presented by electric generation are becoming more common in many water - constrained areas .

these challenges may drive action to reduce electricity's freshwater footprint , such as the adoption of water - efficient electricity generation and water - efficient thermoelectric cooling options , or the use of impaired water .

this appendix describes the available data on the electricity sector's water consumption and data on the different electricity generation's water use .

then it presents alternative thermoelectric cooling choices that may reduce electricity's water use .

lastly , it discusses the tradeoffs between water use and other characteristics ( eg , environmental impacts , reliability , dispatchability ) of electric generation from hydropower facilities , photovoltaic solar and wind installations , and geothermal resources .

data on electricity's water use available estimates for the electricity sector's water consumption focus primarily on thermoelectric cooling water needs because cooling dominates water use during generation .

other aspects of electric production ( eg , fuel mining and processing ) also use water .

 ( see table c - 1 . ) .

data and projections on the water consumed in the mining , production , and processing of fuels for generating electricity are bundled with the production of fossil fuels used in the transportation sector , like the elcock study .

the projections in figure 2 for thermoelectric cooling come from the elcock study , which was based on projections in a 2007 report by netl .

the netl projections are limited to coal , natural gas , and nuclear - powered facilities ; that is , they do not calculate water use changes that would occur from shifts in the electricity sector broadly ( eg , adoption of more wind or photovoltaics ) or shifts in thermoelectric generation more specifically ( eg , concentrating solar power or biomass generation ) .

elcock assumed that biomass generation for electricity production would be based in regions not requiring irrigation .

no analyses of electricity's total water consumption or how it may change under different policies exist ; this type of analysis is difficult to perform without reliable data on water intensities of different electricity generation technologies and fuels .

no authoritative comparison of the various water intensities of electricity generation options exists .

figure c - 1 and figure c - 2 illustrate the best available data for average water intensities for various electricity alternatives , with and without carbon mitigation using ccs , respectively .

these figures are based on table c - 1 , which represents the best available data on water consumed in producing electricity using various fuels and technologies .

the data in figure c - 1 are imperfect and come from multiple sources , raising questions about whether the data can be used to make accurate comparisons across technologies .

thermoelectric cooling: emerging alternatives the withdrawal and water quality impacts of once - through cooling have resulted in newer power plants generally using evaporative cooling .

emerging cooling technologies have the potential to use much less freshwater than once - through or evaporative cooling .

these include dry cooling ( previously discussed ) , hybrid dry - wet cooling , cooling with fluids other than freshwater , and more innovative technologies ( eg , wet - surface air coolers , advanced wet cooling ) .

however , these alternatives have their own costs and disadvantages .

a doe report found that dry cooling could reduce water consumption to roughly 80 gal / mwh for solar troughs and 90 gal / mwh for solar towers .

while they consume less water , dry and hybrid cooling systems have financial as well as efficiency costs .

total annualized costs for dry cooling tower systems can be four times those of evaporative cooling tower systems .

due to the higher cooling and lower generation efficiency costs , the cost of electricity from a dry cooled solar thermal plant may be 3% to 8% higher than a similar wet cooled plant .

dry cooling uses fans to blow air for steam condensation .

while power plants with dry cooling use considerably less water , dry cooling is less effective at cooling the power plant than evaporative cooling , thus reducing electric generation at the facility .

the doe report also found that electricity generation at a dry - cooled facility dropped off at ambient temperatures above 100°f .

for a solar parabolic trough facility in the southwest , the benefit in the reduction in water consumption from dry cooling resulted in cost increases of 2% to 9% and a reduction in energy generation of 4.5% to 5% .

the cost and energy generation penalties for dry cooling depend largely on how much time a facility has ambient temperature above 100°f .

dry cooling would reduce generation on the same hot days when summer peak electricity demand is greatest .

hybrid wet - dry cooling attempts to balance water consumption with power generation efficiency ; it remains under development for commercial scale applications .

to weigh the tradeoffs in energy generation , cost , and water use , doe researched hybrid cooling processes that combine dry and evaporative cooling .

the hybrid system consists of parallel evaporative and dry cooling facilities , with the evaporative cooling operating only on hot days .

by using dry cooling generally and evaporative cooling above certain ambient temperatures , losses of thermal efficiency from dry cooling can be reduced .

how often the evaporative cooling is used determines how much water is consumed and the effect of hot days on thermal efficiency .

doe found that a hybrid cooling system in the southwest using 50% of the water of evaporative cooling would maintain 99% of the performance of an evaporative - cooled facility .

a hybrid cooling system using 10% of the water of evaporative cooling would maintain 97% of the energy performance .

a hybrid system requires greater capital investment and is more complicated to operate ; its cost effectiveness over the life of the project depends in part of the cost of water .

another means for decreasing freshwater impacts is employing alternative water sources for evaporative - cooling .

these alternative water sources include effluent from wastewater treatment plants or other reclaimed or impaired water , such as brackish or low - quality groundwater and mine pool water .

these alternative water sources , however , may lead to additional scaling , corrosion , and fouling of cooling equipment or require pretreatment before cooling use .

additional research may be able to improve the viability of saline water cooling .

availability of alternative water sources in proximity to electricity generation facilities is a potential limitation to their use .

understanding of the opportunities for brackish cooling alternatives is likely to be improved when the assessment of brackish groundwater authorized by section 9507 of p.l .

111-11 , the omnibus public land management act of 2009 , becomes available .

tradeoffs of select electricity generation technologies hydroelectric generation hydroelectric power is produced when water passes through a turbine .

turbines for large - scale hydroelectric generation are located at dams .

electricity at u.s. hydropower facilities is produced with relatively low greenhouse gas emissions .

however , hydropower's environmental effects can be significant .

conventional hydropower development through dam building often significantly alters river ecosystems , harming many indigenous species .

drought and changes to hydrology , such as possible reduction in snowpack under a changing climate , can reduce electricity generation at hydropower facilities because of the effects on reservoir operations and levels .

constructing new large dams is contentious ; therefore , efforts to identify opportunities for increasing hydropower generation have focused on smaller - scale opportunities or improved efficiency and expansion of hydropower at existing facilities .

the electric power research institute estimates a potential capacity hydropower gain of 10 gw by 2025 as feasible , without the construction of new large dams .

six western states — alaska , washington , oregon , california , idaho , and montana — have the highest potentials .

despite this identified potential , little additional hydropower generation has been installed in recent years for a number of reasons ( eg , hydropower and water - related permit and regulatory requirements , and public concerns and perceptions about environmental effects ) .

similarly , the number of applications for ferc preliminary permits for pumped storage has increased substantially in recent years ; however , the proposals have not proceeded to construction .

photovoltaic solar and wind renewable electricity technologies that do not use thermoelectric processes may have minimal water requirements for electricity generation .

wind turbines and solar photovoltaic ( pv ) panels , for example , require small volumes of water for cleaning , but otherwise use no water .

however , the minimal water intensity of wind and pv comes with tradeoffs .

transmission constraints ; cost ; and regulatory , technical , and operational factors currently restrict the extent to which solar and wind resources can be exploited to meet electricity demand .

as previously noted , wind and pv are intermittent electricity sources .

some storage options for these intermittent technologies exist ( eg , wind used in conjunction with a pumped storage hydropower facility ) ; however , their applications are limited and intermittency continues to limit generation from wind and pv .

electricity from pv is also currently more expensive than electricity from csp , although electricity from wind is less expensive than electricity from csp .

for a discussion of wind technologies and policy issues , see crs report rl34546 , wind power in the united states: technology , economic , and policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

geothermal there are several ways to use geothermal energy: electricity generation ( discussed herein ) as well as direct - use ( recovering water heated by the earth ) and heat pumps ( using the earth's heat to cool / heat buildings ) .

traditional geothermal power production uses naturally occurring convective hydrothermal sources in hot rock formations to produce steam to run a thermoelectric power plant's turbines ( i.e. , a geothermal flash system ) .

alternatively , for lower temperature geothermal resources , a second working fluid is heated by the geothermal water using a heat exchanger ; it is the working fluid that drives the turbines ( i.e. , a geothermal binary system ) .

finally , because the majority of hot rock is dry , electricity can also be generated by injecting water into fractured rock to be heated ( i.e. , an enhanced geothermal system ) .

the water is then injected back into the rock formation to create a relatively closed - loop system .

because the geothermal or injected water is an essential component of geothermal electricity generation and the size of the plants are generally smaller than 50 mw , dry cooling is becoming the standard for new geothermal facilities .

smaller power plants are generally easier to dry - cool than larger plants .

a 2008 usgs study estimated that the united states has geothermal resources sufficient to supply half of the nation's electric generation needs , assuming enhanced geothermal systems could be successfully developed and deployed at a commercial scale .

that is , much of the geothermal potential shown on maps of geothermal resources requires water to be injected ( and therefore consumed ) to exploit the geothermal energy .

enhanced geothermal power plants require relatively little land and can be used in coproduction with enhanced oil recovery to lengthen the lifespan of oil fields .

these enhanced systems are an emerging technology , so more research and development are needed for large - scale commercial deployment .

current research is investigating the possibility of replacing water with carbon dioxide as the working fluid , which would significantly reduce water usage and would be a means of carbon sequestration .

