in response to the slow pace of improvement in the labor market after the 2007-2009 recession ended , some members of the 112 th congress and the administration proposed additional fiscal stimulus or job creation legislation .

these bills followed several policy steps taken while the recession was in effect .

attention most recently had focused on the significant increase in taxes and decrease in spending scheduled to occur at the end of 2012 , popularly referred to as the "fiscal cliff. .

economic projections had suggested that these policies would reduce spending and dramatically slow growth in 2013 , most likely leading to a recession in the first part of 2013 .

proposals were made to extend some expiring tax cuts ( h.r .

8 , s. 3412 , s. 3413 ) and to change the manner in which spending cuts ( sequestration ) are to be achieved in the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) .

the american taxpayer relief act ( h.r .

8 ) , enacted at the beginning of january 2013 , eliminated somewhat over half of the fiscal restraint as defined by the congressional budget office , largely through extension of expiring tax cuts enacted in 2001-2003 , but also including an extension of extended unemployment benefits and a two - month delay in budget cuts ( sequestration ) .

the remaining provisions that were not addressed , including an increase in the payroll tax and a cut in spending , would contract the economy , probably between one and two percentage points , compared with the growth that would have occurred without fiscal constraint .

in december 2013 , congress passed h.j.res .

59 , the bipartisan budget act , which increased spending caps for discretionary appropriations .

it also delayed a cut in physicians payments under medicare ( commonly known as the "doc fix" ) for three months .

the agreement had offsetting revenue gains and spending cuts , so that the overall proposal should have little stimulus effect .

no action has been taken on the other temporary provisions in h.r .

8 expiring at the end of 2013 , including the extension of unemployment benefits , the expiration of a number of temporary tax benefits , or a longer - term doc fix .

these provisions together with the sequestration accounted for over a quarter of the original fiscal cliff .

approximately 1.3 million individuals will lose their extended unemployment benefits at the end of december .

this report briefly reviews the situation in the labor market , expands on the above - mentioned policy steps taken to date , and analyzes policy issues that typically arise during consideration of stimulus legislation .

three policy issues are examined: whether to take additional measures to increase jobs ( or avoid contractionary measures ) , what measures might be most effective , and how job creation proposals should be financed .

from december 2007 to june 2009 , the economy experienced the longest and deepest recession since the great depression .

at the onset of the so - called great recession , the unemployment rate was 5.0% .

it more than doubled , peaking at 10.1% in october 2009 , before starting to slowly decline .

this marked the first time that unemployment topped 10% since the 1981-1982 recession .

the 2007-2009 recession also was characterized by the biggest percentage point increase in the unemployment rate of any postwar recession .

since the third quarter of 2009 , economic output has grown , but not quickly enough to reduce the unemployment rate to normal levels .

the labor market remained weak in 2010 , with the unemployment rate averaging 9.6% for the year .

although the rate fell during 2011 , it nonetheless was a still high 8.9% for the year .

the labor market continued to slowly improve in 2012 .

in the fourth quarter of 2012 , the unemployment rate fell to just under 8.0% for the first time since january 2009 .

the december unemployment rate was 7.8% .

the rate fell slowly during 2013 , falling to 7.4% by mid - year , rising slightly in october and eventually reaching 7% by november .

the duration of unemployment remains long by postwar standards .

four years after the recession's end , unemployment remains high , and long - term unemployment continues at historically high levels .

of the 10.9 million workers unemployed in november 2013 , two of every five ( 4.1 million ) had not held a job in over six months .

the rise in unemployment during the great recession was driven by a steep decline in employment .

the number of employees on nonfarm employer payrolls plummeted by more than 7 million between december 2007 and june 2009 .

job losses have subsequently decreased .

employment at private - and public - sector employers rose by more than 3 million between june 2009 and october 2012 , the latest month for which data were available at the time this report was prepared .

within the june 2009-october 2012 period , total employment increased substantially from march to may 2010 because the federal government hired temporary workers to assist it in conducting the decennial census .

after may 2010 , employment fell as the temporary workers were let go upon completion of the 2010 census .

private - sector employment began increasing in march 2010 , according to data from the u.s. bureau of labor statistics' monthly survey of employers in the nonfarm sector of the economy .

from october 2010 through july 2012 , job gains in the private sector more than offset losses in the public sector — chiefly at state and local governments .

the public sector did not begin contributing to the net increase in nonfarm payroll employment until the second half of 2012 .

in the last year , from november 2012 to november 2013 , employment growth has been in the private sector , while employment in the public sector fell .

a "hands off" policy approach would counsel for patience .

in this view , a decrease in unemployment is inevitable .

every recession since world war ii except the 1980 recession was followed by a period of sustained job creation .

historical experience confirms that strong economic growth is the most important factor for reducing unemployment after a recession .

nevertheless , because the unemployment rate is so high , even if the economy grew at a healthy pace , it would take several years for the unemployment rate to reach its pre - recession level .

for example , after the unemployment rate peaked at 10.8% in november and december 1982 , it had fallen less than three percentage points one year later ; it took about six years for the rate to fall by half .

this gradual decline from a recession - elevated level happened when economic growth averaged an unusually high rate of 4.5% annually .

during the current recovery , the rate of economic growth has been much slower .

in addition , the recession came at a time when concerns were already growing about a long - term debt that was unsustainable in the future .

concerns about this debt had led to spending caps that produced part of the fiscal cliff .

further stimulus might help the economy to return more quickly to full employment but would exacerbate the debt problem .

another argument in favor of patience is that the government has already taken extraordinary steps to stabilize the economy through the creation of the tarp , the fed's unconventional policy actions , and fiscal stimulus in 2008 and 2009 , the latter of which contained significant outlays through 2011 .

 ( these programs will be discussed in greater detail in the following section , entitled " policy steps taken through 2013 ." ) .

proponents of this approach are likely to argue that stimulus faces diminishing returns and , with these policies already in place , it is unlikely that further policy steps could sharply hasten the anticipated decline in unemployment .

a more interventionist policy approach could be justified on at least three grounds .

first , the loss in output caused by high unemployment is very costly in economic and non - economic terms in the short run .

if policy steps to reduce unemployment can be taken at relatively low costs , then the cost - benefit tradeoff would be favorable .

an ongoing major policy debate , discussed later in the report , examines how costly financing these additional policy steps would be at a time of large budget deficits the second rationale depends on whether high unemployment has any permanent effects .

mainstream economic theory suggests that the business cycle has no lasting effect on the natural rate of unemployment — busts and booms temporarily move the unemployment rate up and down , but it always gravitates back toward its long - term equilibrium rate .

in this view , policy steps could hasten the return to the natural rate , but market forces would eventually have caused unemployment to return to the same long - run level on its own .

in other words , policy steps would result in temporary ( but not permanent ) improvements in well - being .

some economists have offered a competing theory called "hysteresis. .

in this view , bouts of high unemployment can lead to permanent increases in the natural rate of unemployment , so that unemployment never falls as low in the subsequent recovery as it had been at the previous peak .

hysteresis could result from workers losing some of their skills in long bouts of unemployment that reduce their subsequent employability .

if hysteresis effects are significant , then policy steps that successfully reduce unemployment sooner than later could avoid some permanent loss in economic well - being .

third , a more interventionist approach might be pursued in case the economic recovery stalls .

fear has periodically been expressed that the economy could experience a so - called "double - dip" recession , meaning a return to economic contraction in the near term .

by historical standards double dips are rare .

in the 20 th century , there were two cases where the economy emerged from a recession , only to be quickly followed by another recession ( beginning in 1920 and 1981 ) .

in 1981 , a large tightening of monetary policy is seen as playing a key role in the economy's return to recession .

for the current expansion to similarly be knocked off course , some new "shock" to the economy would likely be needed .

arguably , the economic crisis now engulfing europe could provide such a large shock .

the "fiscal cliff" ( i.e. , implementation of tax increases and spending decreases scheduled to occur in early 2013 ) was also projected to cause a recession , although much of the fiscal cliff remains .

the fiscal cliff was hands - off in terms of the law but not in terms of economic policy , as the combination of tax increases and spending cuts is projected to be 5% of output .

similarly , the provisions expiring in 2013 , if no action is taken , will have contractionary effects ( although small compared with those in the original fiscal cliff ) .

another scenario is that the economy neither re - enters recession nor experiences its usual steady return to full employment and normal growth rates .

instead , it experiences long - term stagnation , sometimes referred to as a deflationary or liquidity trap , where overall spending does not grow quickly enough to significantly reduce the slack in the economy .

evidence in favor of this scenario is the weakness of the expansion to date and the fact that businesses and consumers are "deleveraging" ( increasing saving , and in some cases selling assets , to reduce debt ) .

slower growth could also arise from the remaining elements of the fiscal cliff that have not been extended .

although the united states has not experienced such stagnation in the post - world war ii period , japan's experience since its equity and real estate bubbles burst in the early 1990s illustrates that this scenario is possible in a modern economy .

from 1980 to 1991 , gross domestic product ( gdp ) growth in japan averaged 3.8% .

since 1991 , gdp growth has never exceeded 2.9% in a year .

from a low starting point , japan's unemployment rate rose each year from 1991 to 2002 .

from 1995 to 2009 , japan experienced 10 years of deflation ( falling prices ) and low inflation in the other years , which indicates that japan's slow growth was in part due to inadequate aggregate demand .

although the central bank reduced overnight interest rates to low nominal levels and budget deficits were large ( 5.6% of gdp on average from 1993 to 2009 ) , japan was not able to break out of its deflationary trap .

some economists believe that japan's deflationary trap was prolonged by the government's sporadic attempts to withdraw fiscal and monetary stimulus prematurely .

balance sheet growth was withdrawn in 2006 when inflation was still below 1% and economic growth was about 2% ; prices and output began shrinking again following the 2008 financial crisis .

in addition to inadequate stimulus , many economists believe japan's liquidity trap was prolonged by its failure to address problems in its financial system after its financial crash .

numerous policy actions have already been taken to contain damages spilling over from housing and financial markets to the broader economy .

these policies include traditional monetary and fiscal policy as well as federal interventions into the financial sector .

both monetary and fiscal policy can be used to stimulate the economy .

fiscal policy options include direct spending by the government ; transfers to state and local governments ( for either infrastructure spending , medicaid , or other purposes ) ; direct transfers to individuals ( such as unemployment compensation ) ; tax cuts for individuals ; and tax incentives aimed at businesses , including jobs tax credits .

job credits for hiring the long - term unemployed have been discussed recently .

jobs subsidies differ from policies aimed at increasing aggregate demand , in that they are intended to be supply - side subsidies .

that is , the initial effect is not aimed at inducing spending that will then encourage firms to expand output and hire workers ( although it may do so ) , but is aimed at reducing the cost of hiring workers , so as to induce more hires .

the first section below discusses traditional fiscal policies ; the second discusses incentives aimed at jobs .

although policy measures can be financed by cutting other spending , raising other taxes , or increasing the budget deficit , fiscal stimulus is normally deficit financed .

it is theoretically possible to design a stimulus package that would be deficit neutral by choosing a mix of stimulus proposals with high multipliers and offsets with low multipliers , but such a stimulus would be smaller than a deficit financed proposal .

the choice of financing affects both the macroeconomic impact and the cost - benefit tradeoff of the policy proposal .

economic theory indicates that a deficit - financed policy proposal would have the maximum impact on employment in the short term .

in a deep recession , total spending ( aggregate demand ) in the economy is inadequate to fully employ labor and capital resources .

in other words , lack of aggregate demand is the main cause of high unemployment .

increasing the budget deficit can increase total spending in the economy and bring some of those idle resources back into use .

deficit - neutral proposals would tend to neutralize the effects of job creation provisions on total spending in the economy by cutting other spending or lowering the spending of those whose taxes are raised .

deficit - neutral proposals could even be mildly contractionary .

for example , if taxes are cut and financed by a spending reduction , the increase in consumption of recipients would not fully offset the contractionary effects of the decrease in government spending to the extent that the recipient saves part of the tax cut .

deficit - neutral policies might be designed to lower the cost of labor , but without any increase in demand for their products , employers may be unresponsive to incentives to increase their labor force .

in the context of a large output gap , the short - term economic cost of increasing the budget deficit may be quite low .

the main economic costs of increasing the deficit come from its tendency to "crowd out" private investment spending or increase the trade deficit .

deficits crowd out private investment spending because their financing requires scarce private saving .

increasing the demands on this private saving raises interest rates , making private investment spending less attractive .

in the current context , investment spending has been greatly reduced by the recession , so there is less chance of it being crowded out by the larger deficit in the short run .

unusually low treasury bond rates are evidence that the crowding out factor is not significant at present .

deficits and domestic private investment spending can also be financed through foreign capital flows , however .

an increase in net foreign capital inflows must be matched by an equal increase in the trade deficit .

with perfect capital mobility , the stimulus to total spending caused by the larger deficit could be entirely offset by the decline in total spending resulting from a larger trade deficit .

since the trade deficit has fallen significantly since the beginning of 2007 , this drawback to increasing the deficit may also be less important at present .

while an economic argument can be made that increasing the deficit could have short - term benefits , that argument may presuppose that the increase in the deficit would be reversed when economic conditions return to normal .

political constraints may make that difficult , and could lead one to conclude that the short - term benefits of higher deficits would be outweighed by the long - term costs — namely , that if deficits are not reduced or are increased when unemployment falls , the negative effects on investment spending and the trade deficit would become greater .

indeed , any proposal to increase the deficit can be viewed in the broader context of an overall deficit that since 2009 has been larger relative to the size of the economy than all but a handful of previous wartime years .

current deficits are not sustainable in the long run in the sense that deficits of that size would cause the national debt to continually rise relative to output .

a deficit of this size cannot be maintained indefinitely without eventually resulting in a fiscal crisis where investors refuse to continue financing it because they no longer believe that the government would be capable of servicing it .

while there is no sign of investor unwillingness to hold federal debt at the present ( since borrowing rates are so low ) , it is also difficult to predict at what point investors would refuse to hold more debt .

essentially , investors are willing to hold federal debt as long as they believe that the government will eventually reduce the deficit to the point where it becomes sustainable .

policy changes that increase the deficit place the deficit further from sustainability .

