there has been increased concern over the size and sustainability of the united states' recent deficits and the country's long - run budget outlook .

this concern has brought the issues of the federal government's revenue needs and fundamental reform of the tax system to the forefront of congressional debates .

one place congress may turn to address these issues is the set of tax benefits for homeowners .

the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) has estimated that the cost to the federal government in terms of foregone revenue from these benefits will be approximately $136.3 billion annually between 2014 and 2017 .

economists have identified the set of tax benefits for homeowners as one area in which reform may improve economic efficiency .

this report focuses on the two largest federal tax benefits available to homeowners — the mortgage interest deduction and the deduction for state and local property taxes .

the goals of this report are five - fold: ( 1 ) briefly summarize the trends in homeownership ; ( 2 ) provide an overview of what tax benefits are available ; ( 3 ) analyze the rationales commonly provided for offering such benefits ; ( 4 ) analyze the effect of the mortgage interest deduction and property tax deduction on the homeownership rate , housing consumption , and the economy ; and ( 5 ) present policy options .

until recently , the homeownership rate in this country had generally increased over time .

in 1900 only 46.5% of americans owned the home that they lived in .

by 1950 , the homeownership rate had increased to 55% , and to 67.4% by 2000 .

homeownership peaked in 2004 at 69% , and today hovers around 65% .

the most current data show that of 132.6 million homes in the united states , 75.0 million serve as principal residences .

another 39.7 million homes are renter - occupied , and the remaining 17.9 million are either for sale , for rent , or for seasonal use .

the size of homes that americans own has also generally trended upward over time , while family size has trended downward .

in 1970 the median new home was around 1,385 square feet .

by 2009 , the median new home was roughly 2,135 square feet — an increase of 54% .

over this same time period the average family size decreased .

in 1970 the average family size was 3.58 persons , while in 2009 the average family size was 3.15 persons .

thus , the increase in home size has been even larger after adjusting for family size .

the fact is that americans have tended to build bigger and bigger homes while tending to have smaller and smaller families .

this trend can have important ramifications in terms of land use , energy use , transportation , and affordability .

these long - term trends in homeownership behavior may be overshadowed by more recent trends in foreclosures .

at the beginning of 2001 , near the start of the housing boom , the national foreclosure rate on all mortgage loans was 1.24% .

the foreclosure rate among riskier subprime borrowers was slightly higher at 3.58% .

foreclosures began to increase between 2007 and 2008 , shortly after the turning point in the housing market .

after peaking in late 2009 and early 2010 , the foreclosure rate has gradually decreased .

by the fourth quarter of 2013 the foreclosure rate on all loans stood at 2.86% , while foreclosures occurring among subprime borrowers stood at 10.43% .

as of march of 2014 , there were at least four significant tax incentives that directly or indirectly benefit homeowner - occupiers .

the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) estimates these benefits will cost the federal government an average of $136.3 billion in foregone revenue annually between 2013 and 2017 .

these tax benefits and their associated budget impacts are listed in table 1 .

the three most expensive tax incentives in the jct's estimate are the mortgage interest deduction ( $77.3 billion annually ) , the itemized state and local property tax deduction ( $31.5 billion annually ) , and the exclusion of capital gains on the sale of a principal residence ( $26.5 billion annually ) .

some argue that another tax expenditure not included in official costs estimates — the exclusion of imputed rental income — should be included .

unofficial cost estimates place the foregone revenue generated by this exclusion at between $20 billion and $30 billion annually .

the following overview focuses on the mortgage interest and property tax deductions .

the exclusion of capital gains is not reviewed in detail because its effects on the housing decisions of taxpayers is fundamentally different than the effects of the deductions for mortgage interest and property taxes .

a brief summary of the capital gains exclusions , as well as the other tax benefits , is provided at the end of this section .

a number of possible rationales for subsidizing homeownership have been put forth .

first , a high homeownership rates may bestow certain benefits to society as a whole such as higher property values , lower crime , and higher civic participation , among others .

second , homeownership may promote a more even distribution of income and wealth , as well as establish greater individual financial security .

and lastly , homeownership may have a positive effect on living conditions , which can lead to a healthier population .

this section provides a review and analysis of these rationales .

the analysis presented here is distinct from the analysis of the economic effects of the mortgage interest and property tax deductions , which is presented in the next section .

while some policy makers may or may not want to promote homeownership based on the reasons just discussed , a separate issue that arises is — what are the effects of the mortgage interest deduction and property tax deduction ? .

in particular , do these two tax provisions actually increase homeownership as some argue ? .

how do they affect other dimensions of homeownership , such as the quality and size of homes taxpayers purchase ? .

and how does subsidizing owner - occupied housing affect the performance of the overall economy ? .

this section analyzes these questions in turn .

if congress chooses to do so , there are a number of options at its disposal for changing the mortgage interest deduction and the state and local property tax deduction .

this section discusses several of these options .

actual implementation of any of the options presented here would require careful consideration about how specifically to modify the parameters of the tax benefit ( s ) of interest .

it appears that the two options that have generally received the most attention so far are converting the mortgage interest deduction into a credit , and limiting the deductibility of state and local property taxes .

the list of options presented here is by no means exhaustive .

one possible option would be to eliminate the mortgage interest and property tax deductions .

elimination of the deductions could be justified as a second - best policy alternative to taxing net imputed rental income .

it was discussed earlier in this report that net imputed rental income is currently excluded from taxation .

this is due in part to limited acceptance by non - economists of the idea that owning a home provides owners with implicit income that should be taxed , and in part to the practical difficulty of taxing such income .

little is known , for example , about the probable rental value of individual owner - occupied homes and available data on rental rates is of limited use because of the differences in size and quality of rental units as compared to owner - occupied properties .

the impact on the economy and housing market would depend on how quickly the elimination of the deductions were phased in .

sudden elimination of the deductions could cause home purchases to decrease , leading to a decrease in home prices .

the decrease in home prices would be more severe if the deductions are capitalized to some degree into current home prices .

the decrease in home prices would impose capital losses on current owners and perhaps produce a lock - in effect — current homeowners could be reluctant to sell at a loss .

in addition , the decrease in home prices could lead to a reduction in new home construction , a reduction in homeowner wealth , and the possibility of higher defaults since some homeowners could find themselves underwater on their mortgages .

these three events could lead to the broader economy being negatively impacted in the short term .

if elimination of the deductions were gradually phased in over time it could help mitigate the negative consequences for the economy and housing market .

researchers steven bourassa and william grigsby propose eliminating the deductions over a 15- to 20-year period with a fixed date after which the deductions would no longer be available .

for example , if january 1 , 2034 , were chosen as the cut - off date , taxpayers who buy a home in 2014 could claim the deductions for 20 years , buyers in 2015 could claim the deduction for 19 years , and so on .

bourassa and grigsby postulate that there would be no effect on home demand or prices , although no modeling is done to complement their proposal .

it is possible that gradually eliminating the deductions could simply delay the negative short - term consequences for the economy and housing market .

this could happen if households do not anticipate the full effects of the deductions' elimination until closer to the chosen cut - off date .

a net improvement in the long - term performance of the economy relative to today could be expected from elimination of the mortgage interest and property tax deduction if the deductions lead to distortions in the economy .

a reduction in economic distortions would result in capital and labor being directed to more productive employment in the non - housing sectors of the economy .

the resulting increase in federal revenue from the elimination of the deductions could also improve the long - term budgetary situation of the united states as federal tax revenues would increase , implying less reliance on deficits to finance spending .

a ballpark estimate of the expected increase in federal revenue from eliminating these two deductions is equal to what these benefits currently cost the government — $108.8 billion annually .

if the policy objective of congress is to promote homeownership through the tax code , and congress believes the mortgage interest and property tax deductions increase homeownership , then limiting the deductions to more effectively target the benefits is an option .

currently , the mortgage interest deduction may be claimed on interest paid on up to $1 million of mortgage debt that finances a primary or secondary residence , interest paid on up to $100,000 of home equity debt ( which may be used to finance spending unrelated to the home ) , and is available every year the mortgage is in repayment .

state and local property taxes are also fully deductible .

it could be argued that the deductions provide a tax benefit to a large number of taxpayers that would become homeowners regardless if they existed or not .

the mortgage interest deduction could be limited to interest paid on a mortgage amount that more closely resembles that of a first - time homebuyer .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has estimated the cost of gradually reducing the maximum mortgage amount on which interest can be deducted from $1.1 million to $500,000 .

the cbo proposal would not take effect until 2013 and would decrease the maximum mortgage amount by $100,000 annually until it reached $500,000 .

the cbo estimates this option would raise a total of $41.4 billion between enactment ( 2013 ) and 2019 .

similarly , house ways and means committee chairman dave camp recently released a comprehensive tax reform draft that proposes limiting the size of mortgages eligible for the deduction .

the proposal would reduce the eligible mortgage amount to $500,000 over a four - year period beginning in 2015 .

interest on home equity debt incurred after 2014 would no longer be deductible .

to lessen the impact on the housing market , the new limitations would only apply to new mortgage debt .

furthermore , the proposal includes a grandfather provision for refinanced debt if the original mortgage debt is incurred prior to the mortgage limits being reduced .

because of the comprehensive nature of chairman camp's proposal , the jct grouped the revenue estimates for this proposal along with a number of other changes to itemized deductions .

another option would be to leave the maximum mortgage amount unchanged , but limit the amount of interest that could be deducted .

for example , the amount of interest that a taxpayer may deduct could be limited to a percentage of their adjusted gross income ( agi ) , such as 10% , 12% , or 15% .

the cbo has offered such an option for the deduction for all state and local property taxes .

specifically , the cbo presented the option of limiting the deduction for all state and local taxes to 2% of agi .

their estimates suggest that such a proposal could raise $625.7 billion between 2010 and 2019 .

since property taxes account for about 30% of all state and local taxes households pay , the cbo estimates suggest that limiting the property tax deduction could be an effective option for increasing revenue .

other options include limiting the mortgage interest or property tax deduction to interest and taxes paid on a taxpayer's first home .

this could encourage first - time buyers to remain in their homes longer as the deductions would no longer be available if they moved .

another option would be to limit both deductions to a taxpayer's primary residence .

current law allows for the deduction of interest on a second residence and home equity loan , as well as the deduction of property taxes on every home a taxpayer owns .

the deductions could also be limited to those homeowners below a certain income threshold .

currently the deductions are generally available to homeowners of all income limits , although there are some restrictions based on income as a result of limitations on the amount of itemized deductions some higher - income taxpayers may claim .

the mortgage interest deduction and property tax deduction could be replaced with a tax credit .

the current deductions tend to provide a proportionally bigger benefit to higher - income homeowners since they buy more expensive homes and are subject to higher marginal tax rates .

the requirement that homeowners itemize their tax returns also limits the number of owners who receive the tax benefit .

a tax credit for mortgage interest or property taxes could provide a benefit to more homeowners since itemization would no longer be required .

without the need to itemize , the burden of tax preparation on homeowners would be lessened .

depending on the design of the credit , it could create a more consistent rate of subsidization across homeowners .

making the tax credit refundable would serve to make it better targeted to lower - income homeowners .

over the years , several mortgage interest tax credit options have been proposed .

five of the more prominent ones are listed below .

all five would limit the deduction to a taxpayer's principal residence .

four out of the five would allow a 15% credit rate .

three of the five credit options would be nonrefundable .

two of the options would limit the size of the mortgage eligible for the credit to $500,000 , while one would limit eligible mortgages to no greater than $300,000 ( with an inflation adjustment ) .

another option would limit the maximum eligible mortgage to 125% of the area median home prices .

and still another would place no cap on the maximum eligible mortgage , but would limit the maximum tax credit one could claim to $25,000 .

the cbo , in its most recent options for reducing the deficit report , presented the option of converting the mortgage interest deduction to a 15% nonrefundable tax credit .

the credit would be restricted to a taxpayer's primary residence .

no credit would be allowed for interest associated with home equity loans .

under this option , the deduction would still be available between 2014 and 2018 as the credit was phased in .

simultaneously , the maximum mortgage amount that would be eligible for the credit would be reduced by $100,000 during the phase in .

from 2019 on , only the credit could be claimed on mortgage amounts up to $500,000 .

a similar option was presented by the cbo in 2009 .

the american enterprise institute's alan viard has proposed converting the deduction to a 15% refundable tax credit starting in 2015 .

the credit would be limited to the interest on the first $300,000 of mortgage debt ( in 2013 dollars ) associated with one's primary residence ( second homes and home equity debt would be excluded ) .

the qualifying mortgage amount would be adjusted annually for inflation .

homeowners could still claim the deduction but only at 90% of its current value , decreasing by 10% annually .

a homeowner could switch to the tax credit regime at any time .

president obama's national commission on fiscal responsibility and reform ( fiscal commission ) has recently recommended replacing the mortgage interest deduction with a nonrefundable credit equal to 12% of the interest paid on mortgages of $500,000 or less .

the credit would be restricted to a taxpayer's primary residence .

no credit would be allowed for interest associated with home equity loans .

the bipartisan policy center's debt reduction taskforce , co - chaired by former senator pete domenici and alice rivlin , proposes a 15% credit for up to $25,000 of interest paid on a mortgage associated with a principal residence — interest paid on home equity loans and second homes would be ineligible .

the tax credit would be refundable , which would ensure lower - income homeowners would be allowed to take advantage of the credit .

the proposed credit would be administered via mortgage lenders who would apply for the credit and transfer it to homeowners by lowering their interest payments in an amount equal to the credit .

in 2005 , president george w. bush's advisory panel on federal tax reform ( tax reform panel ) also proposed replacing the mortgage interest deduction with a credit .

specifically , the tax reform panel proposed a tax credit equal to 15% of mortgage interest paid .

under the proposal , the credit would be restricted to a taxpayer's primary residence .

the size of the mortgage eligible for claiming the interest credit would be limited to the average home price in the taxpayer's region .

a similar option was presented by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) in 2009 .

cbo's proposal called for a 15% credit for interest on mortgages of less than $500,000 .

