in the mid - 1990s , the u.s. bureau of the census ( census bureau ) began developing and testing a new means of data collection called a "rolling sample" or "continuous measurement" survey that became the american community survey ( acs ) .

implemented nationwide in 2005 and 2006 , the acs currently collects data from a representative sample of about 295,000 housing units a month , totaling about 3.54 million a year ( an increase from the 2005 to 2011 sample size of approximately 250,000 housing units monthly , totaling about 3 million annually ) .

the data are aggregated over time to produce large enough samples for reliable estimates , with longer cumulations of data necessary in less populous areas .

the bureau issues one - year estimates for the most populous areas , those with at least 65,000 people ; three - year estimates for areas with 20,000 or more people ; and five - year estimates for areas from the most populous to those having fewer than 20,000 residents .

although conducted separately from the once - a - decade count of the whole u.s. population , the acs is considered a part of the decennial census program because it replaced the census long form , which covered a representative sample of housing units every 10 years from 1940 through 2000 .

in the 2000 census , a set of basic questions on a short form went to most housing units ; a sample of units — about 17% overall — received a long form containing the short - form questions and additional questions that collected detailed data on socioeconomic and housing characteristics .

the data served myriad governmental , business , and research purposes and were used in program formulas that determined the annual allocation of various federal funds to states and localities .

acs data , which serve the same purposes but are much more current than the long - form estimates were , are used to distribute more than $450 billion a year in funding .

thus , the timeliness and quality of acs data are important for many reasons , but especially to promote the equitable allocation of scarce public resources .

discussing in 2001 how the acs evolved , the late charles h. alexander of the census bureau recalled that in the early 1990s [t]here was renewed congressional interest in intercensal characteristics data ... and a "continuous measurement" alternative to the census long form was considered as part of the research for census 2000 , starting in 1992 .

[the] rolling sample design was eventually proposed for this purpose because it provided flexibility in making estimates , as well as the potential for efficient data collection.... "continuous measurement" was later renamed the "american community survey.... " the proposed acs was not adopted for census 2000 , but after limited testing during 1996-1998 , the acs methodology was implemented in 36 counties for the years 1999-2001 , so that acs results could be compared to the 2000 census long form data .

there was also a large - scale test in 2000 , for a state - representative annual sample ... called the census 2000 supplementary survey , of collecting long - form data separately from the census , using the acs questionnaire .

he explained that [f]or the main acs objective , to replace the census long form as a source of detailed descriptive statistics , we plan to use 5-year acs cumulations , for a data product similar to traditional long form "summary files" .

this is the shortest time period for which the acs sampling error is judged to be reasonably close to that of the census long form .

all sizes and types of geographic areas would be included on these 5-year data files.... for individual areas , the most prominently published data will be one - year averages for areas greater than 65,000 population , and 3-year averages for areas greater than 20,000 , in addition to the 5-year averages for all areas .

the census bureau had two main reasons for replacing the long form with the acs .

first was the intention to increase public acceptance of , and response to , the decennial enumeration by decoupling the count of the whole population from the sample - survey part of the census .

the bureau strives , never entirely successfully , to achieve a complete count because it is a constitutional requirement for apportioning seats in the u.s. house of representatives , and because the data serve many other important national , state , and local purposes .

according to a 2008 government accountability office ( gao ) report on the projected mail response rate of 69% for the 2010 census , the bureau calculated that eliminating the long form and moving to a short - form - only census would add one percentage point to the 2000 census initial mail return rate of 65% .

the second reason for adopting the acs was to produce more timely information , which was particularly needed in program formulas used to distribute certain federal funds to states and localities .

detailed socioeconomic and housing data not only were collected just once a decade on the long form , but also were up to three years old by the time the bureau processed and released them .

in 1976 , congress authorized , but did not fund , a mid - decade census that would have provided more current data .

the acs could be viewed as substituting for the never - implemented mid - decade census as well as the long form .

before the acs became fully operational , in 2005 and 2006 , it underwent extensive development and testing , which began in the mid - 1990s .

the steps that led to full implementation are discussed briefly below .

in mid - 2006 , the bureau began releasing , on its american factfinder website , annual acs population and housing unit profiles for geographic areas — including congressional districts — with 65,000 or more people .

an estimate released in any given year is a period estimate , a cumulation of data collected in every month during the previous year .

thus , for example , the data issued in 2006 represent information gathered throughout 2005 , not at a particular point in 2005 .

the latest one - year estimates , for 2013 , were posted on september 18 , 2014 .

the first three - year period estimates , for areas with at least 20,000 people , became available in 2008 .

they represent data collected in 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 .

the second three - year set , released in 2009 , covers 2006 through 2008 .

the latest three - year estimates , for 2011 through 2013 , were released on october 23 , 2014 .

in areas with fewer than 20,000 people , generating an acs sample large enough to provide estimates similar in accuracy to long - form estimates requires , as noted at the beginning of this report , data collection over a five - year period .

the first five - year estimates , of data gathered from 2005 through 2009 , were issued in 2010 .

five - year data have been issued in every subsequent year , most recently on december 4 , 2014 , for 2009 through 2013 .

the many tables of acs data shown in american factfinder include , beside each estimate , the margin of sampling error associated with it .

as the bureau has explained , "a margin of error is the difference between an estimate and its upper or lower confidence bounds .

confidence bounds can be created by adding the margin of error to the estimate ( for an upper bound ) and subtracting the margin of error from the estimate ( for a lower bound ) . .

all published margins of error for the acs are based on a 90% confidence level .

that is , the data user can be 90% certain that the true value of an acs estimate lies between its upper and lower confidence bounds .

the bureau gave the following illustration using a one - year estimate from 2007 .

the estimate for the percentage of children under age 18 below the poverty level in mississippi "is 29.3% and the margin of error is + / - 1.2. .

the data user can be 90% "certain that the true value is between 28.1% and 30.5% .

this is calculated by first subtracting the margin of error ( 1.2% ) from the estimate ( 29.3% ) , giving the lower bound for the estimate ( 28.1% ) . .

then , to calculate the upper bound , the data user adds "the margin of error ( 1.2% ) to the estimate ( 29.3% ) , to get 30.5%. .

those who access acs data tables in american factfinder will see that the survey covers a broad array of topics , which are summarized in the appendix to this report .

the brief explanation or description after each topic was adapted from the acs questionnaire .

although — as the appendix indicates — the questionnaire is quite detailed , the items on it , like the predecessor long - form items , underwent a precise selection process .

a 2006 policy statement by the bureau pointed out that the paperwork reduction act of 1995 ( pra ) and its implementing regulations require federal agencies to obtain office of management and budget ( omb ) approval before collecting information from the public .

on the long form , the bureau could ask only for data that were mandatory: "a current federal law ... explicitly called for the use of decennial census data for a particular federal program" ; required: "it was unequivocally clear that a federal law ( or implementing regulation ) required the use of specific data and the decennial census was the historical or only source of data" ; or programmatic: "the data were necessary for census bureau operational needs. .

"in accordance with the pra," the policy statement continued , "the omb , in consultation with the census bureau , is responsible for approving new content for the acs. .

factors to be considered include frequency of data collection ; the level of geography needed ... and whether any other source of data would meet the requestor's need in lieu of ... the acs .

the census bureau recognizes and appreciates the interests of federal partners and stakeholders in the collection of data on the acs .

the fact that respondents' participation ... is mandatory requires that the omb will only approve , and the census bureau will only ask , necessary questions .

on a periodic basis , the census bureau will reassess the questions contained on the acs to ensure that this survey remains the appropriate vehicle for collection of these data .

the omb's responsibility under the pra requires that practical utility of the data be demonstrated and that the respondent burden be kept to a minimum .

as such , the census bureau will refer all agency requests for new content to the omb .

the bureau's website reproduces each item from the acs questionnaire and describes in general terms how the resulting data are used , including , as mentioned at the beginning of this report , in program formulas that determine the distribution of more than $450 billion a year in certain federal funds to states and localities .

below are several examples of these program uses , paraphrased from the bureau's descriptions .

various federal agencies use information about disability status to develop programs and distribute funds , such as grants based on the number of elderly people with physical and mental disabilities and funds for mass transit systems to provide facilities for the handicapped .

income data are part of the federal allocation formulas for many programs .

among other purposes , these data are used to allocate funds for home energy aid ; provide funds for housing assistance ; identify localities eligible for grants to promote economic recovery and conduct job - training programs ; provide local agencies with funds for food , health care , and legal services for the low - income elderly ; allocate funds for food , health care , and classes in meal planning to low - income women with children ; and distribute funds to counties and school districts to improve the education of children from low - income households .

data on veteran status are used to distribute funds to states and localities for veterans' employment and job training programs .

data on language are the basis for allocating grants to school districts to benefit children with limited english proficiency .

data about plumbing facilities are used as one variable in assessing the quality of housing stock ; an additional use is to allocate federal housing subsidies .

tension is inherent between the amount , quality , timeliness , and geographic coverage of data that the acs provides , and the public cost — in both dollars and respondent burden — of gathering the information .

larger samples can provide better data and better coverage across different levels of geography , but they are more expensive and involve more respondents .

gathering a large amount of data monthly and aggregating it over one - , three - , and five - year intervals yields detailed , relatively current information , but also at considerable cost .

by late 2002 , public complaints about the long form and congressional concern about the acs had prompted some in congress to inquire about the advisability of making responses to the latter survey voluntary .

shortly thereafter , the conferees on h.j.res .

2 , p.l .

108-7 , the consolidated appropriations resolution , 2003 , included $1 million for the bureau "to test the response rates of both a voluntary and a mandatory" acs because "sufficient information is not available to [weigh] the benefits" of each approach .

the conferees directed the commerce secretary to report to the appropriations committees as soon as the test results were available .

two reports about the test and its findings appear on the bureau's website .

the first one , issued in december 2003 , "was prepared on an expedited basis to meet congressional needs. .

a year later , the second report presented additional test results , with "greater detail for some of the measures included in the initial report. .

the discussion below focuses on the 2003 report .

as the acs is , the test of a voluntary acs ( hereinafter called the "acs test" ) was a mail - out , mail - back operation in which interviewers followed up with nonresponding households by telephone and , when necessary , personal visits .

the acs test studied four experimental treatments of mailed questionnaires , two instructing recipients that responses were mandatory and two treating responses as voluntary .

the 2003 report highlighted two main treatments , one mandatory and the other voluntary: the benchmark "2002 current mandatory approach" was "identical to the mail treatment used in prior years and provided a control to previous years" ; the "standard voluntary treatment" used "a standard survey approach" to explain that responses were not required .

the bureau's sample design for the test divided the universe of approximately 140,000 housing units into two strata , high - response areas ( hras ) and low - response areas ( lras ) , which were designated on the basis of "tract - level long form mail return rates from census 2000. .

data from the 2001 acs indicated that people in the lras were younger , more likely to be hispanic , more likely to be non - white , less likely to be college educated , and more likely to be renters than in the hras .

the lra stratum had more households with lower incomes , more that included "other relatives" or "nonrelatives," and more where languages "other than english" were spoken at home .

the acs test was conducted in march and april 2003 .

the tables in the report issued later that year compared the results from the standard voluntary treatment of test questionnaires ( hereinafter , the "2003 voluntary survey" ) with those from the mandatory acs for march and april 2002 ( hereinafter , the "2002 mandatory acs" ) , as discussed below .

key test results pertained to the mail cooperation rate .

it was 20.7 percentage points lower overall for the 2003 voluntary survey than for the 2002 mandatory acs ( 38.8% compared with 59.5% , a 34.8% decrease ) .

in the hras , the decrease was 22.2 percentage points ( 42.4% versus 64.6% , a 34.4% drop ) .

in the lras , the percentage - point decrease was less , 15.9 points , but the already low 2002 mail cooperation rate of 43.6% dropped to 27.7% in 2003 ( a 36.5% decrease ) .

lower mail cooperation in the 2003 voluntary survey meant a heavier workload of nonresponse follow - up by telephone .

moreover , cooperation with telephone interviewers was lower when it was optional ( 66.5% overall in 2003 versus 80.7% in 2002 , a 14.2 percentage - point or 17.6% decrease ) .

although the 2003 rates of telephone cooperation were almost identical in the hras and lras , cooperation decreased more from 2002 to 2003 in the hras ( by 15.6 percentage points or 19% , from 82.1% to 66.5% ) than in the lras ( by 10.2 percentage points or 13.4% , from 76.4% to 66.2% ) .

personal visits for nonresponse follow - up closed "some , but not all" of the gap in mail and telephone cooperation between 2002 and 2003 .

as with telephone nonresponse follow - up , the workload of personal visits increased in 2003 ; responses decreased when they were optional ; and the percentage - point decline in cooperation was greater in the hras than in the lras , suggesting that the voluntary approach had a greater negative effect on compliance in areas that usually tended to be cooperative .

overall response to personal visits was 89% in 2003 , down from 95.6% a year earlier ( a 6.6 percentage - point or 6.9% decline ) .

in the hras , the 2003 response rate was 88.2% versus 95.7% in 2002 ( a 7.5 percentage - point or 7.8% drop ) .

the comparable figures for the lras were 90.7% versus 95.6% ( a 4.9 percentage - point or 5.1% decrease ) .

the bureau observed that when acs responses were voluntary instead of required , respondents tended to shift "from participating by mail to participating by telephone or personal visit follow - up. .

because personal interviews are about 10 times more expensive than data collection by mail or telephone , survey costs rise as mail and telephone cooperation fall .

further , since the bureau selects a subsample of acs nonrespondents — not all nonrespondents — for personal visits , reliability of the data is a concern .

a decrease in the percentage of responses by mail and telephone means "fewer total interviews and thus , a reduction in reliability. .

if the survey became voluntary , the bureau concluded , maintaining the same data reliability as under the 2002 mandatory acs would necessitate increasing the planned annual sample size from about 3 million to an estimated 3.7 million housing units , at an additional cost of at least $59.2 million per year in fy2005 dollars .

the latter estimate reflected "direct data collection costs only" ; it did not include the expense of hiring and training more acs staff , and purchasing additional equipment .

the bureau subsequently , as of fy2011 , re - estimated the annual cost of a voluntary acs at $66.5 million .

two bills introduced in the 111 th congress sought to make almost all acs responses optional .

they received no action beyond committee and subcommittee referrals .

h.r .

3131 , to make participation in the american community survey voluntary , except with respect to certain basic questions , was introduced on july 8 , 2009 , by representative ted poe .

the bill would have prohibited applying any criminal penalty to people who refused or willfully neglected to answer acs inquiries , except those about the respondent's name and contact information , the date of the response , and the number of residents at the respondent's address .

h.r .

5046 , the census clarification and privacy act , was introduced on april 15 , 2010 , by representative todd akin .

the measure called for a statement , on the front of the decennial census and acs questionnaires , that the respondent was constitutionally required only to provide the number of people living at the residence , and that all other answers were optional .

the bill also would have made penalties applicable only for refusing or willfully neglecting to answer this question on any census or survey conducted under title 13 , united states code , sections 141 or 193 , or for falsely answering any question on any census or survey conducted under these sections .

in the 112 th congress , two bills would have made almost all acs responses optional .

a third , appropriations , bill passed the house with two amendments pertinent to the acs .

one would have prohibited funds from being used to enforce a penalty for acs nonresponse ; the other would have defunded the survey .

h.r .

931 , to make participation in the american community survey voluntary , except with respect to certain basic questions , was introduced on march 3 , 2011 , by representative poe .

the bill , which was the same as h.r .

3131 from the 111 th congress , was referred to the house committee on the judiciary , subcommittee on the constitution , and subcommittee on crime , terrorism , and homeland security ; and to the house committee on oversight and government reform , subcommittee on health care , district of columbia , census , and the national archives .

this subcommittee held a hearing on march 6 , 2012 , about the pros and cons of a voluntary acs .

no further action occurred on h.r .

931 .

s. 3079 , companion legislation to h.r .

931 , was introduced by senator rand paul on may 10 , 2012 , and referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , where no further action occurred .

before the house passed h.r .

5326 , the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act , 2013 , on may 10 , 2012 , it adopted two amendments that would have affected the acs .

the poe amendment , which was similar to h.r .

931 , would have prohibited the use of funds to enforce a penalty for refusing or willfully neglecting to answer the questions on the acs .

an amendment offered by representative daniel webster would have prohibited the use of funds to conduct the survey .

the senate did not take up h.r .

5326 or s. 2323 , its fy2013 cjs appropriations bill , which had no provisions similar to the poe and webster amendments .

h.j.res .

117 , p.l .

112-175 , the continuing appropriations resolution , 2013 , became law on september 28 , 2012 , without reference to the acs .

it provided funding for cjs entities until the march 26 , 2013 , enactment of h.r .

933 , p.l .

113-6 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 , which funded cjs entities for the remainder of fy2013 .

although p.l .

113-6 did not mention the acs , the senate explanatory statement noted that language in the two house amendments to h.r .

5326 , from the 112 th congress , "prohibiting funding for the acs or prohibiting penalties for non - compliance with the acs" was not adopted .

the census bureau , however , was "directed to provide a report to the committees on appropriations no later than 120 days after enactment of this act on ... the steps being taken to ensure that the acs is conducted as efficiently and unobtrusively as possible. .

the department of commerce was "directed to acquire an independent analysis of the costs and benefits of making compliance with the acs voluntary .

the results of this analysis shall be provided ... to the committees on appropriations no later than 180 days after enactment of this act. .

three bills that would have affected the acs were introduced in the 113 th congress , but saw no action beyond committee referrals and one subcommittee referral .

two companion proposals that resembled h.r .

3131 and h.r .

5046 from the 111 th congress and h.r .

931 , s. 3079 , and the poe amendment to h.r .

5326 in the 112 th congress would have made all but a few acs responses optional .

a third bill would have prohibited the commerce secretary and the census bureau from conducting any surveys , including the acs , and almost all censuses .

the house passed a fourth , appropriations , bill with an amendment that would have prohibited using funds to enforce any penalties under title 13 , united states code , section 221 , concerning the acs .

h.r .

1078 , to make participation in the american community survey voluntary , except with respect to certain basic questions , and for other purposes , was introduced on march 12 , 2013 , by representative poe , and referred to the house committee on oversight and government reform .

the legislation would have made optional most responses to "any survey authorized under" title 13 , u nited s tates code , section 193 .

the acs , as previously mentioned , is conducted under this section and section 141 .

h.r .

1078 would have required responses only to inquiries about the respondent's name and contact information , the date of the response , and the "number of people living or staying at the same address. .

the bill further specified that except for having to provide this information , "no person may be fined or otherwise compelled to answer questions in connection with the survey ... which is commonly referred to as the 'american community survey.' .

s. 530 , the same as h.r .

1078 , was introduced on the same day by senator paul and referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

h.r .

1638 , the census reform act of 2013 , was introduced on april 18 , 2013 , by representative jeff duncan .

it was referred on that date to the house committees on oversight and government reform , agriculture , and appropriations .

on may 3 , 2013 , the bill was referred to the agriculture committee's subcommittee on department operations , oversight , and nutrition .

h.r .

1638 would have repealed the authority of the commerce secretary and the census bureau to conduct the acs and any other surveys or censuses except the decennial census .

this census would have been limited to collecting "only ... information necessary for the tabulation of total population by states. .

the censuses that would have ended if h.r .

1638 had been enacted included the censuses of agriculture and governments as well as the economic census .

h.r .

4660 , the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act , 2015 , passed the house on may 30 , 2014 , with an amendment offered by representative poe that would have prohibited the use of funds to enforce title 13 , united states code , section 221 , "with respect to the american community survey. .

section 221 ( a ) provides for a penalty for refusing or willfully neglecting to answer questions on censuses or surveys such as the acs , and section 221 ( b ) provides for a penalty for giving false answers .

the poe amendment became section 545 of the house - passed legislation .

the senate did not consider h.r .

4660 or pass s. 2437 , its fy2015 cjs appropriations bill .

cjs entities , along with most other federal entities , are funded through september 30 , 2015 , under h.r .

83 , p.l .

113-235 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 , which did not adopt section 545 of h.r .

4660 .

noted below are several possible approaches for congress regarding the acs , given that the survey , fully implemented since 2005 and 2006 , supplanted the long form in the 2010 census .

congress could support the status quo , providing oversight and funding of the acs into the future .

oversight issues might include acs methodology and any advisable improvements in it .

three other related issues are how large the acs sample should be to ensure reliability of the data , particularly for small areas , as the u.s. population continues to grow ; what funding levels would be necessary to achieve and maintain such a sample size ; and what funding levels would be feasible , in view of federal budgetary constraints that could continue indefinitely .

two bills from the 111 th congress , three from the 112 th congress , and three from the 113 th congress would have made completing the acs questionnaire optional for respondents .

another congressional approach — because the test results discussed previously indicate that a voluntary survey might well lower response rates and raise costs — might involve inquiring into the extent and sources of public dissatisfaction with the acs and exploring remedies short of voluntary responses .

possible questions to consider are how to explain more effectively why acs data are collected and how best to engage the public in nonresponse follow - up .

congress could assess with the bureau whether an advertising campaign , perhaps modeled on that for the 2010 census , might heighten awareness of the survey and its value to states and localities .

a related consideration is whether the bureau might enhance the appeal of the acs by identifying on its website every federal program whose formula for distributing funds uses acs data and what the data are , together with estimates of the funds provided each year to specific states and localities on the basis of the program formulas .

various members of congress from time to time have advised the bureau to use the internet as one means of collecting decennial census - related data .

in july 18 , 2012 , congressional testimony , then - bureau director robert m. groves announced the bureau's intention to offer an internet response option for the 2020 census and , beginning in january 2013 , for the acs .

accordingly , as noted earlier in this report , the bureau now sends a letter notifying most households selected to receive the acs that they can access and complete the survey online .

congress could review with the bureau the effects of this option on acs response rates , survey costs , and public perception of the acs .

congress could examine alternatives to the acs .

if the past is an accurate predictor , returning to an approximately 17% sample of u.s. housing units via the long form would depress decennial census response rates somewhat and complicate the count ; this reprise also would generate less timely data than does the acs .

congress could set as a priority research into whether administrative records might substitute for the acs .

possible points to consider would be the operational feasibility of this approach , its expense , the quality and completeness of administrative records , privacy concerns , and acceptability to the public .

the acs is arguably an efficient means of gathering data for many purposes .

congress could direct that the bureau and other federal statistical agencies expedite research into whether the acs could replace certain other surveys .

this research might involve identifying duplicative data collections , if any ; estimating what savings , in both money and respondent burden , might occur from having the acs substitute for these collections ; and assessing any disadvantages of replacing them .

the topics covered by the acs are summarized below .

following each topic is a brief explanation or description of it , adapted from the acs questionnaire .

demographic characteristics age: each person's age and date of birth sex: male or female hispanic origin: whether a person considers himself or herself to be of hispanic or latino ethnicity ; if so , whether the person is mexican , puerto rican , cuban , argentinean , colombian , salvadoran , etc .

race: a person's self - classification as white ; black or african american ; american indian or alaska native , with the tribal name specified ; asian or pacific islander , with the specific group , such as chinese or samoan , named ; belonging to more than one of these groups ; or belonging to some other race , with the name specified social characteristics ancestry: a self - classification based on the country from which each person , or the person's parents or ancestors , came ; examples of ancestries include jamaican , korean , and ukrainian citizenship status: whether a person is a u.s. citizen , either by birth or by naturalization disability status: whether a person has various physical or mental impairments , such as serious difficulty hearing , seeing , walking , dressing , bathing , concentrating , or remembering educational attainment: the highest degree or level of schooling that a person has completed fertility: whether a woman gave birth to any children in the past 12 months field of degree: the major field of study for a bachelor's degree grandparents as caregivers: whether a person has any grandchildren under age 18 living with him or her ; if so , whether the person is responsible for their needs , and how long the person has had this responsibility language: whether a person speaks a language other than english at home ; if so , what the other language is and how well the person speaks english marital status and marital history: whether a person currently is married , divorced , widowed , etc .

 ; whether the person was married , divorced , or widowed within the past 12 months ; how many times the person has been married ; and the year when he or she last married place of birth: either the u.s. state or the place outside the 50 states relationship: the relationship of each person listed on the acs form to the person filling out the form ; examples are husband or wife , roomer or boarder , and foster child school enrollment: whether a person attended public or private school or college in the last three months ; if so , the grade or level residence one year ago and migration: whether a person moved from one residence to another in the past year ; if so , what his or her previous address was veterans: whether and when a person served on active duty in the u.s. military , whether the person has a service - connected disability rating ; if so , what it is year of entry: the year when a person born outside the united states came to live in this country economic characteristics class of worker: whether a person employed during the past 12 months worked for a private for - profit company , a private nonprofit organization , or federal , state , or local government ; was self - employed ; or was an unpaid worker for a family business or farm labor force status: whether a person worked for pay during the past week or was on layoff from a job , whether the person was actively looking for work in the past four weeks , and when the person last worked health insurance coverage: whether a person currently is covered by any health insurance plan , such as through a current or former employer , medicaid , or medicare income: income in the past 12 months from various sources , including wages and salary , interest and dividends , and public assistance industry: the type of activity that occurred where a person was employed during the past 12 months , such as manufacturing , retail trade , or construction occupation: the kind of work a person did during the past 12 months , such as nursing , personnel management , or accounting place of work and journey to work: the location where a person worked in the past week ; what mode of transportation the person used to commute to work ; whether the person commuted with other people in an automobile , a truck , or a van ; when the person usually left home to go to work ; and how many minutes the commute took poverty: determined from income data work status: the number of weeks a person worked during the past year , and the number of hours he or she usually worked each week housing characteristics home heating fuel: the fuel that is used most for heating the house , apartment , or mobile home kitchen and plumbing facilities: whether the housing unit has a sink with a faucet , hot and cold running water , a stove or range , a refrigerator , a flush toilet , and a bathtub or shower owner statistics: the owner's mortgage payments ; condominium fees ; real estate taxes ; payments for utilities ; and payments for fire , hazard , or flood insurance ownership and use of computers and use of the internet by household members ; how they access the internet renter statistics: the renter's payments for rent and utilities rooms and bedrooms: the number of rooms in the housing unit , excluding bathrooms ; the number of bedrooms sales of agricultural products from the property in the past 12 months supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly the food stamp program ) : whether , in the past 12 months , anyone in the household received benefits from the program telephone service available: whether the housing unit has telephone , including cell - phone , service tenure: whether the housing unit is rented or owned , with or without a mortgage , by someone in the household units in structure: whether the housing structure is a mobile home , a single - family detached house , a building with two apartments , etc .

value of home: the estimated dollar value of the home , the number of acres on which it is located , and whether the property includes a business or medical office vehicles available: the number of motor vehicles kept at the home for household members' use year householder moved into unit: the year the person in whose name the housing unit is rented or owned moved into the unit year structure built: the year the housing structure was buil .

