at the nato lisbon summit ( november 19-20 , 2010 ) , alliance heads of state approved a plan to build a territorial ballistic missile defense capability and integrate it with a u.s. initiative to deploy a european - based missile defense system .

nato officials stated that this new alliance capability , which has been under consideration for nearly a decade , is expected to cost approximately 200 million euros ( $260 million ) , borne among all 28 member states , over the next 10 years .

other analysts , however , project a much higher cost .

congress has taken an active interest in missile defense , and there has largely been bipartisan support for the bush and obama administrations' plans to guard against the threat of iranian ballistic missiles through the deployment of radar and interceptors in europe .

nato's adoption of such a capability , and its close integration with the u.s .

phased adaptive approach , also will likely raise several issues that members of congress may address , including command and control protocols , technology transfer , participation by russia , and the extent to which european allies contribute to the common effort .

this report provides background on this issue , including steps taken toward missile defense cooperation between the alliance and russia .

the united states has been developing missile defense systems for decades .

the focus at the early stages of the reagan administration's program was to protect against nuclear - armed ballistic missiles from the soviet union .

over the past decade , the aim has been to neutralize the emerging ballistic missile threat from rogue states such as north korea and iran .

in the case of the former , the pentagon deployed interceptors in alaska and california .

in response to iran's continued development of its ballistic missile program , the bush administration determined that a so - called "third site" should be established on the european continent , and in 2002 began informal discussions and consultations with nato allied states in central and eastern european nato allies .

in addition , the bush administration sought to have a limited missile defense system endorsed by nato and adopted as an alliance capability .

in january 2007 , the bush administration launched formal negotiations with poland and the czech republic on a plan to deploy by 2013 a ground - based mid - course defense ( gmd ) element in europe as part of the global u.s .

ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) capability .

the system , intended to guard against a possible ballistic missile threat from iran , would have included 10 interceptors in poland , an x - band tracking radar in the czech republic , and another radar that would have been deployed closer to iran .

this proposed plan raised foreign policy challenges in europe ; some allies objected that the proposal unnecessarily provoked russia , which strongly criticized the plan , while others indicated that washington's bilateral approach undermined nato solidarity .

in mid - 20008 , the united states negotiated and signed agreements with poland and the czech republic , but for various reasons those accords were not ratified by the end of the bush administration .

in september 2009 , based on new threat assessments , the obama administration announced plans to cancel the bush plan and instead deploy a regional bmd capability in europe .

in the near term , this new system , called the phased adaptive approach ( paa ) , would be based on the expansion of existing bmd sensors and interceptors , such as the navy's aegis bmd system .

although the defense department has expressed high confidence in the capabilities of existing systems such as the aegis bmd , some observers remain skeptical about the prospective effectiveness of the paa .

the administration states that the paa will continue to evolve , and will be expanded over the next decade to include bmd capabilities against medium - and long - range iranian ballistic missiles .

the administration also expressed hope that the paa would be adopted by nato as an alliance - wide bmd capability , and that russia would play a role .

the romanian and polish governments agreed to host facilities for the new system ; plans currently call for the installation of land - based interceptors in the two countries by 2015 and 2018 , respectively .

turkey has been mentioned as a possible site for u.s. missile defense radar .

russia , although initially positive over the cancellation of the bush administration's plan , later found reason to criticize the obama plan , reviving the argument that it would compromise russia's nuclear forces .

regarding possible nato cooperation , russian foreign minister sergei lavrov stated in january 2010 that russia had "told the u.s. and nato that it is necessary to start everything from scratch — to jointly analyze the origin and types of missile proliferation risks and threats. .

in the ensuing months , however , the russian government appeared to take a more open stance toward the program .

in addition , analysts maintain that eventual russian acceptance of — and possible participation in — the paa system would be an important consideration for some allied governments as they decided whether to accept adoption of an alliance territorial missile defense .

the house fy2011 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

5136 ) would place restrictions on the administration's paa comparable to those placed on the bush plan .

among other things , h.r .

5136 would limit the procurement or deployment in europe of u.s. defenses against medium - and long - range ballistic missiles until the secretary of defense certifies that the proposed technology is operationally effective and based on realistic flight testing .

it would further limit the use of funds for bmd deployment until the host government has ratified any necessary agreements and until 45 days after congress has received a report on alternative bmd systems for europe required by the fy2010 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

111-84 ) .

h.r .

5136 would also declare it to be u.s. policy that future versions of the standard missile ( sm ) , when deployed to protect europe under the paa , would also be able to intercept long - range ballistic missiles launched from iran at the united states ( section 224 ) .

the house bill would also express the sense of congress that the paa is not restricted by new start , the u.s. - russian treaty designed to reduce further the two sides' strategic offensive nuclear weapons .

the senate fy2011 national defense authorization act ( s. 3454 ) similarly declares it the sense of congress that a future version of the standard missile be able to intercept long - range iranian ballistic missiles launched at the united states .

the bill also declares that new start imposes no restrictions on developing or deploying effective u.s. bmd systems .

the senate defense authorization bill was scheduled for floor debate in late november 2010 .

senator kyl proposed an amendment ( s.amdt .

4634 ) that would set u.s. policy toward the phased adaptive approach ( paa ) .

this amendment could be viewed as complementing existing u.s. law ( the national missile defense act of 1999 ; p.l .

106-38 ; 113 stat .

205 ; 10 u.s.c .

2431 ) , which guides development and deployment of an effective national missile defense ( nmd ) against limited ballistic missile attacks on the territory of the united states .

in general , s.amdt .

4634 would largely support current administration plans and objectives to evolve bmd coverage of nato europe and the united states over the course of this decade , as well as supporting associated u.s. arms control and foreign policy objectives .

on december 22 , 2010 , the house and senate armed services committees approved a joint explanatory statement , the practical equivalent of a conference report .

the explanatory statement includes: the senate provision that expresses the sense of congress on bmd issues , particularly related to the european paa ; an amendment to the house provision clarifying that limits on the availability of funds for construction and deployment apply to land - based interceptors of the european paa until any host nation approves the required basing and deployment agreements , and a provision granting a national security waiver authority to the secretary of defense regarding those limitations .

the statement further notes this provision is not intended to impede or delay the successful implementation of the european paa , nor is it intended to limit the production of missile defense interceptors for ground - and flight - testing , or production validation ; the house provision that limits funds for construction and deployment of the land - based portion of the european paa until after congress receives an independent assessment of the operational and cost - effectiveness of the paa as required by p.l .

111-84 ; and a provision that authorizes a shared early warning program with the czech republic .

president obama signed the fy2011 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

6523 ) into law ( p.l .

111-383 ) on january 7 , 2011 .

