this report provides background data on u.s. arms sales agreements with and deliveries to its major purchasers during calendar years 2002-2009 .

it provides the total dollar values of u.s. arms agreements with its top five purchasers in five specific regions of the world for the periods 2002-2005 , 2006-2009 , and for 2009 , and the total dollar values of u.s. arms deliveries to its top five purchasers in five specific regions for those same years .

in addition , the report provides a listing of the total dollar values of u.s. arms agreements with and deliveries to its top 10 purchasers for the periods 2002-2005 , 2006-2009 , and for 2009 .

the data are official , unclassified , united states defense department figures compiled by the defense security cooperation agency ( dsca ) , unless otherwise indicated .

the data have been restructured for this report by dsca from a fiscal year format to a calendar year format .

thus a year in this report covers the period from january 1 to december 31 , and not the fiscal year period from october 1 to september 30 .

the following regional tables ( tables 1-5 ) provide the total dollar values of all u.s. defense articles and defense services sold to the top five purchasers in each region indicated for the calendar year ( s ) noted .

these values represent the total value of all government - to - government agreements actually concluded between the united states and the foreign purchaser under the foreign military sales ( fms ) program during the calendar year ( s ) indicated .

in table 6 , the total dollar values of all u.s. defense articles and defense services sold to the top 10 purchasers worldwide are provided for calendar year period noted .

all totals are expressed as current u.s. dollars .

the following regional tables ( tables 7-11 ) provide the total dollar values of all u.s. defense articles and defense services delivered to the top five purchasers in each region indicated for the calendar year ( s ) noted for all deliveries under the u.s. foreign military sales ( fms ) program .

these values represent the total value of all government - to - government deliveries actually concluded between the united states and the foreign purchaser under the fms program during the calendar year ( s ) indicated .

commercial licensed deliveries totals are excluded , due to concerns regarding the accuracy of existing data .

in table 12 , the total dollar values of all u.s. defense articles and defense services actually delivered to the top 10 purchasers worldwide is provided .

the delivery totals are for fms deliveries concluded for the calendar year ( s ) noted .

