conceptually and analytically , it seems critical to make a distinction between what the rule requires of members and what it does not .

specifically , this requires understanding the difference between "a statement of constitutional authority to act" and "an analysis of the constitutionality" of a proposed bill or joint resolution .

these are two separate and discrete questions that require different types of analysis and , most importantly , may produce different results .

the house rule is asking the member to identify the provision or clause of the constitution that grants congress the authority to enact the bill that is being introduced .

phrased another way , the question that the house rule is arguably asking of members is , what part of the constitution gives congress the power to act in the manner being proposed .

the rule does not appear to be asking whether the specifics of what the member is proposing in the bill are consistent with the constitution .

that is a separate , often times much more complex inquiry .

for example , legislation intending to prohibit the interstate sale and distribution of material related to animal cruelty or depictions of child pornography is arguably within congress's authority to act under article i , ยง8 , clause 3 , commonly referred to as the commerce clause .

thus , to comply with the house rule , a statement accompanying the bill identifying the commerce clause as the basis for congress's authority to act appears to fully satisfy the member's obligation .

nothing in the statement required by the rule , however , speaks to whether the particular components of the legislation are in fact constitutionally permissible in light of provisions in the constitution that may place limitations or disabilities on congress's authority to act .

although congress may have the requisite constitutional authority to regulate the interstate sale of material related to animal cruelty or child pornography , reaching that conclusion in no way requires the consideration of whether the first amendment constrains or disables congress's authority with respect to these materials .

the consideration of constitutional limitations or disabilities on congress's authority , such as the first , ninth , and tenth amendments , appears to be outside the scope of the house rule .

the house rule arguably only requires the member to state the constitutional basis for authority to act , not whether the action is constitutionally permissible in light of other potentially disabling or limiting provisions .

another factor potentially complicating analysis under the rule is the likelihood that congress may be able to rely on multiple constitutional provisions for authority to enact a proposed bill .

the recently enacted patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) is an example of such a statute .

had this rule been in effect when ppaca was introduced , the constitutional authority cited could arguably have been the commerce clause , article i , ยง8 , clause 3 , as ppaca attempts to regulate the national market for heath insurance and health care .

ppaca , however , in addition to regulating interstate commerce , also contains language that can be authorized by other provisions of the constitution .

for instance , ppaca , in several sections , provides appropriated funds to agencies to carry out the requirements of the act .

appropriations are authorized by article i , ยง9 , clause 7 , not the commerce clause .

additionally , ppaca contains several sections that provide for "fast track" consideration of certain types of legislation by the senate .

legislation governing the internal rules and procedures utilized by congress is authorized by article i , ยง5 , clause 2 , not the commerce clause .

given the analytical and conceptual distinction between congress's constitutional authority to act and an act's constitutionality , the possibility of conflicting results is clear .

again , ppaca can serve as an illustrative example .

the fact that there is arguably a basis for constitutional authority to act under the commerce clause in no way impacts an analysis of whether the specific provisions within ppaca are legitimate exercises of congress's power under the commerce clause .

as a result , there has been litigation regarding ppaca's individual mandate , which , to date , has resulted in conflicting judicial decisions with respect to the mandate's constitutionality .

although there are thousands of bills introduced in the house of representatives each congress , they can be broadly categorized into selected groupings for purposes of discussing possible bases of constitutional authority .

this section of the report will discuss four such broad categories of legislation: authorization legislation ; appropriations legislation ; legislation that places conditions on the availability of federal funds ; and , finally , legislation that repeals existing laws and / or programs .

this is not intended to be an exhaustive discussion of types of legislation , but is provided to illustrate the analytical framework for determining proposed legislation's constitutional authority .

as discussed above , nothing in this discussion considers or discusses the constitutionality of specific proposed legislation .

article i , section 9 , clause 7 no money shall be drawn from the treasury but in consequence of appropriations made by law ; and a regular statement and account of the receipts and expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time .

article i , section 8 , clause 12 to raise and support armies , but no appropriation of money to that use shall be for a longer term than two years .

article i , section 8 , clause 4 the congress shall have power *** to establish an uniform rule of naturalization , and uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies throughout the united states .

article i , section 8 , clause 3 the congress shall have power *** to regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states , and with the indian tribes .

article i , section 2 , clause 3 the actual enumeration shall be made within three years after the first meeting of the congress of the united states , and within every subsequent term of ten years , in such manner as they shall by law direct .

the number of representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty thousand , but each state shall have at least one representative ; and until such enumeration shall be made , the state of new hampshire shall be entitled to chuse three , massachusetts eight , rhode island and providence plantations one , connecticut , five , new york six , new jersey four , pennsylvania eight , delaware one , maryland six , virginia ten , north carolina five , south carolina five , and georgia three .

fourteenth amendment , section 5 section 1: all persons born or naturalized in the united states , and subject to the jurisdiction thereof , are citizens of the united states and the state wherein they reside .

no state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the united states ; nor shall any state deprive any person of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law ; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws .

**** section 5: the congress shall have power to enforce , by appropriate legislation , the provisions of this article .

article i , section 8 , clause 3 the congress shall have power *** to regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states , and with the indian tribes .

article i , section 8 , clause 3 the congress shall have power *** to regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states , and with the indian tribes .

article v the congress , whenever two thirds of both houses shall deem it necessary , shall propose amendments to this constitution , or , on the application of the legislatures of two thirds of the several states , shall call a convention for proposing amendments , which in either case , shall be valid to all intents and purposes , as part of this constitution , when ratified by the legislatures of three fourths of the several states or by conventions in three fourths thereof , as the one or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the congress ; provided that no amendment which may be made prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight shall in any manner affect the first and fourth clauses in the ninth section of the first article ; and that no state , without its consent , shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the senate .

article i , section 8 , clause 8 the congress shall have power *** to promote the progress of science and useful arts , by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries .

article i , section 8 , clause 5 *** to provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current coin of the united states .

article i , section 8 , clause 6 the congress shall have power *** to coin money , regulate the value thereof , and of foreign coin , and fix the standard of weights and measures .

article i , section 8 , clause 2 the congress shall have power *** to borrow money on the credit of the united states .

article i , section 8 , clause 17 congress shall have power *** to exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever , over such district ( not exceeding ten miles square ) as may , by cession of particular states , and the acceptance of congress , become the seat of government of the united states , and to exercise like authority over all places purchased by the consent of the legislature of the state in which the same shall be , for the erection of forts , magazines , arsenals , dock - yards , and other needful buildings .

fourteenth amendment , section 5 section 1: all persons born or naturalized in the united states , and subject to the jurisdiction thereof , are citizens of the united states and the state wherein they reside .

no state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the united states ; nor shall any state deprive any person of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law ; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws .

**** section 5: the congress shall have power to enforce , by appropriate legislation , the provisions of this article .

twenty - fourth amendment , section 2 section 1: the right of citizens of the united states to vote in any primary or other election for president or vice president , for electors for president or vice president , or for senator or representative in congress , shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or any state by reason of failure to pay any poll tax or other tax .

section 2: the congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation .

article i , section 4 , clause 1 the times , places and manner of holding elections for senators and representatives , shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof ; but congress may at any time make or alter such regulations , except as to the place of chusing senators .

article i , section 9 , clause 8 no title of nobility shall be granted by the united states: and no person holding any office of profit or trust under them , shall , without the consent of the congress accept of any present , emolument , office , or title , of any kind whatever , from any king , prince , or foreign state .

fourteenth amendment , section 5 section 1: all persons born or naturalized in the united states , and subject to the jurisdiction thereof , are citizens of the united states and the state wherein they reside .

no state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the united states ; nor shall any state deprive any person of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law ; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws .

**** section 5: the congress shall have power to enforce , by appropriate legislation , the provisions of this article .

article i , section 8 , clause 9 the congress shall have power *** to constitute tribunals inferior to the supreme court .

article iii , section 1 the judicial power of the united states , shall be vested in one supreme court , and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to time ordain and establish .

the judges , both of the supreme and inferior courts , shall hold their offices during good behaviour , and shall , at stated times , receive for their services , a compensation , which shall not be diminished during their continuance in office .

article iii , section 2 in all cases affecting ambassadors , other public ministers and consuls , and those in which a state shall be a party , the supreme court shall have original jurisdiction .

in all other cases before mentioned , the supreme court shall have appellate jurisdiction , both as to law and fact , with such exceptions , and under such regulations as the congress shall make .

article iv , section 1 full faith and credit shall be given in each state to the public acts , records , and judicial proceedings of every other state .

and the congress may by general laws prescribe the manner in which such acts , records , and proceedings shall be proved , and the effect thereof .

article i , section 9 , clause 2 the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended , unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it .

article i , section 8 , clause 4 the congress shall have power *** to establish an uniform rule of naturalization , and uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies throughout the united states .

article i , section 8 , clause 3 the congress shall have power *** to regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states , and with the indian tribes .

article i , section 8 , clause 3 the congress shall have power *** to regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states , and with the indian tribes .

article i , section 8 , clause 11 the congress shall have power *** to declare war , grant letters of marque and reprisal , and make rules concerning captures on land and water .

article i , section 8 , clause 14 to make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces .

article i , section 8 , clause 16 the congress shall have power *** to provide for organizing , arming , and disciplining , the militia , and for governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the united states , reserving to the states respectively , the appointment of the officers , and the authority of training the militia according to the discipline prescribed by congress .

article i , section 8 , clause 15 the congress shall have power *** to provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the union , suppress insurrections and repel invasions .

article i , section 8 , clause 13 the congress shall have power *** to provide and maintain a navy .

article i , section 8 , clause 18 the congress shall have power *** to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers , and all other powers vested by the constitution in the government of the united states , or in any department or officer thereof .

article i , section 8 , clause 8 the congress shall have power *** to promote the progress of science and useful arts , by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoverie .

article i , section 8 , clause 10 the congress shall have power *** to define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas , and offences against the law of nations .

article i , section 8 , clause 7 the congress shall have power *** to establish post offices and post roads .

article ii , section 1 , clause 6 in case of the removal of the president from office , or of his death , resignation , or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office , the same shall devolve on the vice president , and the congress may by law provide for the case of removal , death , resignation or inability , both of the president and vice president declaring what officer shall then act as president , and such officer shall act accordingly until the disability be removed , or a president shall be elected .

article ii , section 1 , clause 4 the congress may determine the time of chusing the electors , and the day on which they shall give their votes ; which day shall be the same throughout the united states .

twenty - third amendment , section 2 section 1: the district constituting the seat of government of the united states shall appoint in such manner as the congress may direct: a number of electors of president and vice president equal to the whole number of senators and representatives in congress to which the district would be entitled if it were a state , but in no event more than the least populous state ; they shall be in addition to those appointed by the states , but they shall be considered , for the purposes of the election of president and vice president , to be electors appointed by a state ; and they shall meet in the district and perform such duties as provided by the twelfth article of amendment .

section 2: the congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation .

twentieth amendment , section 4 **** section 4: the congress may by law provide for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the house of representatives may choose a president whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them , and for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the senate may choose a vice president whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them .

twenty - fifth amendment , section 4 section 1: in case of the removal of the president from office or of his death or resignation , the vice president shall become president .

section 2: whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the vice president , the president shall nominate a vice president who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both houses of congress .

section 3: whenever the president transmits to the president pro tempore of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office , and until he transmits to them a written declaration to the contrary , such powers and duties shall be discharged by the vice president as acting president .

section 4:whenever the vice president and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as congress may by law provide , transmit to the president pro tempore of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives their written declaration that the president is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office , the vice president shall immediately assume the powers and duties of the office as acting president .

thereafter , when the president transmits to the president pro tempore of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives his written declaration that no inability exists , he shall resume the powers and duties of his office unless the vice president and a majority of either the principle officers of the executive department or of such other body as congress may by law provide , transmit within four days to the president pro tempore of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives their written declaration that the president is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office .

thereupon congress shall decide the issue , assembling within forty - eight hours for that purpose if not in session .

if the congress within twenty - one days after receipt of the latter written declaration , or , if congress is not in session within twenty - one days after congress is required to assemble , determines by two - thirds vote of both houses that the president is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office , the vice president shall continue to discharge the same as acting president ; otherwise , the president shall resume the powers and duties of his office .

fourteenth amendment , section 5 section 1: no state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the united states ; nor shall any state deprive any person of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law ; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws .

**** section 5: the congress shall have power to enforce , by appropriate legislation , the provisions of this article .

article iv , section 3 , clause 2 the congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united states ; and nothing in this constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the united states , or of any particular state .

article iv , section 4 the united states shall guarantee to every state in this union a republican form of government , and shall protect each of them against invasion ; and on application of the legislature , or of the executive ( when the legislature cannot be convened ) against domestic violence .

article i , section 5 , clause 2 each house may determine the rules of its proceedings , punish its members for disorderly behaviour , and , with the concurrence of two thirds , expel a member .

thirteenth amendment , section 2 sections 1: neither slavery nor involuntary servitude , except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted , shall exist within the united states , or any place subject to their jurisdiction .

section 2: congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation .

article i , section 8 , clause 1 the congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes , duties , imposts and excises , to pay the debts and provide for the common defence and general welfare of the united states ; but all duties , imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the united states .

article iv , section 3 , clause 1 new states may be admitted by the congress into this union ; but no new state shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other state ; nor any state be formed by the junction of two or more states , or parts of states , without the consent of the legislatures of the states concerned was well as of the congress .

article i , section 10 , clause 2 no state shall , without the consent of the congress , lay any imposts or duties on imports or exports , except what may be absolutely necessary for executing it's inspection laws: and the net produce of all duties and imposts , laid by any state on imports or exports , shall be for the use of the treasury of the united states ; and all such laws shall be subject to the revision and control of the congress .

article i , section 10 , clause 3 no state shall , without the consent of congress , lay any duty of tonnage , keep troops , or ships of war in time of peace , enter into any agreement or compact with another state , or with a foreign power , or engage in war , unless actually invaded , or in such imminent danger as will not admit of delay .

article i , section 10 , clause 3 no state shall , without the consent of congress , lay any duty of tonnage , keep troops , or ships of war in time of peace , enter into any agreement or compact with another state , or with a foreign power , or engage in war , unless actually invaded , or in such imminent danger as will not admit of delay .

article i , section 10 , clause 3 no state shall , without the consent of congress , lay any duty of tonnage , keep troops , or ships of war in time of peace , enter into any agreement or compact with another state , or with a foreign power , or engage in war , unless actually invaded , or in such imminent danger as will not admit of delay .

article i , section 8 , clause 1 the congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes , duties , imposts and excises , to pay the debts and provide for the common defence and general welfare of the united states ; but all duties , imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the united states .

article i , section 8 , clause 1 the congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes , duties , imposts and excises , to pay the debts and provide for the common defence and general welfare of the united states ; but all duties , imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the united states .

sixteenth amendment the congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on incomes , from whatever source derived , without apportionment among the several states , and without regard to any census or enumeration .

article iv , section 3 , clause 2 the congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united states ; and nothing in this constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the united states , or of any particular state .

article iii , section 3 , clause 2 the congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason , but no attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood , or forfeiture except during the life of the person attainted .

twenty - sixth amendment , section 2 section 1: the right of citizens of the united states , who are eighteen years of age or older , to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of age .

section 2: the congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation .

fifteenth amendment , section 2 section 1: the right of citizens of the united states to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of race , color , or previous condition of servitude .

section 2: the congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation .

article i , section 8 , clause 11 the congress shall have power *** to declare war , grant letters of marque and reprisal , and make rules concerning captures on land and water .

nineteenth amendment , section 2 section 1: the right of the citizens of the united states to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of sex .

section 2: congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation .

