poor performance under a federal contract can have immediate consequences for contractors , who could potentially be denied award or incentive fees , required to pay damages , or terminated for default .

in addition , it can affect their ability to obtain future contracts because federal law generally requires agencies to evaluate contractor's "past performance" and consider past performance information when making source selection decisions in negotiated procurements and when determining whether prospective contractors are "responsible. .

"past performance" refers to contractors' performance on "active and physically completed contracts" and certain orders under existing contracts .

reports alleging that some contractors received new contracts despite allegedly deficient performance under prior or current contracts have recently prompted interest in the role that evaluations of past performance play in federal contracting , as well as attempts by some members of congress and the obama administration to improve agencies' compilation and use of past performance evaluations .

the 112 th congress enacted legislation that requires the department of defense ( dod ) ( p.l .

112-81 ) and the federal acquisition regulatory council ( p.l .

112-239 ) to develop "strateg[ies] for ensuring" that past performance reports are timely , accurate and complete ; and would give contractors 14 days to comment on , rebut , or supplement past performance reports .

the 113 th congress also enacted legislation addressing certain issues relating to past performance , although such legislation was narrower in scope than that enacted in the 112 th congress .

in addition , the obama administration updated the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) in 2013 to standardize the factors used in evaluating contractors' performance , and require that all past performance information be entered into the contractor performance assessment reporting system ( cpars ) .

it made further updates to the far in 2014 to implement p.l .

112-81 and p.l .

112-239 .

contractors , however , have expressed concern that increased emphasis on past performance information could lead to de facto debarment or "blacklisting" of contractors .

this report provides an overview of existing legal requirements pertaining to past performance , including the issues raised by contractors' attempts to challenge ( 1 ) agency evaluations of their past performance , ( 2 ) source selection decisions based , in part , on consideration of past performance information , and ( 3 ) responsibility determinations .

while agencies have long informally evaluated contractors' performance and generally kept some records regarding this performance , at least during the term of the contract , they were not required to compile evaluations of past performance until 1993 .

then , as part of reforms requiring agency consideration of past performance in certain source selection decisions , discussed below , the office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) directed federal agencies to "[p]repare evaluations of contractors' performance on all new contracts over $100,000. .

one year later , congress enacted the federal acquisition streamlining act ( fasa ) of 1994 , which established a statutory basis for agency evaluation of past performance .

among other things , fasa required ofpp to prescribe policies for the collection and maintenance of information on past contract performance that , to the maximum extent practicable , facilitate automated collection , maintenance , and dissemination of information and provide for ease of collection , maintenance , and dissemination of information by other methods , as necessary .

ofpp met this requirement , in part , by promulgating regulations regarding "contractor performance information" in subpart 42.15 of the far .

these regulations , as amended , currently prescribe the content of contractor performance evaluations , as well as procedures for the compilation , posting , and use of such evaluations .

the requirement that agencies evaluate contractor performance was imposed , in part , because "performance assessment is a basic 'best practice' for good contract administration , and is one of the most important tools available for ensuring good contract performance. .

additionally , congress and the executive branch hoped that written evaluations of contractor performance would "improve the amount and quality of performance information available to source selection teams," which would , in turn , "enable agencies to better predict the quality of , and customer satisfaction with , future work. .

however , although ofpp , in particular , anticipated that agencies would ultimately be able to rely almost exclusively on agency performance evaluations in their source selection decisions , this does not seem to have occurred , as discussed below .

although not expressly required to do so , agencies appear to have considered past performance when selecting vendors in "negotiated procurements" since at least the 1960s .

a negotiated procurement is one in which the contract is awarded to the vendor whose proposal represents the "best value" for the government .

this is not necessarily the vendor whose proposal has the lowest price , but rather the vendor whose proposal represents the greatest overall benefit to the government given its price , technical merit , and relationship to other evaluation criteria specified in the request for proposals ( rfp ) .

such consideration of past performance in source selection decisions was not , however , standardized or required until the mid - 1990s .

then , in 1993 , ofpp issued guidelines that required agencies to consider past performance information in all negotiated procurements valued in excess of $100,000 .

this requirement was given a statutory basis one year later , when congress enacted fasa .

fasa directed ofpp to promulgate "standards for evaluating past performance with respect to cost ( when appropriate ) , schedule , compliance with technical or functional specifications , and other relevant performance factors that facilitate consistent and fair evaluation by all executive agencies. .

ofpp did so by promulgating regulations in 1995-1997 regarding consideration of past performance information in negotiated procurements .

these regulations were codified in far subpart 15.3 and fully took effect in 1999 .

subpart 15.3 , as amended , currently governs use of past performance as an evaluation factor in negotiated procurements .

congress and the executive branch required agencies to consider past performance in source selection decisions in the hope that the government would obtain better performance under its contracts — and better value for its procurement dollars — by shifting the basis of its source selection decisions .

previously , agencies conducting negotiated procurements had relied heavily on what some commentators described as "complex technical and cost proposals," which these commentators asserted had "no correlation to the contractor's ability to perform the job. .

consideration of past performance in source selection decisions was seen as an alternative to reliance on such proposals , especially by those who characterized past performance information as the best indicator of a contractor's ability to provide quality goods and services at a reasonable cost .

such consideration was not intended to exclude contractors with poor performance histories from future contracts .

rather , it was anticipated that certain contractors with poor performance histories would be able to compensate for this in other aspects of their proposals ( eg , offering lower prices , partnering with companies with better records ) , while others would be found nonresponsible for purposes of particular contracts or excluded from government contracting generally through the operation of other legal authorities .

ever since the far was promulgated in 1984 , agencies have considered whether contractors have a "satisfactory performance record," among other things , in determining whether they are sufficiently "responsible" to be awarded a government contract .

agencies are prohibited from awarding a contract to a contractor who has not been determined to be affirmatively responsible .

then , in 1995 , after the issuance of ofpp policy letter 92-5 and the enactment of fasa , ofpp amended subpart 9.1 of the far to further require that agencies consider "relevant past performance information," as defined in subpart 42.15 , when making responsibility determinations .

guidance issued by ofpp shortly thereafter clarified that agencies are to use consideration of past performance in the responsibility determination process — not the source selection process — as a means of avoiding contractors with poor performance histories: a contractor with a record of unsatisfactory past performance should be screened out of the selection process as part of the responsibility determination .

if a contractor's past performance record passes the responsibility determination , then the record should be compared to the other responsible offerors to determine the offeror that provides the best value to the government .

however , it should be noted that , while ofpp characterizes the responsibility determination process as the means for "screening out" contractors with poor past performance , agencies may not use nonresponsibility determinations to punish contractors for poor performance , and poor performance or even default on one or several prior contracts does not necessarily constitute adequate grounds for a nonresponsibility determination .

additionally , as discussed below , any use of the responsibility determination process to avoid a contractor with poor past performance must be short - term and procurement - specific so as to avoid de facto debarment of the contractor .

for dealings with a contractor to be avoided long - term and / or government - wide , the contractor would need to be formally excluded from government contracting ( i.e. , debarred or suspended ) .

because of the amendments made to subpart 9.1 of the far in 1995 , past performance has traditionally played a unique role in the responsibility determination process .

until recently , "relevant past performance" information was the only information that contracting officers were required by law to consider when making responsibility determinations .

they otherwise had broad discretion as to what and how much information to consider , although they were encouraged to consider certain information ( eg , commercial sources of supplier information , preaward survey reports , business and trade associations ) .

this changed in 2008 , when congress enacted legislation requiring contracting officers to consider the information contained in fapiis when making responsibility determinations .

fapiis is required to contain , among other things , brief descriptions of civil , criminal , and administrative proceedings involving federal contracts that resulted in a conviction or finding of fault , as well as terminations for default , administrative agreements , and nonresponsibility determinations relating to federal contracts , within the past five years for all persons holding a federal contract or grant worth $500,000 or more .

consideration of this information would arguably be most helpful in assessing responsibility criteria other than whether the contractor possesses a satisfactory performance record ( eg , whether the contractor has a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics ) .

however , because fapiis includes information from cpars / ppirs , the requirement to consider the information in fapiis arguably augments agency consideration of past performance evaluations .

additionally , subpart 9.1 of the far , which governs responsibility determinations , establishes a presumption that contractors who are , or recently have been , "seriously deficient" in contract performance are nonresponsible unless the contracting officer determines that the circumstances were beyond the contractor's control , or the contractor has taken appropriate corrective action .

subpart 9.1 does not define what constitutes a "serious deficiency" in performance , but gao and the courts have found that it could potentially include delinquent performance , delivery of nonconforming items , failure to adhere to contract specifications , late deliveries , poor management or technical judgment , failure to correct production problems , failure to perform safely , and inadequate supervision of subcontractors .

contractors' ability to challenge agency determinations that they are nonresponsible , or that another contractor is responsible , is limited .

judicial and other tribunals that hear protests of contract awards do not routinely review contracting officers' responsibility determinations because such determinations are "practical , ... not legal determination[s]" and "are not readily susceptible to judicial review. .

the gao hears protests regarding responsibility determinations only when the protester alleges that "definitive responsibility criteria" were not met , or "identif[ies] evidence raising serious concerns that ... the contracting officer unreasonably failed to consider available relevant information or otherwise violated statute or regulation. .

the federal courts similarly consider the merits of protested responsibility determinations only when the protester's allegations that the agency's determination was arbitrary and capricious , an abuse of discretion , or otherwise not in accordance with the law can survive a preliminary motion to dismiss .

moreover , judicial and administrative tribunals decline to overturn contracting officers' responsibility determinations in many of the protests that they do hear .

they generally overturn a determination only when the protester can show that the determination was clearly unreasonable given the record before the contracting officer .

the gao and the courts have also held that a contracting officer's determination is not unreasonable merely because another contracting officer made a different determination after considering the same information .

because the focus of a responsibility determination is upon the contractor's ability to satisfy the needs of the government under a particular proposed contract , the responsibility determination process is not designed to exclude contractors with allegedly deficient past performance , or other problems , from future dealings with the government .

to the contrary , any use of it to this effect could potentially be found to constitute de facto debarment .

the federal courts developed the concept of de facto debarment as a way of ensuring that agencies do not deprive contractors of the due process to which they are entitled in formal exclusion proceedings ( i.e. , debarment and suspension ) by effectively excluding contractors by other means .

repeated determinations of nonresponsibility based on the same alleged conduct by the contractor have been found to constitute de facto debarment , as have statements or other conduct evidencing an intent to exclude a contractor from future government contracts .

for example , in old dominion dairy products , inc. v. secretary of defense , the air force was found to have de facto debarred a contractor when the contracting officer determined that the contractor lacked integrity and was nonresponsible after another contracting officer had determined that the contractor was nonresponsible due to billing irregularities .

similarly , in art - metal - usa , inc. v. solomon , the general services administration was found to have de facto debarred a contractor when it determined that the contractor was nonresponsible for a new contract and suspended its existing contracts in response to concerns that it had supplied "inferior products. .

in both cases , the courts noted that the challenged agency conduct effectively excluded the contractor without providing the contractor with the notice or opportunity for a hearing that the contractor would have received had they been formally debarred or suspended .

the courts thus enjoined the agency conduct that resulted in de facto debarment or granted other relief to the contractor .

cases that involve de facto debarment sometimes also involve unconstitutional deprivation of contractors' liberty interests .

this generally occurs when contractors are excluded from government contracts without notice or a hearing because of concerns about their integrity , as contractors have a cognizable liberty interest in being "free from 'stigmatizing' governmental defamation having an immediate and tangible effect on [their] ability to do business. .

however , depending upon the circumstances , concerns about past performance could be implicated in concerns about integrity .

agencies also have legal authority under subpart 9.4 of the far to debar or suspend contractors for willful failure to perform under a contract or a history of failure to perform .

debarment and suspension are government - wide and last for a fixed period of time .

such exclusions may , however , only be implemented to protect the government , not to punish the contractor , and the agency could be found to have violated the administrative procedure act ( apa ) if it subsequently excludes the contractor for conduct that it was aware of when it determined that the contractor was responsible .

for example , in lion raisins , inc. v. united states , the u.s. court of federal claims found that the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) suspension of a contractor for falsifying raisin certifications violated the apa , given that the usda knew of the contractor's conduct when making five prior determinations that the contractor was "responsible. .

while the decision in lion raisins has been criticized by some commentators and distinguished by some courts , it has been followed or cited approvingly by others and could potentially be read to preclude agencies from debarring or suspending contractors under the far based on "stale" allegations of wrongdoing .

"stale" allegations of wrongdoing could potentially include allegations of poor performance under contracts completed some time ago .

