both the house and senate have internal rules encouraging the separation of money and policy decisions .

these rules stem from the principle that the process through which the activities of government are chosen should be distinct from the process through which those activities are funded .

for activities funded through the annual appropriations process ( referred to as discretionary spending ) , congress differentiates between authorizations and the appropriations .

authorizations comprise substantive law establishing government entities , activities , or programs , while appropriations provide budget authority to fund government agencies or programs by allowing them to obligate funds .

under the rules of the house and senate , legislative provisions and appropriations for purposes not authorized by law typically may not be included in appropriations measures .

these rules were formally established in both chambers during the mid - 1800s to address concerns with delays in enacting appropriations due to the inclusion of extraneous legislative matters that tended to provoke controversy .

as currently provided in house rule xxi , the house bars legislative provisions from being reported in general appropriations bills ; amendments to general appropriations bills containing language that would add to or alter existing law are also prohibited .

clause 5 of house rule xxii also prohibits the inclusion of legislative language in conference reports that accompany appropriations acts .

senate rule xvi additionally restricts legislative language not contained within existing law from being added via amendment to a general appropriations bill , unless it is determined to be germane to a legislative provision previously added by the house .

these rules are enforced on the house and senate floor through points of order , but if legislative provisions are enacted as a part of an appropriations measure , they have the full force of the law .

although house and senate rules restrict legislating on appropriations , policy matters may be included through limitation provisions .

limitations within appropriations measures are provisions that negatively restrict the amount , purpose , or availability of funds without changing existing law .

the effect of these provisions is to limit the actions for which funds may be used through the capping or outright denial of funds for specific purposes .

proper limitations are distinct from legislative provisions because they do not have the effect of either making new law or changing existing law .

as a result , limitation provisions , which define the purposes for which budget authority may not be used without also affecting a recipient's discretion under other laws , have frequently been included within the text of appropriations bills reported by the committee or added by amendments on the floor .

the allowability of limitations under the rules of the house and senate is based upon the principle that although congress may authorize an activity , it is under no obligation to fund that activity .

congress can therefore choose to specify those purposes for which funds are not to be used , even if that purpose has been previously authorized .

the distinction between legislative provisions and funding limitations has been developed and refined over time based on various rulings that establish what types of provisions are allowable .

early debates over the permissibility of limitation provisions centered on the question of "[whether] the proposed limitation might be construed by the executive or administrative officer as a modification of statute [or] a change in existing law. .

so , although a house floor amendment to the fy1910 fortifications appropriations bill stipulating "that all material purchased under the foregoing provision of this act shall be of american manufacture" was ruled by the chair to be out of order , that same amendment , rephrased by unanimous consent as , " provided , that no money appropriated by this act shall be expended except for goods of american manufacture," was allowed because it no longer contained an affirmative direction to the recipient of the funds .

in more recent years , as the precedents regarding limitations have become more nuanced , parliamentary determinations of legislative language have stemmed from a number of principles related to the imposition of new duties upon the recipient of funds , changes in agency discretion , or whether the provision mandates action contrary to law .

the goal of this report is to clarify aspects of the legislative process concerning the inclusion of limitations in appropriations measures under the rules of the house and senate .

this report begins by explaining the contrasting procedural contexts that influence the consideration of limitation provisions in appropriations measures on the house and senate floor .

next , it defines the two forms of limitations that have been allowed under house and senate precedents , with examples of previous purposes that have been allowed .

this report then proceeds to identify the variety of substantive challenges that exist in structuring a limitation provision so that it does not constitute legislative language and thereby violate house and senate rules .

finally , this report concludes by discussing the effect of points of order during floor consideration and the burden of proof that exists for proponents of limitation provisions to successfully overcome procedural objections .

although many of the examples of both proper and improper limitations used in this report are from older precedents , they nevertheless remain applicable to house and senate rules in this area .

precedents regarding limitations are also considerably more numerous in the house than the senate .

one reason for this is that , unlike the house , the senate has no specific rules governing the consideration of limitations beyond those that prohibit legislative language in appropriations acts .

in addition , the senate occasionally allows legislative language to be inserted in an appropriations act if it is determined by a majority of senators to be germane to legislative language already included by the house in the bill .

the senate has previously relied , in at least once instance , on house precedents for defining an acceptable limitation , which resulted in the chair upholding a point of order against a limitation as being legislative in nature .

additionally , the parliamentarian's discussion of what constitutes a proper limitation contained in riddick ' s senate procedure occasionally uses house precedents to clarify the types of provisions that have been allowed as limitations .

this report will therefore rely primarily on precedents from the house to help define and illustrate proper limitation provisions .

areas where the house and senate diverge in their understanding of , or approach to , what constitutes a limitation will be noted as they occur .

this report should be read with several caveats in mind .

first , it does not take account of every ruling that has been made and does not address every contingency that might arise .

second , unanimous consent agreements in the senate and special rules in the house can be used to set aside each chamber's respective rules and customary procedures relating to both limitations and legislation on appropriations measures .

third , the house and senate parliamentarians are the advisers to the presiding officers on what constitutes a proper limitation within the appropriations context .

although this report may provide useful background information , it should not be considered a substitute for consultation with the parliamentarian and his or her associates on specific procedural problems and opportunities .

the rules of the house and senate with respect to limitations are enforced during floor consideration of general appropriations measures .

although these rules generally encourage the separation between policy and money decisions in the area of appropriations , the procedural approach of each chamber differs in three significant ways with respect to the consideration of limitations and the exclusion of legislative provisions .

the first area of contrast is the extent to which legislative provisions are allowed as committee or floor amendments .

the second area of contrast is whether chamber rules designate a separate set of procedures for the consideration of limitation amendments .

the third area of contrast relates to the allowability of legislative provisions within conference reports .

there are two forms in which limitations are regularly proposed .

the first form places a total ban on the use of funds for a certain purpose by stipulating that none of the funds in the account or bill can be used for such purpose .

this type of limitation has been allowed under house and senate rules , even when the funds have been authorized by law for that particular activity .

the second form , sometimes referred to as a "not to exceed" limitation , provides that the use of funds is not to exceed a specific amount or percentage of total funds .

according to house practice , "a negative restriction on the use of funds above a certain amount in an appropriation bill is in order as a limitation .

as long as a limitation on the use of funds restricts the expenditure of federal funds carried in the bill without changing existing law , the limitation is in order. .

although the rules of the house and senate encourage money and policy decisions to remain separate , proper limitations in appropriations measures can affect policy by stipulating for what purposes federal funds cannot be used or by placing a maximum limit on spending in certain areas .

limitations have been previously allowed that prohibit funding for specific activities , a class of recipients , and earmarks .

"not to exceed" limitations that establish funding ceilings for certain activities or total funding amounts have also previously been determined by the presiding officer to be in order , as have limitations that restrict the availability of funds for transfer .

the precedents of the house and senate distinguish between the limitations and legislative provisions based upon both structure and substance .

for a limitation to be allowed under the house and senate rules , it must first be phrased as a negative prohibition and not as an affirmative direction .

second , it can only prohibit funding for activities , not the activities themselves .

the below house amendment to the fy1965 defense appropriations act is an example of a proper limitation in these respects , and was determined by the chair to be in order .

none of the funds appropriated herein shall be available for paying the cost of a conventional powerplant for cva - 67 .

however , even though a limitation may be disqualified because of improper structure , the more salient standard by which its admissibility is evaluated is its substance .

this is because , even with proper structure , a limitation can still be legislative in effect and therefore be prohibited under the rules .

a number of precedents have identified certain principles by which a provision can be evaluated as to whether it is legislative , and therefore not allowed under the rules , or merely affects an agency's funding and is therefore a proper limitation .

in total , these attempts can be distilled down to several broad concepts involving the scope of the provision , whether it waives current law and agency discretion , whether it imposes new duties upon a government official or agency , and whether the funding is provided based upon a contingency .

in addition , whether or not the recipient of the funds can be considered "federal" and , in the house , if the subject matter of the limitation involves taxes or tariffs , are also factors that can have an impact on its admissibility .

when a point of order is raised against a limitation provision contained within an appropriations bill or amendment , the burden of proof is on its proponent to demonstrate that it is a valid limitation that does not effectively change agency discretion or impose new duties in order for it to be allowed .

in some circumstances , if a provision or amendment containing a limitation is determined by the presiding officer to be legislative , it can potentially be revised to comply with chamber rules , unless prevented by a special rule or unanimous consent agreement .

in the house , in the event of an objection , the proponent of a limitation amendment is responsible for demonstrating that it is not legislative in nature .

for example , the house amendment below to the fy1981 defense appropriations act was objected to during consideration on the grounds that it imposed new duties on the secretary of defense .

provided further , that no funds herein appropriated shall be used for the payment of a price differential on contracts hereafter made for the purpose of relieving economic dislocations other than contracts made by the defense logistics agency and such other contracts of the department of defense as may be determined by the secretary of defense pursuant to existing laws and regulations as not to be inappropriate therefore by reason of national security considerations .

the proponent of the amendment argued that this new provision would not require any new duties of the secretary but was unable to cite any existing laws or regulations that required the secretary to make such substantive determinations related to national security and the payment of price differentials .

in the absence of the amendment's proponent being able to cite provisions of existing law that required the secretary to make such determinations , the chair sustained the point of order .

likewise , if a limitation provision is challenged as being legislative in nature , evidence that the provision requires determinations already mandated by existing law can be a compelling reason for a point of order to be overruled .

in the example below , a provision contained in the fy1977 labor and health , education , and welfare appropriations act reported from the committee , an objection was raised based upon the assertion that it creates a new duty for school administrators .

none of the funds contained in this act shall be used to require , directly or indirectly , the transportation of any student to a school other than the school which is nearest the student's home , and which offers the courses of study pursued by such student , in order to comply with title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 .

in defending this provision , the appropriations committee chair argued that the requirement that the student be bussed only to the school closest to the student's home placed no new duties on the school administrator because the equal educational opportunity act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-380 ) already required that the school administrator make such a determination regarding the existence and location of comparable schools closest to student's homes .

the committee chair also provided evidence that the equal educational opportunity act required that the school administrator make determinations regarding the appropriate grade level and type of education for each student .

the presiding officer subsequently overruled the point of order .

in the face of a point of order , the proponent of a limitation may also be called upon to provide evidence that the provision does not interfere with discretion guaranteed under existing law to the official or agency .

the below house amendment to the fy1921 agriculture appropriations bill was challenged on the grounds that it would impermissibly narrow the discretion of the secretary of agriculture .

provided further , that no part of any appropriation in this act for the forest service shall be expended on any national forest in which the fees charged for grazing shall be at a rate less than 300 per cent of the existing rate .

in this case , the point of order against the provision was sustained based on evidence provided by a member who objected that the supreme court had held that the secretary of the agriculture has discretion to make rules and regulations for the preservation of the forests and to set the amount of user fees to be assessed .

if the chair sustains a point of order against an amendment as being legislative in nature , a member may be able to offer a new ( redrafted ) amendment that is compliant with house rules , if not prevented by a special rule or unanimous consent agreement .

an additional option , in some circumstances , is that the amendment's sponsor asks unanimous consent to modify such amendment during debate .

although obtaining unanimous consent for such a request may be difficult , if granted , it could allow the proponent an opportunity to revise the amendment so that it would conform to house rules .

in the senate , paragraph 6 of rule xvi mandates that points of order against restrictions on the expenditure of funds be "construed strictly and , in the case of doubt , in favor of the point of order. .

this creates a procedural context similar to that of the house , where the presiding officer is constrained to uphold a point of order against a limitation in the absence of evidence that demonstrates that it is proper and not legislative .

if the amendment's sponsor wishes to modify his or her amendment , this must occur before action has occurred or the presiding officer has ruled .

a member could also offer a new ( redrafted ) amendment that was compliant with senate rules , as long as there was no unanimous consent agreement governing consideration of the pending measure that precluded such action .

