the recent financial crisis and deep economic recession have led to criticisms of the federal reserve's ( fed's ) handling of both .

critics have blamed the fed for pursuing policies that allowed the housing bubble to inflate , for lax regulation of financial firms and mortgage markets that led to excessive speculation , for "bailing out" financial firms during the crisis , for failing to prevent the recession's unusual length and depth , and for engaging in "quantitative easing" that critics believe will result in high inflation .

although alternative explanations have also been offered for each of these criticisms , they have led some members of congress to question whether legislative remedies are needed to avoid similar problems in the future .

in particular , some members of congress have argued that the fed's statutory mandate should be modified .

the fed's statutory mandate for monetary policy was set in the "federal reserve reform act of 1977. .

it currently reads: the board of governors of the federal reserve system and the federal open market committee shall maintain long run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy's long run potential to increase production , so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment , stable prices , and moderate long - term interest rates .

although this mandate includes three goals , it is often referred to by economists as a "dual mandate" of maximum employment and stable prices .

some economists have argued that congress should strike the goals of maximum employment and moderate long - term interest rates from the current mandate , leaving price stability as the only mandated goal .

often the proposal for a single mandate is paired with a more specific proposal that the fed should adopt an inflation target .

under an inflation target , monetary policy would aim to achieve a predefined numerical target or range for some measure of inflation ( the change in the general price level ) .

for at least the past two decades , bills have been introduced in congress to switch the federal reserve to a single mandate of price stability .

in the 113 th congress , h.r .

215 , the federal reserve single mandate act , would strike maximum employment from the mandate and replace "stable prices" with "long - term price stability , a low rate of inflation" ( it would maintain stable prices and moderate long - term interest rates ) .

it would require the fed to establish an inflation target to promote price stability .

also in the 113 th congress , there was companion legislation introduced in the house , h.r .

1174 , the sound dollar act , and the senate , s. 238 , the federal reserve modernization act .

title i of h.r .

1174 / s. 238 would strike the current mandate and replace it with a single mandate of long - term price stability .

it would require the fed to establish metrics ( eg , an inflation target ) to evaluate whether the mandate was being achieved , and those metrics would have to take into account price indices of goods and services , asset prices , exchange rates , and the price of gold .

the fed would be required to publicly disclose the metrics and report to congress when the metrics were altered .

the bill would also replace current semi - annual "humphrey - hawkins" reporting requirements to congress , which call for "a discussion of the conduct of monetary policy and economic developments and prospects for the future , taking into account past and prospective developments in employment , unemployment , production , investment , real income , productivity , exchange rates , international trade and payments , and prices," with reporting requirements on "whether the goal of long - term price stability is being met and , if such goal is not being met , an explanation of why the goal is not being met and the steps that the board and the federal open market committee will take to ensure that the goal will be met in the future…," as well as a description of the instruments used and strategy employed to achieve price stability , and the effect of monetary policy on the exchange rate value of the dollar .

the h.r .

1174 / s. 238 also has other titles unrelated to the fed's mandate .

were a single mandate to be adopted in the united states , it would follow an international trend that has seen many foreign central banks , including those of new zealand , canada , australia , and the united kingdom , adopt price stability mandates , inflation targets , or both in recent decades .

in january 2012 , the fed voluntarily announced a "longer - run goal for inflation" of 2% , as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures .

this report analyzes the economic arguments for and against shifting to a single mandate .

it then analyzes possible effects of a mandate change on fed policymaking in the context of recent criticisms related to the fed's performance .

it also discusses the advantages and disadvantages of different options for implementing an inflation target .

the statutory mandate sets the ultimate goals of monetary policy , and can be altered only through legislative action .

the instruments , methods , and strategies that the fed employs to reach those goals are not laid out in law .

inflation targeting can be thought of as a strategic approach — to focus policy on achieving a numerical target for inflation — to achieving mandated goals .

because it is a part of a strategy for achieving statutory goals , it could be codified through legislation or voluntarily adopted internally by the fed .

traditionally , proponents of a single mandate have also favored inflation targeting .

there is logic to the idea that if the fed's sole focus of policy is going to be achieving price stability , then there should be a numerical target to help ensure that this goal is achieved and facilitate evaluation of the fed's performance in relation to the mandate .

legislation could include both , but need not .

one might favor a single mandate of price stability , but oppose a legislated inflation target on the grounds that the fed should have maximum independence and flexibility to pursue that mandate .

or congress might legislate a single mandate , and the fed could then choose whether to voluntarily adopt an inflation target to help meet the single mandate .

although many proponents of inflation targeting also favor a single mandate , an inflation target could also be adopted without changing the current mandate .

fed chairman ben bernanke was a well - known advocate of inflation targeting before his time at the fed , but has repeatedly defended the dual mandate in its current form while at the fed .

he has suggested that an inflation target would be complementary to the dual mandate .

in 2005 , he testified: one possible step toward greater transparency would be for the fomc to state explicitly the numerical inflation rate or range of inflation rates it considers to be consistent with the goal of long - term price stability , a practice currently employed by many of the world's central banks .

i have supported this idea in my academic writings and in speeches as a board member .

providing quantitative guidance about the meaning of "long - term price stability" could have several advantages , including further reducing public uncertainty about monetary policy and anchoring long - term inflation expectations even more effectively .

i view the explicit statement of a long - run inflation objective as fully consistent with the federal reserve's current policy approach , including its appropriate emphasis on the role of judgment and flexibility in policymaking .

most important , this step would in no way reduce the importance of maximum employment as a policy goal .

indeed , a key justification for this action is its potential to contribute to stronger and more stable employment growth by further stabilizing inflation and inflation expectations .

it is debatable whether an inflation target is compatible with the equal weighting of maximum employment and price stability in the dual mandate — arguably , it communicates to the public a greater focus on inflation , intentionally or not .

given the fed's broad discretion over policy implementation , however , the fed would not need to seek new authority or wait for a mandate change to adopt an inflation target if it desired .

an example of the fed's scope to act within its current mandate is discussed in the next section .

proponents claim that a series of related benefits would stem from a single mandate of price stability .

these claims have been criticized on two grounds — that purported benefits would actually result in worse policy and economic outcomes than the status quo , or that the fed , in practice , has already delivered the same benefits under the current dual mandate .

in fact , some economists have referred to the fed as an "implicit inflation targeter" because of the latter argument .

this section considers each of those arguments in turn .

for clarity of discussion , this report will treat a single mandate and inflation targeting as complementary when evaluating the merits and drawbacks of the proposal unless otherwise noted .

in other words , an inflation target would increase the benefits and drawbacks of changing the mandate .

it should be noted , however , that more of the literature has focused on the effects of inflation targeting than on a single mandate , so certain authors may not necessarily have intended their arguments to be applied to both .

since the financial crisis began , the fed has been subject to significant criticism on a number of different fronts .

some would argue that its shortcomings of the past few years are a sign that legislative action is needed to improve its performance .

this section analyzes whether a switch to a single mandate might have altered the criticized policy decisions .

if congress decided to legislate an inflation target , or the fed decided to adopt one voluntarily , there are a number of institutional details to consider surrounding its scope and composition .

arguably , these issues would have important ramifications for economic and policy outcomes , as well as the scope of the fed's discretion .

a single mandate or inflation target may constrain the fed's ability to pursue policies that result in high inflation , but in practice fed policies over the past two decades have not resulted in high inflation .

by conventional standards , the fed's record on price stability in the past two decades is very good — headline inflation has been below 4% since 1991 and core inflation has been below 3% since 1995 — but not perfect .

since the recent financial crisis , however , the problem has generally been modestly lower - than - desired inflation .

the fed's performance is also not significantly different from major inflation targeting countries .

nevertheless , past performance does not guarantee similar results in the future .

some argue that introducing an inflation target is a way to "lock in" good policies .

in isolation , a change to a single mandate of price stability is unlikely to lead to a modification in monetary policy decisions since it would leave intact the fed's independence and discretion to set policy as it sees fit .

the dual mandate is only one of many institutional factors that contribute to the fed's discretion and independence .

neither statute nor tradition formally lay out any consequences of missing the mandated goals ; this makes accountability more difficult , but a switch to a single mandate in isolation would not alter that arrangement .

an inflation target could potentially have more of an impact on the fed's discretion , but the extent that its discretion would be constrained would depend on the characteristics of the inflation targeting regime , such as what consequences there would be if the target were missed , and whether the inflation target was selected and designed by the fed or by congress .

the benefits of constraining discretion are debatable — discretion can lead to good or bad decisions .

for example , inflation ( as measured by the cpi ) in 2008 rose 3.8% , which was its highest rate since 1991 .

if the fed had felt compelled to focus policy solely on the inflation rate , it might have felt constrained in its response to the financial crisis that occurred that year .

has the fed already introduced an inflation targeting regime ? .

based on truman's inflation targeting framework , the fed's january 2012 announcement of a longer - run inflation goal of 2% meets the criterion of a numerical target in full and partly meets the other criteria .

the announcement could be seen as reducing the importance — to supporters and opponents — of proposed statutory changes to the mandate or statutory implementation of an inflation targeting regime .

alternatively , such statutory changes could be seen as reinforcing the fed's inflation goal , marking a continuation of current policy .

as practiced abroad , countries with a single mandate or inflation target have not ignored changes in unemployment when setting monetary policy , in part because they may help predict future changes in inflation .

while this demonstrates that policymaking under one or both can be more flexible in practice than opponents sometimes portray , it also begs the question of whether dropping maximum employment from the mandate is necessary or desirable .

arguments in favor of an inflation target and single mandate include improved accountability of monetary policymakers and increased transparency of monetary policy to financial markets .

both are thought to result in better outcomes for the economy .

to the extent that an inflation target were interpreted flexibly by the fed , these benefits would be diminished .

on the other hand , flexibility could improve outcomes if policymakers cannot devise a regime that accounts for all unforeseen contingencies ahead of time .

some of the desire for legislative change comes from discontent with the fed's recent performance .

but would those shortcomings be affected by a mandate change ? .

many of the criticisms of the fed's performance — its "bailouts" of "too big to fail" firms , lax supervision of the financial system in the run up to the crisis , and passivity during the housing boom's run up of unsuitable mortgage debt — are unrelated to its monetary policy mandate , and involve authority derived from other parts of the federal reserve act .

monetary policy's failure to prevent , and possibly exacerbate , the housing bubble , could argue in support of a mandate change .

but because the housing bubble did not lead to high inflation , a single mandate would not obviously modify the fed's behavior in the face of future asset bubbles .

a mandate change to require the fed to explicitly address bubbles or financial stability might be a more direct means to this end .

criticism that the fed should have done more to prevent the depth and length of the recession implicitly speaks to the "maximum employment" part of the dual mandate , and so it does not follow that a single mandate of price stability would result in more aggressive countercyclical policy .

a criticism could be made that the fed's focus on core inflation has not proven to be the optimal measure for obtaining price stability .

but this criticism does not make the case that the fed has neglected price stability , or that the fed would be more focused on price stability under a single mandate .

unless congress is involved in defining price stability ( through the type of inflation to be targeted , for example ) , discretion would still remain with the fed on what measure to focus on .

a similar argument applies to criticisms that the fed's program of quantitative easing is inconsistent with a price stability mandate — the fed believes that quantitative easing is necessary to maintain price stability ( to avoid deflation ) , and as long as the fed has discretion to set its policies , a single mandate would not prevent quantitative easing .

