americans have long been of mixed mind about advertising .

on the one hand , advertising is beneficial insofar as it provides information .

on the other hand , advertising ( be it private or governmental ) often attempts to persuade individuals to alter their behaviors .

unease with advertising can be magnified if the advertiser is the government , especially if an advertisement conflicts with widely held beliefs about government .

many americans believe that government was established to protect liberty , and that the essence of liberty is the freedom to think and live as one pleases ( provided one does not harm others ) .

many individuals also believe that government should not needlessly or wantonly spend taxpayer money , and that citizens should be thrifty and self - reliant .

in light of these beliefs , it is not surprising that controversies have arisen around government advertisements that have attempted to dissuade individuals from using marijuana , have promoted the use of social service programs , are viewed as overly expensive or wasteful , or are perceived as possibly misleading .

however , not all government advertising is controversial .

few complain when the government advertises federal agency job openings , competitions for federal contracts , or the sale of surplus government property .

these sorts of advertisements likely are viewed as part of government's duty to truthfully inform the public about its activities .

as one of the hoover commission task forces wrote a half - century ago , apart from his responsibility as spokesman , the department head has another obligation in a democracy: to keep the public informed about the activities of his agency .

how far to go and what media to use in this effort present touchy issues of personal and administrative integrity .

but of the basic obligation [to inform the public] there can be little doubt .

additionally , some government advertising has been mandated by law .

for example , congress established the national youth anti - drug media campaign in a 1997 appropriations act ( p.l .

105-61 ; 111 stat .

1272 ; 22 u.s.c .

1708 ) .

this statute directed the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) to produce media campaigns to discourage illicit drug use .

and not all advertisements that tell people what to do are ill regarded .

few have criticized government advertising campaigns that have encouraged citizens to buy war bonds or avoid inadvertently setting forest fires .

generally speaking , there are few government - wide restrictions on government advertising .

furthermore , no single agency is charged with tracking and overseeing the advertising expenditures of federal agencies .

some restrictions on agencies' advertising expenditures may be found in annual appropriations acts , the u.s. code , and the code of federal regulations .

for example , the department of defense has been prohibited from using appropriated funds to pay the costs of advertising by any defense contractor ( 10 u.s.c .

114 amendments ) ; and 7 c.f.r .

12 contains guidelines for government advertisements promoting blueberries , honey , and mohair , among other agricultural products .

for many decades , annual treasury appropriations laws have contained prohibitions on the use of funds for the purpose of "publicity or propaganda purposes not authorized by the congress. .

a fuller statement of the limitations on government advertising may be found in gao's principles of federal appropriations law , volume i .

though not an independent source of legal authority , principles does provide some guidance as to what may be viewed as improper and / or illegal agency use of appropriated funds for agency activities that might be construed as advertising .

principles begins with the 1919 federal anti - lobbying law ( 18 u.s.c .

1913 ) that prohibits agencies from using government funds to pay for advertisements that are designed to sway members of congress .

principles also describes the prohibitions against "publicity and propaganda" included in appropriations acts since 1949 , the limitations on informational activities by agencies , and the prohibition of government use of "publicity experts. .

principles notes , whether an agency's appropriations are available for advertising , like any other expenditure , depends on the agency's statutory authority .

whether to advertise and , if so , how far to go with it are determined by the precise terms of the agency's program authority in conjunction with the necessary expense doctrine and general restrictions on the use of public funds such as the various anti - lobbying statutes .

under the "necessary expense doctrine," an agency may use a general appropriation to pay any expense that is ( 1 ) necessary or incidental to the achievement of the underlying objectives of the appropriation , ( 2 ) not prohibited by law , and ( 3 ) not otherwise provided for by statute or appropriation .

"thus," gao explains , "the navy could exercise its statutory authorization to promote safety and accident prevention by procuring book matches with safety slogans printed on the covers and distributing them without charge at naval installations. .

the department of justice is responsible for prosecutions under the aforementioned 1919 anti - lobbying law .

otherwise , oversight , investigation , and enforcement of appropriate practices regarding government advertising falls to agencies' inspectors general , gao , and congress .

it is unclear how vigorously the limits on government advertising are being enforced .

it does not appear that the department of justice has indicted anyone for lobbying with appropriated funds .

gao has issued comptroller general opinions that fault agency use of appropriated funds for advertising .

however , gao reviews of agency advertising result only after congressional request , and its opinions are advisory — they do not have the force of law .

primary oversight of government agency advertising has been exercised by congress .

in recent years , it has examined some large advertising campaigns , often when some members of congress have perceived the advertisements as being overly promotional of a policy or program .

