the central issue considered by the review conference was the proposed adoption of the crime of aggression into the jurisdiction of the court .

this section reviews the primary issues and points of contention concerning the icc's proposed aggression jurisdiction .

it includes an overview of different states' and other stakeholders' positions on the court's aggression jurisdiction ; a discussion of the proposed and adopted definition of the crime of aggression and the issues surrounding such definition ; and a discussion of the provisions that set out the court's jurisdiction over aggression , including the provisions as proposed , the main issues of contention for the review conference , and the jurisdictional provisions as they were ultimately adopted by the conference .

during negotiations to finalize the rome statute in 1998 , some countries' delegations to the conference wished to include aggression as one of the crimes under the icc's jurisdiction in order to empower the icc to end impunity for waging aggressive war in violation of international law generally and the u.n. charter in particular .

the participants could not agree on the definition and jurisdiction provisions of aggression , however , and thus included aggression as a crime included in the rome statute but not yet defined or activated .

article 5 , paragraph 1 of the rome statute , lists the international crimes within the court's jurisdiction: the crime of genocide , crimes against humanity , war crimes , and the crime of aggression .

paragraph 2 of article 5 states that the court will exercise jurisdiction over aggression after it has adopted a provision defining the crime and setting conditions for the exercise of jurisdiction over the crime .

article 123 states that such an addition to the rome statute must be considered and adopted at a review conference .

in anticipation of the review conference mandated by the rome statute , the asp created a special working group on the crime of aggression ( swg ) in 2002 .

the swg was tasked with creating working proposals for amendments to the rome statute defining the crime of aggression and the court's exercise of jurisdiction over the crime .

the context within which the swg undertook its work presented a number of challenges .

first , the court's three operative crimes ( war crimes , crimes against humanity , and genocide ) had been prosecuted in numerous cases before ad hoc international criminal tribunals and national courts in the decades prior to their inclusion in the rome statute .

aggression jurisprudence , on the other hand , has been frozen since the late 1940s , when several german and japanese officials were prosecuted under the crime of aggressive war .

since the advent of the cold war , no aggression prosecutions have been undertaken .

the swg , therefore , had no clear and current international practice on which to rely with respect to defining and exercising jurisdiction over the crime of aggression when compared with the three more established crimes .

second , since the end of the cold war , international recognition has expanded for certain uses of force , including foreign military action to stop atrocities taking place within the borders of a country .

overall , u.n. - mandated peacekeeping operations have greatly increased in number since 1991 .

any consideration of prosecuting illegal uses of force is complicated by the growing acceptance of military action considered acceptable by the international community .

third , while war crimes , crimes against humanity , and genocide are jus in bello crimes , that is , crimes committed during an armed conflict , aggression is a jus ad bellum crime , involving a determination of the legality of the decision to initiate the armed conflict itself .

fitting a jus ad bellum crime into the established procedures and jurisdictional practice of three jus in bello crimes might prove difficult .

a number of observers and governments , including the united states , have voiced opinions over the perceived benefits and risks of including the crime of aggression in the icc's jurisdiction , and the possible effect on the operation of the icc overall .

leading up to and during the review conference , several states parties , as well as the united states as observer , opposed adoption of jurisdictional provisions for aggression if consensus among states parties could not be achieved .

any decision taken without consensus , they argued , might result in permanent discord among states parties and reduced state party cooperation with the court .

there was sentiment among some participants that the review conference would be the last opportunity to activate aggression as an icc crime ; these participants believed that consensus was less important than adopting the provisions activating the aggression crime to reduce illegal military action as soon as possible .

analysts have also argued that the addition of a new crime at this point in the icc's development might cause the court to be overburdened with a set of new cases when it still has not completed a trial .

in addition , some argued that adopting aggression might prevent the icc from meeting the goal of universal acceptance of its jurisdiction , as several major powers , including the united states , china , russia , and india , already had concerns about icc jurisdiction over the crime .

activating aggression may cause one or more of these countries to foreclose the possibility of becoming states parties to the rome statute .

in addition , many , including state department legal adviser harold koh , have argued that any determination over the propriety of military action is inherently political , and that the icc would weaken its reputation as an impartial judicial body if it embroiled itself in political disputes between parties to armed conflict .

in addition , u.s. officials have expressed concerns about the icc's jurisdiction over aggression that are specific to the interests of the united states .

these officials have pointed to the special position that the united states occupies as the "sole global superpower," and the fact that the united states is expected to use its military more frequently than other countries because in many instances it is uniquely capable of meeting international security challenges .

if the icc gains the ability to prosecute government officials for their decisions to take military action , they have argued , u.s. decision makers would be disproportionately at risk of prosecution , possibly for political reasons .

u.s. officials and some analysts have asserted that with the icc's activation of the crime of aggression , u.s. officials charged with making national and international security decisions might hesitate to initiate military action for fear of later icc prosecution and punishment .

also , as with the three crimes currently operative under the rome statute , the department of defense has remained concerned over the possibility that the icc will prosecute members of the u.s. armed forces for carrying out military operations abroad .

ambassador rapp has stated that if these concerns are not properly addressed prior to adoption of new aggression provisions , the chances for universal acceptance of icc jurisdiction by all countries , a primary goal of the icc and its supporters , will be diminished .

commentators have interpreted this to mean that the united states would not become party to the rome statute if aggression provisions are adopted that are not acceptable to the united states .

during the review conference , the states parties to the rome statute reached consensus on proposed amendments both to define the crime of aggression and to set out the circumstances and procedures under which the icc may exercise jurisdiction over the crime .

the following two sections evaluate the amendments as adopted in relation to arguments made and concerns expressed about such amendments , and the extent to which such concerns , especially those of the united states , were addressed by the review conference .

article 124 of the rome statute , which is titled "transitional provision," provides that a state party , during its first seven years as a party , can declare that it does not accept the jurisdiction of the court , effectively exempting from prosecution war crimes , crimes against humanity , and genocide committed by its nationals or on its territory for that time period .

the provision also requires that the first review conference examine this article's provisions .

when the rome statute was originally finalized , contentious debate surrounded article 124 , because many saw it as potentially gutting the ability of the court to effectively prosecute international crimes during its first several years .

it was included to encourage certain states that were undecided about the court to become parties to the rome statute .

in the review conference agenda , the asp included a proposal to delete article 124 entirely .

supporters of this proposal argued the provision was meant to be "transitional" in nature , providing assurances to states parties as the icc began operations in 2002 , and that it was no longer needed .

the fact that article 124's own language requires a review under article 123 , paragraph 1 , which specifically relates to changes in the rome statute , seemed to support this view .

also , only two states parties , france and venezuela , availed themselves of the exemption , while numerous other states parties have engaged in armed conflicts without finding an exemption declaration necessary .

france withdrew its declaration prior to the end of the seven - year period , and venezuela's seven - year exemption has expired .

proponents of deleting article 124 argued further that removing an exemption option would reflect the icc's growth as an entity and its importance under international law .

although there seemed to be wide support for this proposal , some argued that maintaining the exemption provided in article 124 would encourage more states to become party to the rome statute , acting as an assurance to countries even if they do not find it necessary to activate their exemption rights .

although it might harm the cause of international criminal justice in the short term , they argued , it would increase the likelihood of eventual universal acceptance of the court's jurisdiction .

the states parties chose not to amend the rome statute to delete article 124 , so the right of new parties to exempt themselves for seven years remains .

japan and the european union ( eu ) both touted its significance for eventual universal acceptance of icc jurisdiction , and japan in particular argued that it would improve the chances that other countries in east asia would become states parties in coming years .

the asp included a resolution for consideration at the review conference to add employing certain types of weapons in non - international conflicts to the definition of war crimes under article 8 ( 2 ) ( e ) of the rome statute .

the new provisions would outlaw the following actions: ( xiii ) employing poison or poisoned weapons ; ( xiv ) employing asphyxiating , poisonous or other gases , and all analogous liquids , materials or devices ; and ( xv ) employing bullets which expand or flatten easily in the human body , such as bullets with a hard envelope which does not entirely cover the core or is pierced with incisions .

identical provisions are already included in article 8 ( 2 ) ( b ) of the statute , which applies to international conflicts .

at the review conference most states parties and other stakeholders supported adoption of these additional prohibitions in article 8 .

the united states , however , had expressed concerns about these provisions , both for their possible application to actions taken by domestic authorities within the united states and for u.s. armed forces activities in conflicts such as afghanistan and iraq that were non - international in character .

rosa brooks , senior advisor to the under secretary of defense for policy , stated in may 2010 that the amendments might not take into account the necessity of using certain types of weapons both in counter - terrorism operations , as well as some domestic law enforcement and public security activities .

she also suggested that the rules on employment of certain weapons can be better regulated under existing international treaties on the use of conventional weapons .

proponents of the new prohibitions argued that these prohibitions have already been established in international law through the custom and practice of the international community , and that their addition would reflect customary international law .

the states parties adopted the new prohibitions for addition to article 8 ( 2 ) ( e ) at the review conference .

in response , the u.s. as well as the canadian and israeli delegations supported a french delegation statement that interpreted the new prohibition concerning use of certain bullet types to prohibit their use only if there is a specific intent to aggravate suffering or wounding effect .

interpreting the provisions to require a finding of such intent would raise the threshold for finding a violation of the provisions .

during the review conference , the states parties and other stakeholders convened a number of panel and roundtable discussions to take stock of the state of international criminal justice as undertaken by the icc , and to discuss and determine strategies concerning the effects of the icc's work and state party involvement in that work .

four main stocktaking topics were covered: cooperation of states parties with the icc and other states parties in bringing criminals to justice ; the principle of complementarity under the rome statute and its role in fighting impunity for atrocity crimes ; the effect of the court on victims of international crimes and affected communities ; and the relationship between achieving peace and effecting justice for criminal actions committed during armed conflict .

as a result of these discussions , states parties adopted resolutions concerning victims of crimes and complementarity , as well as a declaration concerning cooperation .

the states parties did not adopt a resolution or declaration on the topic of peace and justice .

generally , observers of the stocktaking exercise at the review conference have asserted that it was a productive undertaking , even though it did not concern the central judicial and investigative operations of the court .

instead , it focused on states parties' obligations under the rome statute and highlighted the need to consider the effects of the icc on issues outside mere prosecutions .

these issues are often intertwined with the political will and governmental capabilities of states parties and other states both to accept the jurisdiction of the icc and to cooperate with the court on individual cases .

although state party and observer delegations made official statements during the stocktaking sessions , some have commented that the meetings were made more useful by allowing subject - matter experts , rather than state representatives , to lead many of the discussions .

this , they claim , led to a sharpened focus on concrete strategies and practical approaches to improvement of the icc's effectiveness .

the u.s. delegation participated fully as an observer in the stocktaking exercise .

in the period before the review conference took place , many observers promoted u.s. involvement in the stocktaking meetings due to the capacity of the united states to assist the icc both through diplomatic support and a number of technical areas of international criminal justice where the united states has long experience .

during the conference , it has been reported that the u.s. delegation played a central role in the stocktaking sessions , and the united states reportedly was the only non - party state to make specific pledges of support to improve work in the four areas discussed .

ambassador rapp has stated that despite the restrictions in aspa on the use of u.s. funds to support the icc , the united states has provided in - kind technical assistance to the icc and will continue to do so on a case - by - case basis .

legal adviser koh has stated that such assistance does not require a change in u.s. law going forward .

the outcomes of the review conference present a number of issues related to the authorities and operation of the icc , and to the relationship between the icc and the united states .

the states parties adopted changes to the rome statute that increased the court's jurisdiction , most importantly by adding the crime of aggression to the icc's list of prosecutable crimes .

this occurred despite some objection , including that of united states .

it seems clear , however , that the states parties to the rome statute as a whole are heavily in favor of moving forward with expanding the icc's role in international criminal justice , expanding the influence of international criminal justice generally .

the decisions taken at kampala seem to signify the states parties' continued expectation that the icc will grow as an important tool in encouraging peaceful resolution of disputes and discouraging military and other leaders from engaging in unlawful military activities , both at the beginning of and during armed conflicts .

with regard to u.s. interests , the u.s. delegation to the review conference did not condemn the addition of aggression and other provisions to the rome statute .

the provisions defining the court's jurisdiction over the crime seem to exclude u.s. officials and members of the u.s. armed forces from prosecution for the crime of aggression , and u.s. delegation efforts to clarify the definition of aggression under the rome statute make it likely that only the most serious cases of aggressive military action might be subject to prosecution .

with regard to u.s. officials and servicemembers possibly being subjected to icc prosecution for war crimes , crimes against humanity , and genocide , however , the review conference did not alleviate these long - standing u.s. concerns , and the obama administration has repeatedly asserted that the united states will not seek to become a party to the icc in the near future .

the review conference nevertheless showed that the united states is actively engaging with the icc , and intends to participate fully with the asp on major issues regarding the rome statute and the operations of the court .

the obama administration's official policy toward the icc is one of engagement as an observer nation , with further participation to come during the periodic meetings of the asp .

u.s. officials at the review conference made pledges of in - kind support to the icc regarding the court's current cases and the icc prosecutor's current investigations .

ambassador rapp and legal adviser koh expressed their desire to meet with the icc prosecutor to determine what u.s. support can be provided .

they have explained that their cooperative efforts comport with pertinent u.s. law and that they do not require , nor will the administration request , amendments to such law , including aspa .

despite these assertions , congress may decide to further examine the icc and the u.s. - icc relationship , both in terms of current and historic u.s. policy and as it relates to the restrictions and intent of aspa .

congress might undertake some or all of the following .

c onduct hearings .

congress might choose to gather further information on u.s. engagement and cooperation efforts with the icc , including the specific activities undertaken by respective executive agencies to cooperate with the icc and the identified "in - kind" assistance to the icc , including assistance that flows through international organizations such as the united nations .

congress may also ask for an explanation of administration policy and icc cooperation as it relates to the intended restrictions on the u.s. - icc relationship in aspa ; the possibility of the united states becoming party to the rome statute in the wake of the adoption of the crime of aggression and the restrictions on intrastate use of certain asphyxiating gases and special ammunition ; and the implications for u.s. interests , especially the security of members of the u.s. armed forces , of the adoption of provisions to activate the court's jurisdiction over the crime of aggression .

r equir e executive branch report s .

congress might consider requiring the executive branch to report on a periodic basis on u.s. cooperation with the icc , including resources and personnel involved in such cooperation .

as explained above , aspa prohibits the use of appropriated funds to support the icc , but the obama administration has pledged only "in - kind" assistance to the court .

reporting on u.s. support for the icc could shed light on whether u.s. - icc cooperation activities fall within existing legislative authorities and restrictions , especially those in aspa ; and developments in the practices , procedure , and precedents of the icc , as well as the statements of the icc prosecutor and other icc officials , in relation to preparing for prosecuting the crime of aggression , as well as any icc investigations into the actions of u.s. officials or officials of u.s. allies .

a mend ing existing or enact new legislation .

because official u.s. policy toward the court has shifted to one of engagement and support , congress might provide direction to u.s. officials concerning the u.s. - icc relationship going forward through new legislation , including provisions specifically dealing with the review conference's adoption of the crime of aggression and other changes to the rome statute .

such legislation might provide new authorities for or limitations on u.s. involvement with the court , and might address the definition of "in - kind assistance" and u.s. provision of it to the icc .

congress might decide to take up legislation that would provide policy direction on u.s. support or opposition to icc activities and to delineate authorization for u.s. participation in meetings of the asp and other u.s. - icc engagement .

