congress views the stability of haiti with great concern and commitment to improving conditions there .

both congress and the international community have invested significant resources in the political , economic , and social development of haiti , and closely monitored the conduct of the 2010-2011 elections as a prelude to the next steps in haiti's development .

haiti has been struggling to build and strengthen democratic institutions for 25 years , ever since massive popular protests and international pressure forced dictator jean - claude duvalier to abandon his rule and flee the country in 1986 .

known as "baby doc," duvalier came to power in 1971 , succeeding his father , francois "papa doc" duvalier , who had ruled since 1957 .

their 29-year dictatorship was marked by repression and corruption .

hoping to reverse almost 200 years of mostly violent and authoritarian rule , haitians overwhelmingly approved a new constitution creating a democratic government in 1987 .

de facto military rule , coups and thwarted attempts at democratic elections continued until a provisional civilian government conducted what was widely heralded as haiti's first free and fair elections in 1990 , in which jean - bertrand aristide , a former catholic priest , was elected president .

in the short term , elections have usually been a source of increased political tensions and instability in haiti .

in the long term , elections in haiti have contributed to the slow strengthening of government capacity and transparency .

elected governments have developed long - term development plans resulting in international technical and financial assistance .

they have developed national budgets and made them public .

the number of employees in bloated state enterprises has been reduced .

the government carried out the fiscal management and transparency reforms necessary to qualify for debt relief from multilateral and some bilateral creditors under the enhanced heavily indebted poor countries initiative in 2009 .

human rights violations have been drastically reduced .

despite controversy over some aspects of the 2006 elections , préval was accepted as the legitimate head of state by haitians and the world community , and oversaw a period of economic growth and relative internal political stability before a devastating earthquake struck the nation in january 2010 .

there is still much to be accomplished .

some parts of the government are not fully independent , the judicial system is weak , and corruption and political violence still threaten the nation's stability .

haitian governance capacities , already limited , were considerably diminished by the earthquake .

poverty is massive and deep , and there is extreme economic disparity between a small privileged class and the majority of the population .

the united states and other members of the international community continue to support efforts to hold free and fair elections in haiti in the belief that in the long run they will contribute to improved governance and , eventually , improved services to haitian citizens and greater stability which will allow for increased development .

congress has given bipartisan support to this policy approach .

the road to democratic development has been bumpy , and the international community became increasingly involved in trying to keep haiti on that road .

aristide was overthrown in a military coup eight months after he was inaugurated .

for three years , the coup leaders resisted international demands that aristide be restored to office .

only when faced with a u.s. military intervention did the regime relent .

aristide returned in 1994 under the protection of some 20,000 u.s. troops , who transferred responsibility to a united nations mission in 1995 .

with u.s. assistance , president aristide disbanded the army and began to train a professional civilian police force .

in 1996 haitians saw their first transfer of power between two democratically elected presidents when aristide was succeeded by rene préval .

subsequent elections held under presidents aristide and préval , both of whom served two non - consecutive terms , were marred by alleged irregularities , low voter turnout , and opposition boycotts .

some election conflicts left haiti without a fully functioning government , as when most of the legislators' terms expired in 1999 without elections being held to replace them .

president préval then ruled by decree for the remaining two years of his first term .

the international community , including an oas mission , tried in vain for several years to mediate negotiations between the aristide government and the opposition over the elections in which aristide was reelected in 2000 .

tension and political violence continued throughout aristide's second term , culminating in his flight into exile in 2004 , after the refusal of the opposition to negotiate , an armed rebellion , and loss of international support .

there were numerous allegations that aristide was involved in drug trafficking and other corrupt activities .

an interim civilian government was formed and oversaw elections in 2006 in which préval , after a dispute over the vote calculation , was elected to a new term .

since the earthquake that ravaged the haitian capital of port - au - prince and surrounding areas on january 12 , 2010 , political stability has been especially uncertain , due to the loss of many political figures and government officials , massive damage to government infrastructure , and mounting frustrations at what is widely perceived as slow progress in reconstruction and distribution of over $9 billion in pledged international assistance .

an outbreak of cholera has further complicated the situation .

at stake in the recent election process were the offices of president , the entire 99-member chamber of deputies , and 11 of 30 senators .

the newly elected officials will be responsible for directing reconstruction efforts .

many observers therefore believe that it was especially important that these elections be conducted fairly , so that the new government be accepted as legitimate by both the haitian public and international donors , including the united states , who are providing technical and financial support to the election process .

the obama administration , which considers haiti its top priority in the latin american and caribbean region , provided $16 million in election support through the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

 ( see appendix a for details on u.s. elections assistance to haiti. ) .

the un stabilization mission for haiti ( minustah ) provided security and technical support for the process .

parliamentary elections had originally been scheduled for february 28 , 2010 , but were postponed because of the earthquake .

the terms of all of the chamber of deputies and of one - third of the senate expired on may 10 , 2010 .

because elections were not held before then , the legislature ceased to function as a whole .

normally , the legislature must approve federal procurement contracts and authorize spending .

before it adjourned , however , the legislature passed a state of emergency law in april 2010 giving the executive branch those and other broad powers for 18 months , to october 2011 .

the date mandated in the constitution for any president's inauguration is february 7 ( the anniversary of duvalier's flight into exile ) .

because of the delays caused by the earthquake , and the difficulty of organizing elections following such a disaster , the legislature also authorized the extension of préval's term to may 14 , if necessary .

the president , senators , and deputies are elected to serve five - year terms .

the constitution limits presidents to two non - consecutive terms .

there are no term limits for the legislature , although turnover for its members has been high .

the first round of both the presidential and legislative elections took place on november 28 , 2010 .

according to the haitian constitution , if no candidate receives an absolute majority of the vote , a runoff vote between the top two candidates is held for presidential and chamber of deputy seats .

for senate seats , candidates who lack an absolute majority but have at least 20% more votes than the next candidate are declared the winner .

the concerns over this particular election cycle in haiti are shared by the international donor community , congress , and the obama administration .

each group is deeply concerned about the political stability of the government , its ability to move forward with a clearly defined plan for the reconstruction and development of post - earthquake haitian society , and the effectiveness of the foreign aid each provides .

in the long term , elections in haiti have contibuted to the slow strengthening of government capacity and transparency .

in the short term , elections have usually been a source of increased political tensions and instability .

in proximity to the united states , and with such a chronically unstable political environment and fragile economy , haiti has been a constant policy issue for the united states .

congress views the stability of the nation with great concern and commitment to improving conditions there .

state department and usaid officials say that the obama administration regards haiti as its number one priority in the latin america and caribbean region .

the main priorities for u.s. policy regarding haiti are to strengthen fragile democratic processes , continue to improve security , and promote economic development .

other concerns include the cost and effectiveness of u.s. aid ; protecting human rights ; combating narcotics , arms , and human trafficking ; addressing haitian migration ; and alleviating poverty .

congress has monitored haiti closely , and has established a number of conditions on assistance over the years .

congressional priorities for assistance to haiti have included "aggressive action to support the haitian national police ; " ensuring that elections are free and fair ; developing indigenous human rights monitoring capacity ; facilitating more privatization of state - owned enterprises ; promoting a sustainable agricultural development program ; and establishing an economic development fund to encourage u.s. investment in haiti .

haiti's national election process has been closely watched by the international community as well as by congress .

over the past decade , the united states and other international donors have been politically , economically , and militarily involved in haiti , investing significant resources both in the attempt to build and strengthen haiti's democracy and political stability and in providing significant amounts of development , humanitarian , and other assistance .

congress and other bilateral donors have again provided another financial stake in haiti's long - term development by providing funds for this election cycle and will continue to closely monitor the conduct of the entire election process until the conclusion of all electoral disputes as a prelude to the next steps in haiti's development .

appendix a. u.s .

elections assistance the united nations and other international donors provided technical and financial support of the recent elections process .

the united states provided $16 million in election support through the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

this aid , which encompassed support for both the first and second round voting process , included: an assessment of the feasibility of organizing free and fair elections ; support to the provisional electoral council ( cep ) for election organization and administration .

this includes training for voting center staff ; technical assistance for nationwide civic and voter education campaigns ; technical assistance to improve the cep's ability to communicate with the public and the press ; and the establishment of a call - in information center through which voters can find out where to vote ; support to a national network of nonpartisan community action groups to organize election - related civic education and get - out - the - vote activities ; technical assistance to political parties to help them compete more effectively in the 2010-2011 elections , increase the chance that they will accept election results , and reduce the potential for political conflict .

activities include training in poll watching , participation in candidate debates , and election dispute resolution ; support of domestic and international electoral observation to monitor the entire election period , to increase the confidence and participation of voters and political parties ; support for the organization of presidential debates to provide the electorate with greater access to information about candidates and issues ; support for procurement of elections material , such as ballots and ballot boxes , through a contribution to the elections trust fund managed by the united nations development program ; and after the elections , programs to build broad national support for electoral reform , including the establishment of an independent , permanent electoral council .

usaid expected relatively minor additional costs involved in making improvements for the second round based on recommendations from domestic , oas , and other observers of the first round .

these included additional staff and training for voting centers , increasing the hours and capabilities of the voter information center , and adding enough international observers to conduct a parallel vote count .

the undp and oas sought additional funding from other donors as well .

appendix b. make - up of the parliamen .

