on june 22 , 2010 , the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) grain inspection , packers and stockyards administration ( gipsa ) published a proposed rule on the implementation of regulations dealing with livestock marketing practices as mandated by title xi ( livestock ) of the food , conservation and energy act of 2008 ( 2008 farm bill ; p.l .

110-246 ) .

the proposed rule amends the regulations ( 9 c.f.r .

201 ) under the packers and stockyards act of 1921 ( p&s act , 7 u.s.c .

§181 et seq . ) .

to describe and clarify conduct that violates the p&s act .

usda received more than 61,000 public comments on the proposed rule , and it was the subject of considerable debate in congress during 2010 and 2011 .

on november 3 , 2011 , after nearly a year of review , usda notified stakeholders that a final rule and an interim final rule on livestock and poultry marketing practices had been sent to the office of management and budget ( omb ) for final review .

usda indicated that the final rule would contain provisions covering the suspension of delivery of birds , additional capital investment , breach of contract , and arbitration — four provisions addressed in sections 11005 and 11006 of the 2008 farm bill .

also , usda said the final rule would contain a section on swine and poultry contracts .

importantly , usda also indicated that it would not go forward with proposed and controversial provisions that banned packer - to - packer sales and limited the relationship between packers and packer buyers .

usda also dropped the requirement that written records providing justification for pricing differentials be maintained .

however , on november 18 , 2011 , the fy2012 agriculture appropriations act ( p.l .

112-55 ) was enacted and included a general provision that limited usda's ability to finalize a large portion of its proposed rule .

section 721 of the act placed specific conditions and prohibitions on which parts of the proposed rule usda could finalize .

it required that the combined annual cost to the economy from a final rule or an interim final rule must be less than $100 million .

section 721 also prohibited usda from using any funds to implement eight specific provisions of the proposed rule , regardless of the annual cost to the economy of the final or interim final rule .

furthermore , section 721 required that usda publish any rules in the federal register by december 9 , 2011 , and that no funding be used to implement the final rule until after 60 days of being published .

on december 9 , 2011 , usda issued the final rule on livestock and poultry marketing practices .

the rule went into effect on february 7 , 2012 .

the final rule was a significant modification of the proposed rule .

it included four provisions from the proposed rule , addressing suspension of the delivery of birds , additional capital investment , remedy of breach of contract , and arbitration .

however , it did not include many of the most contentious provisions , either because of congressional prohibitions enacted in p.l .

112-55 or because usda decided not to pursue some provisions at this time .

for more information on usda and congressional actions affecting the proposed rule , see " congressional limits in fy2012 appropriations ," and " usda's final rule ," below .

the grain inspection , packers and stockyards administration ( gipsa ) is the usda agency that promulgates regulations under the packers and stockyards act of 1921 ( p&s act , 7 u.s.c .

§181 et seq .

 ; see box , "the packers and stockyards act of 1921" ) to oversee livestock and poultry markets .

gipsa is responsible for monitoring , reviewing , and investigating livestock and poultry markets to promote fair competition ; providing payment protection through bonding and packer trusts , and guarding against deceptive and fraudulent trade practices .

some farmers and ranchers and their advocate groups believe that as the meat and poultry industries have become increasingly concentrated over time , competition has eroded , and producers have little say in market transactions with large meat companies .

in addition , some claim usda has not used the p&s act sufficiently to protect livestock and poultry producers , especially small producers , from perceived unfair trade practices of large meat companies .

during 2010 , in order to address ongoing concerns about competition in the livestock and poultry industries , usda and the department of justice ( doj ) jointly held five workshops to discuss competition and regulatory issues in agriculture .

the five workshops covered farming , poultry , dairy , livestock , and margins ( the difference between the price producers receive and the price consumers pay ) .

these workshops provided an opportunity for stakeholders from various sectors of the meat and poultry industries to air their concerns .

usda issued a proposed gipsa rule on livestock and poultry marketing practices in mid - 2010 .

proponents and opponents espoused widely differing interpretations of it .

according to usda and supporters of the proposed rule , the regulations allowed for more effective and efficient enforcement of the p&s act .

according to usda , the interaction between meat companies would be more transparent , as the proposed rule required meat packers and poultry processors to justify pricing differences and provide sample contracts to gipsa .

the proposed rule defined and gave examples of practices that gipsa considered unfair that would violate the p&s act .

the proposed rule would bring fairness to marketing transactions , according to supporters .

opponents of the proposed rule claimed that there would be unintended consequences that would adversely affect normal livestock and poultry marketing practices .

they argued that the proposed rule amounted to the government stepping in to manage the day - to - day working of markets , which would lead to inefficiencies , increased litigation , and the loss of gains that the industry has experienced over the years .

the proposed rule was issued with a 60-day comment period .

after considerable comment and feedback , the comment period was extended for an additional 90 days ending november 22 , 2010 .

the proposed rule generated more than 61,000 public comments .

some members of congress expressed considerable interest in the gipsa rule throughout the comment period , and during the 112 th congress there has been considerable interest in overseeing usda's implementation of the final rule .

this report provides background on the genesis of the proposed and final rules and a summary of their provisions .

the report discusses some of the major concerns about the proposed rule , and describes congressional interest and oversight .

advocates for stronger anticompetitive measures in the livestock industry contend that , because of the substantial market consolidation that has occurred over the past several decades , packers and poultry processors / integrators or live poultry dealers have more market power than individual producers when negotiating contracts and in the livestock market in general .

others argue that this consolidation occurred in previous decades and has stabilized in recent years , bringing with it efficiencies that benefit producers and consumers alike .

furthermore , barring collusion , others argue that it only takes two interested buyers to have sufficient competition for a market to work properly .

although congressional interest in livestock market competition issues did not result in a competition title , the most recently enacted omnibus farm bill in 2008 ( p.l .

110-246 ) included a livestock title ( title xi ) .

previous farm bills generally addressed livestock issues in miscellaneous titles .

the livestock title of the 2008 farm bill included 17 sections that cover issues such as mandatory price reporting for livestock , country - of - origin labeling for meat , and catfish grading and inspection .

sections 11005 and 11006 of the farm bill specifically addressed the p&s act .

the first of these sections dealt with production contracts and the second section with promulgating regulations for the p&s act .

the proposed rule was issued by usda to fulfill the 2008 farm bill requirements .

besides fulfilling the requirements of the farm bill , usda also saw the proposed rule as an opportunity to address the increasing use of contracting in livestock and poultry production .

usda stated that , "the goal of this regulation is to level the playing field between packers , live poultry dealers , and swine contractors , and the nation's poultry growers and livestock producers. .

the proposed rule and gipsa's discussion of the rule covered four broad areas: competitive injury , unfair or unjustly discriminatory or deceptive practices , undue or unreasonable preference or advantages , and arbitration .

the proposed rule addressed the poultry grower and swine producer contract provisions in the 2008 farm bill and also included regulations that prohibit what usda has deemed unfair market practices .

the proposed rule introduced new requirements for contracts and market practices with the aim of creating a fairer , transparent market for livestock and poultry producers .

the appendix of this report includes a synopsis of the proposed rule and a discussion of usda's supporting arguments and opponents' concerns .

on november 3 , 2011 , usda submitted a final rule and an interim final rule on livestock and poultry marketing practices to the office of management and budget ( omb ) for review .

usda informed stakeholders that the proposed rule had been modified in its final form .

usda indicated that the final rule would contain provisions covering the suspension of the delivery of birds , additional capital investment , breach of contract , and arbitration .

usda also noted that the final rule would include a section on sample swine and poultry contracts .

in addition , usda planned to publish a separate interim final rule on the poultry tournament pricing system .

however , on november 18 , 2011 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-55 ) was signed into law and it curtailed usda's ability to finalize its rule .

specifically , fy2012 funds could only be used to publish a final or interim final rule if the annual cost to the economy , which would include the livestock and poultry industries , is less than $100 million .

usda's notification on november 3 , 2011 , to stakeholders indicated that the final rule and its interim final rule would have an economic impact under $100 million .

opponents of the gipsa rule believed the economic impact could reach into the billions of dollars and had strongly criticized usda for not providing a comprehensive economic analysis of the proposed rule ( see " economic impact of the proposed rule " ) .

in february 2011 testimony , secretary of agriculture tom vilsack had assured members of congress that usda was analyzing public comments and incorporating them into additional economic analysis of the rule .

the fy2012 appropriations provision significantly restricted what usda could put forward in its final rule .

section 721 prohibited usda from using any funds to implement eight specific sections of the proposed rule , regardless of the annual cost to the economy of the final or interim final rule .

section 721 prohibited usda from using funds to finalize definitions of the tournament system ( §201.2 ( l ) ) , competitive injury ( §201.2 ( t ) ) , and the likelihood of competitive injury ( §201.2 ( u ) ) .

it also did not allow funding for usda's proposed provision that recognized the possibly of a violation of the p&s act without necessarily there being harm or likely harm to competition ( §201.3 ( c ) ) .

the section prohibited usda from using funds to issue criteria for determining unfair , unjust discriminatory and deceptive practices or devices ( §201.210 ) and undue or unreasonable preferences or advantages ( §201.211 ) .

furthermore , usda was prohibited from using funds for collecting sample swine and poultry contracts ( §201.213 ) and finalizing regulations on the tournament system ( §201.214 ) .

section 721 further required that usda publish any rules in the federal register by december 9 , 2011 , and stated that no funding could be used to implement the published rules until 60 days after publication .

the prohibitions enacted in fy2012 were continued in the fy2013 , fy2014 , and fy2015 appropriations acts ( p.l .

113-6 , p.l .

113-76 , and p.l .

113-235 , div .

a ) .

see " congressional interest and oversight " for further information .

on december 9 , 2011 , usda published its final rule on livestock and poultry marketing practices .

the rule went into effect on february 7 , 2012 .

the final rule included four provisions from the proposed rule: suspension of the delivery of birds ( §201.215 ) , additional capital investment ( §201.216 ) , remedy of breach of contract ( §201.217 , §201.218 in proposed rule ) , and arbitration ( §201.218 , §201.219 in proposed rule ) .

the final rule also included three definitions — principal part of performance ( §201.2 ( m ) ) , additional capital investment ( §201.2 ( n ) ) , and suspension of delivery of birds ( §201.2 ( o ) ) — and a section on the applicability of the rule ( §201.3 ) .

see table 3 for a comparison of the proposed rule and the final rule .

the debate on the gipsa rule stretched from the middle of 2010 until the end of 2011 , and some of the issues could arise in the context of the upcoming farm bill debate .

the following section includes a description of several of the major concerns about the proposed rule , as well as the positions of those for and against the proposed rule .

a description of each section of the proposed rule and arguments for and against them also is provided in the appendix of this report .

the box above includes a partial list of organizations that were actively involved in the debate over the proposed rule .

proponents of the proposed rule argued that the p&s act had not lived up to its potential because rules had not been properly promulgated over the years and courts had incorrectly interpreted the act .

the organization for competitive markets ( ocm ) , one of the leading proponents of the proposed rule , stated in its comments to gipsa that "perhaps its most important worth is in addressing what we believe to be errant court rulings that there is a requirement to establish 'harm to competition' prior to considering harm to an individual. .

according to proponents , the proposed rule would bring fairness to contracts and reshape interactions between producers and large meat packers and processors , especially for poultry growers who rely almost entirely on contracts .

the proposed rule , according to ocm , would not "reinvent" the p&s act but "reinvigorate" it .

ocm also contended that opponents had overblown the rule's potential impacts .

opponents of the proposed rule were concerned about how usda proposed to establish criteria for violating the p&s act , as well as a number of other provisions .

also , the proposed rule contained several provisions to address the perceived unequal balance of market power between packers or poultry dealers and individual producers or growers .

overall , opponents expected the rule to significantly alter how business is currently conducted , to the detriment — in their view — of producers , consumers , and industry participants .

according to the critics , the proposed rule would have resulted in increased litigation if gipsa's view that harm to competition is not necessary to determine a violation of the p&s act prevailed .

opponents also were concerned that the proposed rule attempted to impose a "one - size - fits - all" rule on the marketing structure and processes of different livestock sectors .

they pointed to a wide range of differences in structure and the nature of markets , with nearly all poultry produced under contract while a substantial portion of steer and heifer slaughter is traded on the cash market .

the marketing of hogs falls in between poultry and cattle with respect to the four firm concentration and marketing methods ( see figure 1 and table 1 ) .

hence they argued that several rules that might appear reasonable for one sector might be counterproductive for another .

one of the primary concerns of opponents of the proposed rule was that it lacked a rigorous economic impact analysis .

the rule was declared by the office of management and budget ( omb ) to be "significant," meaning it would have an annual effect on the economy of more than $100 million .

a rule declared significant requires that an agency explain the need for the regulation , assess potential costs and benefits , and undergo omb review .

the proposed rule was not determined to be "economically significant," which requires an even more thorough cost and benefit analysis that includes a quantified assessment of the effects and possible alternatives to the rule .

also , there was significant criticism over the cost - benefit analysis presented in the rule , which opponents said was incomplete and merited further discussion because it failed to account for potential market consequences under various scenarios .

on october 1 , 2010 , 115 members of congress sent a letter to secretary vilsack stating that the proposed rule went beyond the mandate of the 2008 farm bill and would cause major changes in livestock and poultry marketing .

the letter stated , "the analysis contained in the proposed rule fails to demonstrate the need for the rule , assess the impact of its implementation on the marketplace , or establish how the implementation of the rule would address the demonstrated need. .

the members asked that usda's office of chief economist provide a thorough economic analysis .

in response to this request , secretary vilsack said in a letter to now - house agriculture committee chairman lucas that , "beyond the cost - benefit analysis we have conducted for the proposed rule , we look forward to reviewing the public comments to inform the department if all factors have been properly considered , if or how changes should be incorporated , and to aid more rigorous cost - benefit and related analyses pursuant to the rulemaking process. .

media reports stated that in a december 13 , 2010 , conference call with stakeholders , secretary vilsack said that usda would review the public comments and conduct a more thorough cost - benefit analysis for the final rule .

r - calf usa , one of the leading proponents of the proposed rule , endorsed usda's move to conduct another cost - benefit analysis that r - calf believed would show the proposed rule's tremendous benefit for rural america and allow usda to properly implement and enforce the p&s act .

opponents noted that the proposed rule would have to be deemed economically significant in order for a meaningful analysis to be conducted .

secretary vilsack's comments that the rule would be redrafted after considering public comments raised the hope of rule opponents that the final rule would be more limited in scope .

the 112 th congress showed considerable interest in gipsa's intent and implementation of the proposed rule .

immediately after the november 2010 election , representative frank lucas , chairman of the house committee on agriculture , indicated that the proposed gipsa rule could be of interest as part of the committee's oversight responsibilities during the first session of the 112 th congress .

also , in a letter to senator debbie stabenow , chairwoman of the senate agriculture committee , and senator pat roberts , ranking member , senator mike johanns stated that hearings on gipsa's proposed rule should be one of several issues included in the agriculture committee's oversight responsibilities .

eventually , congress expressed its concern about the gipsa rule through the appropriations process .

the 112 th congress enacted an appropriations rider for fy2012 that placed restrictions on usda's ability to finalize and implement parts of the proposed gipsa rule .

the 113 th congress continued to enact the prohibitions in appropriations bills for fy2013 through fy2015 , and included provisions to rescind parts of the finalized rule in fy2013 and fy2015 .

for the first time since fy2012 , the appropriations bill for fy2016 did not contain a gipsa rider .

the gipsa rule was part of the farm bill debate , as house - passed measures in the 2012 and 2013 farm bill versions would have permanently prevented usda from finalizing and implementing the gipsa rule or issuing similar rules in the future .

senate farm bill versions did not include gipsa repeal provisions .

in the end , the farm bill conference report for the agriculture act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-79 ) did not include a gipsa repeal provision .

if the farm bill provisions had been successfully enacted , the appropriations provisions would not have to be renewed annually .

on february 17 , 2011 , during separate oversight hearings on the farm economy conducted by the house committee on agriculture and the senate committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry , secretary vilsack was asked about the proposed rule and when usda's economic analysis would be completed and the proposed rule finalized .

without providing a time frame , he indicated that usda was working on the economic analysis , using the numerous public comments , and would take the time necessary to complete a thorough analysis .

the secretary was also asked if usda's economic analysis would be peer - reviewed and made available for a public comment period , but no commitment was given .

in a may 18 , 2011 , letter to secretary vilsack , 147 members of the house of representatives followed up the hearing by requesting that usda allow for public comment on any revisions to the proposed rule and on the new economic analysis .

in addition to these initial hearings where questions and concerns about the proposed rule were raised , the proposed rule was questioned and discussed in several other hearings .

witnesses in three hearings on the state of the beef , pork , and poultry sectors conducted by the house committee on agriculture's subcommittee on livestock , dairy , and poultry raised concerns that the proposed rule would hamper or damage the way they conducted business .

a hearing on the state of the livestock industry held by the senate committee on agriculture nutrition and forestry also aired concerns about the proposed rule by senators and industry representatives , while a witness from the national farmers union testified that farmers and ranchers needed the proposed rule to provide fairness in the marketplace .

in addition , the gipsa proposed rule was the subject of oversight hearings by the house committee on small business , subcommittee on agriculture , energy , and trade , and the house committee on oversight and government reform .

as in the earlier hearings , industry witnesses mostly expressed their concerns that the proposed rule would economically damage their operations .

in the small business hearing , a witness from a pennsylvania farm organization testified that the proposed rule would help protect poultry growers and hog producers from the loss of competition due to industry consolidation .

in response to significant concerns by some members of congress , the fy2012 appropriations bill ( h.r .

2112 ) that passed the house on june 16 , 2011 , contained section 721 , prohibiting usda from using any appropriated funds "to write , prepare , develop , or publish a final rule or an interim final in furtherance of , or otherwise to implement" the proposed gipsa rule .

during debate on h.r .

2112 , representative marcy kaptur opposed section 721 in floor comments but did not offer an amendment to remove it .

instead , she argued that the proposed rule benefitted farmers and ranchers and that gipsa should be allowed to proceed with the rulemaking process .

representative kaptur also entered statements from the american farm bureau and a group of 140 farm organizations that supported allowing usda to move the proposed rule forward .

the house committee on appropriations' report on h.r .

2112 expressed concern that gipsa's proposed rule misinterpreted the intent of congress concerning the regulation of livestock marketing practices and underestimated the cost of the proposed rule .

the report also expressed concern that usda might not have complied with the administrative procedures act that governs rulemaking by publishing its "farm bill regulations — misconceptions and explanations" document .

in addition , by closing the comment period in november 2010 before holding the last of five workshops on competition held jointly with the department of justice in december 2010 , the committee report stated that the department might have limited the public's ability to comment on the proposed rule .

the senate version of h.r .

2112 that was passed on november 1 , 2011 did not include a similar provision .

however , the fy2012 conference report for h.r .

2112 included section 721 with its conditions and prohibitions on usda's authority to finalize and implement certain parts of the proposed rule .

 ( sections 201.2 ( l ) , 201.2 ( t ) , 201.2 ( u ) , 201.3 ( c ) , 201.210 , 201.211 , 201.213 , and 201.214 ) ; see table 3 ) .

on november 18 , 2011 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-55 ) was enacted .

proponents of the proposed rule characterized the considerable restrictions as a "mortal blow" to the proposed rule , and the "death knell" of the p&s act .

in a november 16 , 2011 , letter to members of the senate , the national farmers union noted that section 721 blocked usda action that would have helped independent farmers and ranchers .

on the other hand , opponents of the proposed rule believed many of their concerns were addressed through section 721 .

in its statement on the agriculture appropriations act , the american meat institute said , "we also commend lawmakers' action to prevent gipsa from proceeding with the most disruptive and costly provisions contained in its 2010 proposed rule. .

the provisions that blocked usda from implementing the majority of the gipsa rule in fy2012 were continued in fy2013 .

section 742 of the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 ( p.l .

113-6 ) , which was enacted march 26 , 2013 , included language from the fy2012 agriculture appropriations bill that restricted how usda could finalize its proposed rule on livestock and poultry marketing practices .

in addition , section 742 included a provision that required the secretary of agriculture to rescind three provisions that usda finalized in december 2011 ( see "usda's final rule" ) .

the three provisions were the definition of the "suspension of delivery of birds" ( §201.2 ( o ) ) , the provision that made the rule applicable to live poultry ( §201.3 ( a ) ) , and the 90-day notification period required when a poultry company intends to suspend the delivery of birds to a grower ( §201.215 ( a ) ) .

under section 742 , usda was required to rescind the three provisions within 60 days of the enactment of the bill .

the provision to rescind parts of the gipsa rule that had already been finalized first appeared in section 719 of the house - reported fy2013 appropriations bill ( h.r .

5973 ) .

the only difference was that the house bill also would have rescinded the definition of "additional capital investment" ( §201.2 ( n ) ) .

the senate fy2013 appropriations bill ( s. 2375 ) did not contain a provision similar to section 719 .

the rescinding provisions of section 719 were not included in the fy2013 continuing resolution ( cr ; p.l .

112-175 ) , which was enacted september 28 , 2012 , to provide appropriations through march 27 , 2013 .

the extension of the appropriations and authorities from fy2012's p.l .

112-55 in the cr resulted in the majority of the gipsa rule remaining blocked .

in march 2013 , the 113 th congress began addressing appropriations for the remainder of fy2013 .

the house - passed appropriations bill , department of defense , military construction and veterans affairs , and full - year continuing appropriations act , 2013 ( h.r .

933 ) , did not include specific language regarding the gipsa rule , but extended the prohibitions from fy2012 appropriations .

however , section 742 of the senate - amended version of h.r .

933 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 , included language to continue the prohibitions on finalizing and implementing parts of the gipsa rule , and rescinded three of usda's finalized provisions .

reportedly , section 742 was included during negotiations between the house and senate over agriculture appropriations in december 2012 .

during the debate , proponents of the gipsa rule sent a letter to the senate appropriations committee objecting to the inclusion of section 742 in the appropriations bill stating that it limited usda's ability to "address anti - competitive and fraudulent practices in the livestock and poultry sectors. .

the american farm bureau federation also weighed in with a letter to senators that expressed opposition to section 742 .

senators tester , johnson ( sd ) , brown , and leahy proposed an amendment ( s.amdt .

75 to h.r .

933 ) that would have struck the gipsa provisions from the senate appropriations bill .

however , the amendment did not receive a floor vote .

section 742 of the house - reported fy2014 agriculture appropriations bill ( h.r .

2410 ) included the same prohibition from the fy2012 and fy2013 appropriations acts that prevent usda from using appropriated funds to finalize or implement certain provisions of the gipsa rule .

however , the section did not rescind the three finalized provisions as in p.l .

113-6 .

the senate - reported fy2014 agriculture appropriations bill ( s. 1244 ) did not include a similar provision .

the continuing resolution ( p.l .

113-46 ) that ended the government shutdown and provided funding through january 15 , 2014 , carried forward the fy2013 authority for the gipsa prohibitions .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) was enacted on january 17 , 2014 .

section 744 of p.l .

113-76 continued to prohibit usda from finalizing and implementing certain parts of the gipsa rule , but did not include language rescinding the three provisions that were in the fy2013 act .

for fy2015 , continuing resolution ( p.l .

113-164 ) initially extended gipsa funding prohibitions through december 11 , 2014 .

subsequently , section 731 of the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 , division a ) continued to prohibit gipsa from finalizing and implementing gipsa rule provisions for the remainder of the fiscal year .

in addition , section 731 included language to rescind the three finalized provisions that were included in the fy2013 appropriations act ( see " fy2013 appropriations " ) , but not the fy2014 act .

on february 5 , 2015 , usda issued a final rule that permanently removed the three rescinded provisions from regulations .

the three were ( 1 ) the definition of the "suspension of delivery of birds" ( §201.2 ( o ) ) , ( 2 ) the provision that made the rule applicable to live poultry ( §201.3 ( a ) ) , and ( 3 ) the 90-day notification period required when a poultry company intends to suspend the delivery of birds to a grower ( §201.215 ( a ) ) .

the enacted consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) does not include a gipsa rider prohibiting usda from finalizing and implementing rules on livestock and poultry marketing .

neither the house - reported agricultural appropriations bill ( h.r .

3049 ) nor the senate - reported bill ( s. 1800 ) included gipsa riders .

as stated above , any effort to prohibit implementation of the gipsa rule in the context of the appropriations bill expires at the end of the fiscal year .

critics of the gipsa rule sought a permanent solution through repealing and prohibiting gipsa provisions in farm bill legislation .

both the 2013 house farm bills , h.r .

1947 and h.r .

2642 , contained provisions that would have permanently prevented usda from implementing the gipsa rule or issuing similar rules in the future .

the senate - passed 2013 farm bill ( s. 954 ) did not contain provisions similar to the house versions .

in the end , the farm bill conference report for the agriculture act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-79 ) did not include the gipsa repeal provision .

on may 15 , 2013 , during the house agriculture committee markup of the 2013 farm bill ( h.r .

1947 ) , representatives conaway and costa offered an amendment to repeal section 11006 of the 2008 farm bill , and permanently stop usda from finalizing or implementing eight sections of the gipsa rule that were included in appropriations bills ( sections 201.2 ( l ) , 201.2 ( t ) , 201.2 ( u ) , 201.3 ( c ) , 201.210 , 201.211 , 201.213 , and 201.214 ; see table 3 ) .

in addition , the amendment repealed the existing regulation that defined additional capital investment ( §201.2 ( n ) ) , and prohibited usda from enforcing the three existing regulations that were rescinded in the fy2013 appropriations bill ( p.l .

113-6 ) .

these were the definition of suspension of delivery of birds ( §201.2 ( o ) ) , the applicability to live poultry ( §201.3 ( a ) ) , and the 90-day notification for suspension of the delivery of birds ( §201.215 ( a ) ) .

the amendment also permanently prohibited usda from issuing regulations or adopting provisions similar to those in the amendment .

the house agriculture committee adopted the conaway - costa amendment on voice vote and it became section 12102 of h.r .

1947 .

after h.r .

1947 failed on the floor of the house on june 20 , 2013 , the gipsa amendment was included as section 11102 of h.r .

2642 , which was passed by the house on july 11 , 2013 .

on september 28 , 2013 , the house passed h.res .

361 , which inserted the house - passed nutrition reform and work opportunity act of 2013 into h.r .

2642 as the nutrition title ( title iv ) , making the gipsa provision section 12102 of the amended house farm bill .

the house - reported 2012 farm bill ( h.r .

6083 ) also contained a gipsa provision .

the senate - passed 2012 farm bill ( s. 3240 ) did not include a gipsa provision .

proponents of the gipsa rule provisions oppose section 11102 of h.r .

2642 .

in a letter sent prior to the markup of h.r .

1947 to chairman lucas and ranking member peterson , the national farmers union noted that the provision would "undercut the enforcement of farmer protections" that gipsa provides under the p&s act .

stakeholders that oppose the gipsa rule support the inclusion of the provision .

the livestock marketing association ( lma ) , an association that represents livestock marketing businesses , has expressed concern that the language in section 11102 ( c ) ( 3 ) prohibiting usda from issuing or adopting policies "similar to" the gipsa provisions could tie usda's hands in future rulemaking .

lma notes that the p&s act could require future updates that are widely supported by industry , but if any future measure were deemed "similar to" provisions from the 2010 gipsa rule , usda could be prevented from addressing it .

lma recommends that the "similar to" language could be dropped without undermining the intent of the section .

