the 112 th congress is currently considering various options for tax reform and deficit reduction .

in recent years , deficits have reached historically high levels relative to the size of the economy , leading to concerns over fiscal sustainability in the long run .

a balanced approach to deficit reduction could involve changes to both federal spending and revenues .

this report addresses revenue options , highlighting proposals made by the president's fiscal commission and the debt reduction task force .

both of these groups offered bipartisan proposals for deficit reduction that provide a potential starting point for what is likely to be a process that involves many difficult policy choices .

in addition to changes in revenue policy geared toward deficit reduction , fundamental tax reform has been an issue of interest in the 112 th congress .

it is possible for tax reform to complement deficit reduction goals .

this report begins by reviewing the current fiscal situation .

as a percentage of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , revenues remain at historically low levels while spending remains elevated , contributing to budget deficits .

the budget deficit in fy2011 is projected to be nearly $1.5 trillion , or 9.8% of gdp .

further , in recent years , the share of the federal budget devoted to mandatory spending has increased , making it difficult , if not impossible , for fiscal sustainability to be achieved through cuts in discretionary spending alone .

large budget deficits continue to contribute to a growing national debt , which , if left unchecked , could undermine future economic growth .

after examining the current fiscal situation , this report analyzes current federal revenues .

the united states currently raises most federal revenues through the individual income tax and payroll taxes .

reforms to both types of taxes could result in additional revenues .

further , the united states could generate additional revenue by reforming the corporate income tax , levying additional consumption taxes , or by increasing excise taxes on certain items ( eg , gasoline , alcohol ) , among other options .

in recent months , a number of groups and individuals have issued proposals for deficit reduction .

this report provides a comparison of the tax reforms suggested in two of these proposals , the president's fiscal commission and the debt reduction task force .

these two were chosen as each provided comparable specifics with respect to tax reform .

in addition to the fiscal commission and debt reduction task force plans , notable deficit reduction plans have been released by congressional leadership and the administration .

in april , 2011 , representative paul ryan , chairman of the house committee on the budget released the path to prosperity: restoring america's promise .

this document accompanies the house - passed fy2012 budget resolution , h.con.res .

34 .

chairman ryan's path to prosperity proposes to reduce budget deficits and stabilize national debt using a combined strategy , including spending cuts , entitlement reforms ( specifically , medicare ) , and tax reforms .

the path to prosperity suggests simplifying the tax code by reducing rates and eliminating tax expenditures .

specifics regarding which tax expenditures would be eliminated were not provided .

the administration has also outlined a broad framework for deficit reduction , in a fact sheet titled the president's framework for shared prosperity and shared fiscal responsibility .

the president also supports eliminating tax expenditures .

eliminating tax expenditures might allow for reduced rates or deficit reduction .

the administration's proposal does not provide specifics regarding which tax expenditure provisions would be eliminated .

the administration also notes that reforms to social security should be considered .

this potentially could include changes to the payroll tax base , however , specifics were not provided .

the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) couples an increase in the debt ceiling with reduced spending , while also establishing a 12-member joint select committee to identify additional policies to reduce the deficit .

under the budget control act of 2011 , the debt ceiling is increased through multiple phases by $2.1 trillion to $2.4 trillion .

the increase in the debt ceiling is matched with a decrease in projected federal deficits .

under the first phase , the debt ceiling is increased by $900 billion ( $400 billion up front , with another $500 billion increase to occur in the absence of a joint resolution of disapproval ) .

under the second phase , the 12-member joint select committee on deficit reduction identifies an additional $1.5 trillion in deficit reduction over the fy2012 - fy2021 budget window .

if the joint select committee fails to find at least $1.2 trillion in deficit reduction , $1.2 trillion in across - the - board spending cuts would be enacted .

as the joint select committee evaluates policy options for achieving the additional $1.2 trillion to $1.5 trillion in deficit reduction , revenue options may be considered .

on september 19 , 2011 , president obama submitted recommendations for deficit reduction to the joint select committee on deficit reduction .

the president's proposal , when combined with the discretionary spending caps enacted as part of the budget control act , would result in nearly $4.9 trillion in deficit reduction through 2021 .

several factors contribute to the current fiscal situation .

first , there are historically large budget deficits .

bringing down budget deficits could involve reducing spending , increasing revenues , or both .

second , these large budget deficits are contributing to a growing national debt .

if these deficits and the debt are not addressed , there may be macroeconomic consequences .

the following sections address these factors in turn .

in fy2010 , federal revenues were $2.2 trillion .

the sources for these revenues are illustrated in figure 4 .

nearly 41.5% of total receipts ( $899 billion ) was collected through individual income taxes .

another 40.0% ( $865 billion ) was collected through social insurance and retirement ( i.e. , payroll ) taxes .

the corporate tax accounted for 8.9% ( $191 billion ) in total tax collections .

excise taxes accounted for 3.1% of total collections ( $67 billion ) .

the estate and gift taxes were responsible for 0.8% ( $18 billion ) in revenue , and the remaining 5.6% ( $122 billion ) in receipts came from other sources .

figure 5 illustrates the trends in federal receipts as a percentage of gdp , by receipts source , over the past four decades .

as can be seen in figure 5 , both individual and corporate tax receipts relative to gdp reached a 40-year low in 2009 .

corporate receipts recovered modestly in 2010 .

the low levels of individual and corporate income tax collections can be partially explained by the recession .

another factor contributing to reduced income tax collections is the increased availability of income tax credits , exemptions , and deductions .

individual income tax collections have tended to be below historical averages , since the 2001 tax cuts .

social insurance tax collections were slightly above the historical average .

as a benchmark , it is helpful to consider the magnitude of the increase in revenues that would be needed , should deficits be eliminated through only tax increases .

table 1 provides some guidance on the percentage increase in revenues that would be necessary to achieve a balanced budget under the cbo current policy baseline and the administration's fy2012 budget proposal ( omb ) , based on fy2011 and fy2015 projections .

both cbo and omb projections suggest that the federal budget deficit will remain around $1.5 trillion in fy2011 .

closing this budget deficit using only increased income tax revenue would require income tax receipts to increase by 145% , using cbo's projections , or 141% , using omb's projections .

increases in income tax receipts could be achieved through higher rates or by reducing various tax expenditures ( this issue is discussed further below ) .

balancing the fy2011 budget through increases in both income and social insurance taxes would require an increase in receipts of 78% , using cbo's projections , or 72% , using omb's projections .

increasing social insurance receipts could be achieved either through rate increases or by applying the tax to income above the social security cap .

balancing the budget through tax increases in fy2015 would require less in terms of increased revenues .

both cbo and omb project increasing tax revenues and falling deficits over time as the economy continues to recover from the recent recession .

note that cbo's baseline is current law , meaning that the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts , and the amt patch , among other policies , are allowed to expire as scheduled in 2012 .

if tax cuts that are scheduled to expire are extended further , the tax increases required to eliminate the deficit would be even larger .

using these projections , increasing income tax revenues by 30% ( using cbo's baseline ) or 37% ( using omb's projections ) would achieve a balanced budget in fy2015 .

if both income and social insurance taxes were increased , revenue increases of 18% ( using cbo's baseline ) or 21% ( using omb's projections ) would be necessary to achieve a balanced budget .

if all taxes were increased , including corporate taxes , estate and gift taxes , and excise taxes , revenues would have to increase by 15% ( using cbo's baseline ) or 17% ( using the omb's projections ) to achieve a balanced budget .

economists oftentimes evaluate the relative merits of tax policies using the concepts of economic efficiency and equity .

generally , there is a trade - off between economic efficiency and equity .

tax systems that maximize economic efficiency oftentimes do not have desirable distributional consequences .

thus , policymakers may strive to balance these two objectives when implementing changes to the tax code .

another challenge for policymakers is that tax reforms may create winners and losers .

eliminating targeted tax incentives may increase tax liability for some , even as rates across the board are reduced .

while eliminating certain tax incentives targeted for low - income individuals may broaden the tax base , eliminating such tax preferences may raise equity concerns .

alternatively , eliminating tax preferences that tend to benefit higher - income taxpayers may enhance tax - code equity at the expense of economic efficiency , if the tax preferences were designed to address a market failure .

for example , higher - income households are more able and more likely to benefit from education - related tax incentives .

thus , eliminating various education tax benefits could enhance tax code equity .

eliminating education tax incentives , however , could reduce economic efficiency .

tax subsidies for education can enhance economic efficiency if they are successful in increasing investment in education .

the following sections provide a broad overview of various tax reform options , categorized according to the various sources of federal revenues discussed above .

providing a detailed analysis of the many reform options available is beyond the scope of this report .

instead , broad options for reform within each revenue source are reviewed .

this overview provides a foundation for the discussion of specific deficit reduction proposals that follows .

in february 2010 , by executive order , president obama created the national commission on fiscal responsibility and reform ( fiscal commission ) .

the 18-member commission was charged with "identifying policies to improve the fiscal situation in the medium term and achieve fiscal sustainability over the long run. .

the fiscal commission released a final report in december 2010 .

a number of other groups have released alternative plans for achieving deficit reduction and fiscal sustainability .

a full comparison of the tax policies of these plans is beyond the scope of this report .

details of the fiscal commission's tax proposals are compared to the tax proposals put forth by the debt reduction task force in restoring america 's future: reviving the economy , cutting spending and debt , and creating a simple , pro - growth tax system .

the debt reduction task force was co - chaired by former senator pete domenici and alice rivlin , former director of the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and office of management and budget ( omb ) .

the details from this report are included for a number of reasons .

first , like the fiscal commission , the debt reduction task force is a group comprised of a number of budget experts .

second , the debt reduction task force's plan contained specifics that could be compared to those put forth by the fiscal commission .

third , the urban - brookings tax policy center provides distributional analysis of both reports' tax proposals , allowing for additional comparison .

table 5 provides a side - by - side comparison of the fiscal commission's tax proposals , the debt reduction task force's proposals , and tax provisions under current law .

there are a number of similarities between the two proposals .

for example , each plan seeks to broaden the tax base by eliminating various exemptions , deductions , and credits , allowing for lower tax rates .

the following sections highlight similarities , as well as differences , through providing an overview of the two proposals .

as noted above , the budget control act of 2011 established a joint select committee for deficit reduction .

as this bi - partisan committee evaluates various policy options , the findings of the fiscal commission and the debt reduction task force may serve as a useful starting point .

persistent budget deficits and the accompanying increase in national debt is at the forefront of congressional debate .

achieving fiscal sustainability , reducing the budget deficit , and bringing the national debt to sustainable levels , will likely involve some combination of spending and revenue measures .

this report provided a broad overview of some of the potential revenue options available to congress .

the majority of federal revenues are collected through the individual income tax system and through payroll taxes .

revenues can be enhanced by eliminating various deductions , exemptions , and credits , generally broadening the tax base .

a broader tax base could allow for lower tax rates , which may enhance economic efficiency .

there are , however , additional revenue options outside of the existing tax code .

both the president's fiscal commission and the debt reduction task force laid out plans for achieving fiscal sustainability .

tax reform was a substantial component of both proposals .

each proposed to modify the existing individual and corporate tax systems by eliminating tax expenditures allowing for lower tax rates .

each plan also suggested increasing the payroll tax base by increasing the share of covered wages .

the plans differed , however , with respect to how much revenue would be generated through these tax reforms .

under the fiscal commission's proposal , comprehensive tax reform and payroll tax changes would generate the majority of revenues , with additional revenues coming from an additional excise tax on motor fuels .

the debt reduction task force's comprehensive tax reform would not generate added revenues through 2020 .

instead , the debt reduction task force proposed raising revenues through a consumption tax , in the form of a broad - based national sales tax .

the president's september 19 , 2011 , deficit reduction proposal also provides a specific framework for achieving long - run deficit reduction and enhancing fiscal sustainability .

additional revenues in the president's proposal are raised primarily by allowing the reduced tax rates on high - income taxpayers to expire and by limiting the value of itemized deductions for high - income taxpayers , thereby broadening the tax base .

the fiscal commission , debt reduction task force , and president's proposal have provided possible roadmaps for achieving fiscal sustainability .

in all three plans , tax reform is an important component .

understanding that tax reform could play an important role in any successful deficit reduction and debt control strategy , congress may want to consider tax policies that will be economically efficient , equitable , and provide a stable foundation for future economic growth .

it is also important to note , however , that enhancing equity and efficiency in the tax code may not necessarily lead to deficit reduction .

