over the past decade , the united states has recognized the human immunodeficiency virus and the acquired immune deficiency syndrome ( hiv / aids ) as a key foreign policy priority .

congressional authorization of the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) in 2003 brought unprecedented attention and funding to the epidemic and established a new and central role for donor governments in the fight against hiv / aids , particularly regarding the provision of aids treatment .

the united states remains the largest single donor for global hiv / aids efforts in the world , providing over 50% of all government donor funds .

in recent years , despite the continued challenge of hiv / aids around the world , international funding for hiv / aids — including u.s. assistance — has begun to level off .

this report provides information on key components of the hiv / aids epidemic and the u.s. response to hiv / aids .

hiv is an infectious disease that damages human immune cells .

the final stage of hiv is aids , which occurs when an individual's immune system is so damaged it can no longer fight off other infections .

if left untreated , aids is fatal .

hiv is spread through contact with the bloodstream or by passing through delicate mucous membranes , including the vagina , rectum , and urethra .

transmission primarily occurs in three ways: ( 1 ) unprotected sexual intercourse with an infected partner ; ( 2 ) injections with a needle , syringe , or other equipment that has been used by an infected person ; and ( 3 ) between a child and an infected mother , during pregnancy , birth , or breast - feeding .

high - risk groups include sex workers , men who have sex with men , and injecting drug users .

prevalence : prevalence measures the number of people living with a disease .

since the beginning of the epidemic , more than 60 million people have been infected with hiv .

in 2010 , there were an estimated 34 million people living with the virus .

women make up 50% of all adults living with hiv .

the number of people living with hiv continues to rise as a combined result of new infections and improved access to antiretroviral treatment ( art ) that has lowed aids - related mortality .

incidence : incidence measures the number of people who contract a disease within a given time period ( usually one year ) .

in 2010 , 2.7 million people contracted hiv , including 390,000 children under the age of 15 .

new infections are thought to have peaked in 1996 at 3.5 million ( figure 1 ) .

incidence has fallen by more than 25% in 33 countries between 2001 and 2009 , including in 22 sub - saharan african countries .

mortality : hiv continues to be a leading cause of death worldwide and the number one killer in sub - saharan africa .

in 2010 , 1.8 million people died of aids , including roughly 250,000 children .

aids - related deaths are thought to have peaked in 2004 at 2.2 million and declined since then due to the improved access to art .

hiv / aids is a global phenomenon , but there are important regional and intra - regional differences in hiv prevalence , incidence , and mortality .

sub - saharan africa ( ssa ) is the region most affected by hiv / aids ( figure 2 ) .

in 2010 , an estimated 22.9 million people were living with hiv / aids in ssa , accounting for 68% of all people living with hiv worldwide .

southern africa is home to the nine countries with the world's highest hiv prevalence rates worldwide and was home to an estimated 11.1 million people living with hiv in 2010 .

swaziland has the world's highest prevalence rate ( 25.9% ) , and south africa has the world's largest population with hiv ( 5.6 million ) .

in 2010 , about 1.9 million people in ssa contracted hiv and some 1.2 million people in the region died from aids .

in 2010 , an estimated 4.8 million people were living with hiv in asia , including 360,000 people who became infected in 2010 .

also in 2010 , approximately 310,000 aids - related deaths occurred in the region , the largest number of deaths outside of sub - saharan africa .

in asia , the rate of hiv transmission is slowing and the death toll has remained stable , while the epidemic among men who have sex with men appears to be growing .

in 2010 , an estimated 1.7 million people were living with hiv in latin america and the caribbean , including 112,000 people who became infected in 2010 .

in the region , the bahamas has the highest prevalence rate , while brazil has the largest population living with virus .

overall , the epidemic in latin america has stabilized and the rates of new infections and aids - related deaths in the caribbean have slowed .

eastern europe and central asia ( eeca ) has experienced the largest regional increase in hiv prevalence , most prominently in russia and ukraine .

since 2001 , the number of people living with hiv in the region has increased by 250% .

in 2010 , an estimated 1.5 million people were living with hiv in eeca , including 160,000 people who were infected in 2010 .

the number of aids - related deaths in the region has also continued to grow , reaching 83,000 in 2010 .

treatment : use of art to treat hiv / aids has lowered the rate of aids - related deaths in much of the world .

art coverage — the percentage of people on art among those eligible for treatment — was 47% in 2010 , up from 7% in 2003 .

while lowering aids - related deaths , access to art has also increased hiv prevalence around the world , as infected individuals are now living longer .

art also has preventive benefits as it lowers viral loads , consequently reducing the likelihood of transmission .

care activities : care for individuals infected and affected by hiv / aids constitutes a wide range of activities , including support for art adherence , treatment of opportunistic infections , nutritional counseling , mental health services , prevention education , and livelihood activities , along with attention to orphans and vulnerable children .

prevention activities : a number of prevention efforts are being used to combat hiv / aids , including male circumcision , reduction of mother - to - child transmission ( pmtct ) , behavior change programs ( including advocacy of abstinence , being faithful , and using condoms ) , hiv testing , blood supply safety programs , harm reduction programs aimed at high - risk groups , and increased provision of antiretroviral therapy , which can reduce the potential of transmission .

prevention research : several studies published in 2010 and 2011 have demonstrated progress in developing new prevention technologies .

antiretroviral therapy has been shown to have important preventive benefits: among couples with one infected partner , early use of art was shown to reduce transmission by at least 96% .

efforts to develop hiv preventive vaccines and microbicides — compounds that can be applied inside the vagina or rectum to protect against sexually transmitted infections — are also underway .

results from a 2010 study in south africa , funded in part by the united states , showed that the use of a microbicide was 39% effective in reducing a woman's risk of contracting hiv during sex .

many health experts support microbicide research as it offers women vulnerable to violence and sexual coercion some degree of protection against hiv .

on may 27 , 2003 , president george w. bush signed into law the united states leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria act of 2003 ( leadership act , p.l .

108-25 ) .

the leadership act authorized $15 billion for global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs from fy2004 through fy2008 .

the act also authorized the creation of the office of the global aids coordinator ( ogac ) at the department of state to oversee and coordinate all bilateral hiv / aids activities and funding .

as part of the act , congress recommended the following distribution of hiv / aids funds: 15% of funds be used for palliative care , and 20% of funds be used for hiv / aids prevention efforts .

congress further required the following distribution of hiv / aids funds for each fiscal year from fy2006 to fy2008: at least 55% of funds be used for aids treatment , of which at least 75% be used for the purchase and distribution of art and at least 25% be used for related care ; at least 33% of appropriated prevention funds be used for abstinence - until - marriage programs ; and at least 10% of funds be spent on orphans and vulnerable children .

finally , the act mandated that from fy2004 to fy2008 , the united states contribution to the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis , and malaria ( global fund , see , " key partners in the response to global hiv / aids " ) not exceed 33% of the total amount of funds contributed from all sources .

on july 24 , 2008 , president bush signed into law the tom lantos and henry j. hyde u.s .

global leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria reauthorization act of 2008 ( lantos - hyde act , p.l .

110-293 ) .

the lantos - hyde act authorized $48 billion for u.s. global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria efforts from fy2008 through fy2013 , including $2 billion for the global fund in fy2008 .

as part of the act , congress removed the recommendations that 20% of funds be spent on prevention efforts and that 33% of these funds be used for abstinence - until - marriage programs , and required the following: for each fiscal year from fy2009 to fy2013 , at least 10% of funds be spent on orphans and vulnerable children ; for each fiscal year from fy2009 to fy2013 , more than 50% of bilateral assistance be spent on treatment and care of individuals infected with hiv / aids ; balanced funding for prevention activities including those that promote abstinence , delay of sexual debut , monogamy , fidelity , and partner reduction and country - specific implementation of such activities ; and a report to congress should less than 50% of prevention funds go to activities promoting abstinence , delay of sexual debut , monogamy , fidelity , and partner reduction in any country with a generalized epidemic .

this legislation will be up for reauthorization in fy2013 .

in 1999 , the 106 th congress authorized resources to support a proposal by the clinton administration to broaden u.s. activities related to global hiv / aids through the leadership and investment in fighting an epidemic ( life ) initiative .

life sought to address hiv / aids in 14 african countries and in india and represented the first time agencies other than the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) were included in the u.s. response to hiv / aids .

president george w. bush launched two initiatives that built on the life initiative .

in 2002 , president bush announced the international mother and child hiv prevention initiative , which focused on preventing mother - to - child transmission of hiv in 12 african countries and in 2 caribbean countries .

in 2003 , president bush announced pepfar , proposing that the united states spend $15 billion over the course of five years to combat global hiv / aids .

both the life initiative and the international mother and child hiv prevention initiative were replaced by pepfar .

pepfar significantly increased attention to and funding for global hiv / aids .

the president proposed that the majority of the funds ( $9 billion ) be concentrated in 15 focus countries , including 12 in sub - saharan africa .

the proposal also allocated $5 billion to research and to other bilateral hiv / aids programs and $1 billion for contributions in fy2004 to the global fund .

pepfar represents the largest commitment by any country toward an international health issue .

at the time it was established , health experts were debating whether the international community had a responsibility to provide art to hiv - positive people in developing countries and whether they could be safely administered in such environments .

pepfar responded to calls from those advocating treatment for the world's poor and demonstrated that art could be effectively provided in low - resource settings .

through the leadership act , congress authorized the establishment of the office of the global aids coordinator ( ogac ) , at the department of state .

ogac oversees and coordinates all u.s. spending on bilateral global hiv / aids activities implemented by various agencies ( see " pepfar implementing agencies " ) , as well as contributions to multilateral organizations .

president barack obama has committed to continued support for pepfar , while working to transition pepfar from an emergency plan to a long - term and sustainable approach to global hiv / aids .

on may 5 , 2009 , the president announced the global health initiative ( ghi ) , a new six - year effort to develop a comprehensive u.s. global health strategy .

the ghi calls for a more integrated u.s. response to global health issues and for a shift in u.s. global health strategy from one focused on specific diseases to a more comprehensive approach to health .

pepfar is the central component of the ghi and accounts for approximately 75% of the president's fy2013 budget proposal .

as part of the ghi , pepfar has committed to supporting the following goals from fy2010 through fy2014: prevention of more than 12 million new hiv infections ; treatment of more than 6 million people living with hiv / aids ; care for more than 12 million people , including 5 million orphans and vulnerable children ; and training and retention of more than 140,000 new heath care workers .

pepfar programs are led by ogac at the state department and implemented by various u.s. agencies and departments , including the following: u.s. agency for international development : usaid supports hiv / aids programs in nearly 100 countries .

these programs focus on providing treatment , care , and support to people infected with hiv / aids ; strengthening primary health care systems ; providing training , technical assistance , and commodities that reduce hiv transmission ; reducing high - risk behaviors ; and supporting international partnerships .

centers for diseases control and prevention ( cdc ) : cdc's global aids program ( gap ) operates in 38 countries and four regional programs .

cdc hiv / aids programs assist ministries of health and local implementing organizations to implement hiv / aids prevention programs , analyze program impact and cost effectiveness , and build the capacity of public workforce , as well as public health information , laboratory , and management systems .

national institutes of health ( nih ) : nih supports hiv / aids research and training in approximately 100 countries .

this research focuses on tools to prevent hiv transmission , such as vaccines and microbicides ; strategies to prevent mother - to - child transmission ; and approaches to treating hiv and its associated opportunistic infections and co - infections in resource poor settings .

health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) : hrsa provides education and training hiv / aids programs in more than 25 countries that increase rapid roll - out of art , support health system strengthening and improvements in human resources for health , and facilitate innovative approaches to health data collection and evaluation .

u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) : fda ensures the availability of safe and effective aids treatment .

since 2004 , fda has supported an accelerated review process for arts , including generic drugs and fixed dose combination drugs ( fdcs ) — multiple antiretroviral drugs combined into a single pill — for pepfar programs .

as of 2011 , 136 art formulations had been approved or tentatively approved by fda .

department of defense ( dod ) : dod operates hiv / aids programs in 73 countries .

dod's primary role under pepfar is to support military - to - military hiv / aids prevention , treatment , and care efforts ; assist in the development of military - specific hiv / aids policies ; and provide hiv / aids counseling , testing , and care for military families .

dod also provides hiv prevention scientific and technical assistance to non - military pepfar programs .

the dod hiv / aids prevention program ( dhapp ) manages dod's hiv / aids programs for foreign militaries and oversees the use of pepfar funds by dod .

department of labor ( dol ) : dol implements hiv / aids programs in over 23 countries that facilitate the development of comprehensive workplace - based hiv prevention and education programs ; assist governments , employers , and trade unions to develop and disseminate workplace policy countering stigma and discrimination ; and support collaboration between government , business , and labor in countering hiv / aids .

peace corps : peace corps volunteers support community - based hiv / aids care and prevention efforts over 66 countries .

a number of peace corps volunteer projects related to hiv / aids received direct pepfar funding , while other peace corps posts benefited from activities organized by the headquarters using central pepfar funding .

u.s. department of commerce ( doc ) : doc creates and disseminates sector - specific strategies to inform hiv trade advisory committees on how the private sector can help combat hiv / aids .

the u.s. census bureau also contributes to pepfar by assisting with data management and analysis , estimating infections averted , and supporting mapping of country - level activities .

congress provides funds for global hiv / aids assistance to several u.s. agencies through a number of appropriations vehicles: state - foreign operations ( state - foreign ops ) ; labor , health and human services and education ( labor - hhs ) ; and department of defense ( defense ) ( figure 3 ) .

table 1 details all u.s. funding for global hiv / aids since fy2004 .

state - foreign operations appropriations: the majority of pepfar funds are appropriated through state - foreign operations to the department of state .

in fy2012 , congress appropriated over 85% of all global hiv / aids funds to the department of state .

as the coordinator of global hiv / aids activities , the department of state transfers the bulk of these funds to implementing agencies , including usaid and cdc , in support of bilateral hiv / aids programs .

per congressional proviso , the department also uses some of these funds to make contributions to other organizations that combat global hiv / aids , including the global fund .

congress also appropriates funds to usaid for bilateral hiv / aids activities through state - foreign operations appropriations .

labor , health and human services , and education appropriations : congress appropriates funds for global hiv / aids activities to hhs agencies , including cdc and nih , through labor - hhs appropriations .

historically , congress has provided a second portion of the u.s. contribution to the global fund through labor - hhs , although it did not do so in fy2012 or the fy2013 budget request .

congress used to appropriate funds to dol for bilateral hiv / aids activities , but it has not done so since fy2005 .

department of defense appropriations : congress also appropriates funds to dod for bilateral hiv / aids programs through dod appropriations .

since the establishment of pepfar , u.s. funding for global hiv / aids has increased each year , with the largest increases between fy2004 and fy2008 .

u.s. funding for bilateral global hiv / aids programs has been decreasing since fy2010 ( figure 4 ) .

the united states also supports global hiv / aids programs through contributions to the global fund , an international financing mechanism for the response to hiv / aids , tb , and malaria ( table 2 ) .

u.s. contributions to the global fund support grants for hiv / aids , tb , and malaria .

the united states is the single largest donor to the global fund .

in low - income countries , the bulk of spending on hiv / aids is from international sources , approximately three - quarters of which is from bilateral donors , with the remaining quarter from multilateral donors .

in 2010 , u.s. funds made up over half of all donor government disbursements for global hiv / aids ( figure 5 ) and 24% of global hiv / aids funds from all sources , including donor and domestic governments , multilateral organizations , and the private sector .

when standardized to correspond to gross domestic product ( gdp ) per $1 million spent , six european countries spend more than the united states on global hiv / aids .

unaids estimates the funding gap — the difference between resources available and resources needed to combat global hiv / aids — to be $6 billion annually .

the united states works with a range of partners to combat hiv / aids , including other national governments , multilateral organizations , non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , and the private sector .

through authorizing legislation and annual appropriations , congress provides funds to several multilateral organizations and international research initiatives that contribute to the fight against hiv / aids , including the global fund and the united nations joint program on hiv / aids ( unaids ) .

the global fund : the global fund was established in 2002 as a public - private partnership to provide financial support for global responses to hiv / aids , tb , and malaria .

the united states contributes more to the global fund than any other country .

the global fund has committed over $22.6 billion in grants in 150 countries since it was established , and was responsible for 21% of all international hiv funding in 2009 .

in november 2011 , the global fund announced that due to limited funding available , it would postpone its 11 th round of funding .

unaids : unaids is the main advocate for united nations ( u.n. ) action on hiv / aids and is responsible for coordinating hiv / aids activities implemented by nine agencies , including u.n. children's fund ( unicef ) ; u.n. development program ( undp ) ; international labor organization ( ilo ) ; u.n. population fund ( unfpa ) ; u.n. office on drugs and crime ( unodc ) ; u.n. educational , scientific and cultural organization ( unesco ) ; world food program ( wfp ) ; world health organization ( who ) ; and the world bank .

the united states is one of the largest contributors to unaids .

unaids oversees a wide range of hiv / aids activities , which include efforts to reduce transmission of hiv ; ensure access to art ; prevent death from hiv / tb co - infection ; empower men who have sex with men ; remove punitive law , policies , and practices that block effective responses to aids ; reduce sexual and gender - based violence ; and empower young people to protect themselves from hiv .

the 112 th congress will continue to be faced with a number of issues regarding the u.s. response to global hiv / aids , including how much assistance to provide and how to best apportion global hiv / aids funds .

given the united states' central role in the fight against hiv / aids , many experts assert that the future direction of the u.s. response to hiv / aids will have significant implications for the global response to hiv / aids as a whole .

the 112 th congress may consider the following issues as it considers the u.s. response to global hiv / aids: treatment efforts : without a vaccine or cure to hiv , people continue to contract hiv and require lifelong treatment .

as such , despite efforts by the international community to expand access to treatment , the number of people in need of art outpaces treatment resources .

global health experts have increasingly debated the sustainability of hiv / aids treatment programs and how to use limited resources to both treat those in need while also preventing new infections .

prevention efforts : there is widespread support within the global health community for intensifying prevention efforts , particularly in light of the persistent need for hiv / aids treatments .

at the same time , experts disagree on what prevention efforts are most effective , how to measure the success of any one prevention activity , and how to incentivize leaders of developing countries to increase financial investment in prevention , particularly given its less immediate and dramatic results when compared with treatment .

recent scientific evidence regarding the preventive benefits of art , as well as topical and oral antiretroviral pre - exposure prophylaxis , including microbicides , may increase support for and discussion of the use of these technologies .

health system strengthening: many global health experts argue that an effective long - term approach to global hiv / aids requires efforts to strengthen health systems ( hss ) in low - and middle - income countries .

however , there is little consensus within the global health community over how to define , implement , and measure hss activities , and over whether pepfar has had a beneficial or detrimental impact on the broader functioning of health systems .

country ownership: donor governments have increasingly supported the concept of country ownership as a way to promote sustainable and country - appropriate responses to the epidemic .

to this end , a number of pepfar programs have implemented "partnership frameworks" with partner countries to clarify joint goals and strategies .

several issues related to country ownership are being debated within donor governments , including how to best align donor priorities and country priorities and how to maintain effective levels of oversight while shifting control to host governments .

