even before september 11 , 2001 , congressional policymakers expressed concern about the safety and security of facilities possessing certain amounts of hazardous chemicals .

the sudden release of hazardous chemicals from facilities storing large quantities might potentially harm many people living or working near the facility .

historically , chemical facilities engaged in security activities on a voluntary basis .

following september 11 , 2001 , some states enacted laws requiring additional consideration of security at chemical facilities .

congress debated whether the federal government should reduce the risk such facilities pose by regulating them for security purposes .

in 2006 , the 109 th congress passed legislation providing the department of homeland security ( dhs ) with statutory authority to regulate chemical facilities for security purposes .

subsequent congresses have extended this authority .

this statutory authority expires on march 27 , 2013 .

the obama administration has requested extension of this authority until october 4 , 2013 .

both fy2013 homeland security appropriations bills ( s. 3216 and h.r .

5855 ) would extend the existing authority until october 4 , 2013 .

advocacy groups , stakeholders , and policymakers have called for congressional reauthorization of this authority , though they disagree about the preferred approach .

congress may extend the existing authority , revise the existing authority to resolve potentially contentious issues , or allow this authority to lapse .

this report provides a brief overview of the existing statutory authority and implementing regulation .

it describes several policy issues raised in previous debates regarding chemical facility security and identifies policy options for congressional consideration .

finally , it discusses legislation in the 112 th congress .

the 109 th congress provided dhs with statutory authority to regulate chemical facilities for security purposes .

the statute explicitly identified some dhs authorities and left other aspects to the discretion of the secretary of homeland security .

the statute contains a "sunset provision" and expires on march 27 , 2013 .

the obama administration has requested extension of this authority until october 4 , 2013 .

on april 9 , 2007 , the department of homeland security issued an interim final rule regarding the chemical facility anti - terrorism standards ( cfats ) .

this interim final rule entered into force on june 8 , 2007 .

the interim final rule implements both statutory authority explicit in p.l .

109-295 , section 550 , and authorities dhs found congress implicitly granted .

in promulgating the interim final rule , dhs interpreted the language of the statute to determine what dhs asserts was the intent of congress .

consequently , much of the rule arises from the secretary's discretion and interpretation of legislative intent rather than explicit statutory language .

under the interim final rule , the secretary of homeland security determines which chemical facilities must meet regulatory security requirements , based on the degree of risk posed by each facility .

the dhs lists 322 chemicals as "chemicals of interest" for the purposes of compliance with cfats .

the dhs considers each chemical in the context of three threats: release ; theft or diversion ; and sabotage and contamination .

chemical facilities with greater than specified quantities of potentially dangerous chemicals must submit information to dhs , so that dhs can determine the facility's risk status .

the statute exempts several types of facilities from this requirement: facilities defined as a water system or wastewater treatment works ; facilities owned or operated by the department of defense or department of energy ; facilities regulated by the nuclear regulatory commission ; and those facilities regulated under the maritime transportation security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-295 ) .

based on the submitted information , dhs determines the risk associated with each facility .

facilities dhs deems high risk must meet cfats requirements .

the dhs assigns high - risk facilities into one of four risk - based tiers .

facilities in higher risk tiers must meet more stringent performance - based requirements .

the statute mandated the use of performance - based security requirements .

the dhs created graduated performance - based requirements for facilities assigned to each risk - based tier .

all high - risk facilities must assess their vulnerabilities , develop an effective security plan , submit these documents to dhs , and implement their security plan .

the vulnerability assessment serves two purposes under the interim final rule .

one is to determine or confirm the placement of the facility in a risk - based tier .

the other is to provide a baseline against which to evaluate the site security plan activities .

the site security plans must address the vulnerability assessment by describing how activities in the plan correspond to securing facility vulnerabilities .

additionally , the site security plan must address preparations for and deterrents against specific modes of potential terrorist attack , as applicable and identified by dhs .

the site security plans must also describe how the activities taken by the facility meet the risk - based performance standards provided by dhs .

the dhs must review and approve the submitted documents , audit and inspect chemical facilities , and determine regulatory compliance .

the dhs may disapprove submitted vulnerability assessments or site security plans that fail to meet dhs performance - based standards , but not because of the presence or absence of a specific security measure .

in the case of disapproval , dhs must identify in writing those areas of the assessment and / or plan that need improvement .

owners or operators of chemical facilities may appeal such decisions to dhs .

similarly , if , after inspecting a chemical facility , dhs finds the facility not in compliance , the secretary must write to the facility explaining the deficiencies found , provide an opportunity for the facility to consult with dhs , and issue an order to the facility to comply by a specified date .

if the facility continues to be out of compliance , dhs may fine and , eventually , order the facility to cease operation .

the interim final rule establishes the process by which chemical facilities can appeal dhs decisions and rulings , but the statute prohibits third - party suits for enforcement purposes .

the statute requires certain protections for information developed in compliance with this act .

the interim final rule creates a category of information exempted from disclosure under the freedom of information act ( foia ) and comparable state and local laws .

the dhs named this category of information "chemical - terrorism vulnerability information" ( cvi ) .

information generated under the interim final rule , as well as any information developed for chemical facility security purposes identified by the secretary , comprise this category .

judicial and administrative proceedings shall treat cvi as classified information .

the dhs asserts sole discretion regarding who will be eligible to receive cvi .

disclosure of cvi may be punishable by fine .

the interim final rule states it preempts state and local regulation that "conflicts with , hinders , poses an obstacle to , or frustrates the purposes of" the federal regulation .

states , localities , or affected companies may request a decision from dhs regarding potential conflict between the regulations .

since dhs promulgated the interim final rule , congress amended p.l .

109-295 , section 550 , to state that such preemption will occur only in the case of an "actual conflict. .

the dhs has not issued revised regulations addressing this change in statute .

within dhs , the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) is responsible for chemical facility security regulations .

within nppd , the office of infrastructure protection , through its infrastructure security compliance division ( iscd ) , oversees the cfats program .

this section reviews implementation of the chemical facility security regulations , focusing on funding , the number of regulated facilities , rate of facility inspection , and dhs's internal review of its implementation efforts .

previous congressional discussion on chemical facility security raised several contentious policy issues .

some issues , such as whether dhs has sufficient funds to adequately oversee chemical facility security ; whether federal chemical facility security regulations should preempt state regulations ; and how much chemical security information individuals may share outside of the facility and the federal government , will exist even if congress extends the existing statutory authority without changes .

other issues , such as what facilities dhs should regulate as a chemical facility and whether dhs should require chemical facilities to adopt or consider adopting inherently safer technologies , may be more likely addressed if congress chooses to revise or expand existing authority .

the statutory authority for cfats expires on march 27 , 2013 .

the obama administration has requested extension of this authority until october 4 , 2013 .

the 112 th congress may address chemical facility security through several options .

congress may increase its oversight of dhs's efforts to implement this program .

congress might also take legislative action to extend further the existing statutory authority by revising or repealing its sunset provision ; codify the existing regulations ; amend the existing statutory authority ; address existing programmatic activities ; or restrict or expand the scope of chemical facility security regulation .

if congress does not act and allows the statutory authority to expire , regulated entities may question the application and enforcement of the cfats regulations .

in the case where congress allows the statutory authority to expire , but congress appropriates funds for enforcing the cfats program , dhs will likely be able to enforce the cfats regulations .

the government accountability office ( gao ) has found that in the case where a program's statutory authority expires , but congress explicitly appropriates funding for it , the program may continue to operate without interruption .

if congress allows the statutory authority to expire and also does not appropriate funding for implementing the cfats program , the cfats regulations will likely also lapse .

in this case , the states would likely become the primary source of any chemical facility security regulation .

the annual appropriations process provides funding for implementation of chemical facility security regulation .

the continuing appropriations resolution , 2013 ( p.l .

112-175 ) extends the statutory authority through march 27 , 2013 , and provides appropriations for cfats implementation .

the current statutory authority expires on march 27 , 2013 .

congress is considering extending the existing authority through authorization legislation .

the obama administration has requested extension of the existing statutory authority in each budget request .

for fy2013 , it has requested extension of this authority until october 4 , 2013 .

it requested a one - year extension of the existing statutory authority to october 4 , 2011 , in the fy2011 budget and a two - year extension to october 4 , 2013 , in the fy2012 budget .

congress provided a one - year extension in the dhs appropriation act for fy2011 and fy2012 .

h.j.res .

117 / p.l .

112-175 , the continuing appropriations resolution , 2013 , became law on september 28 , 2012 .

it extended the existing statutory authority to march 27 , 2013 .

h.r .

901 , the chemical facility anti - terrorism security authorization act of 2011 , was reported as amended by the house committee on homeland security .

the act would amend the homeland security act of 2002 with provisions authorizing dhs oversight of chemical facility security .

the provisions of h.r .

901 generally match the existing statutory authority .

h.r .

901 would also authorize appropriation of $89.9 million annually from fy2012 through fy2018 .

the statutory authority would expire on september 30 , 2018 .

in addition , the dhs would be required to approve or disapprove of vulnerability assessments and site security plans within 180 days of receipt and provide technical support to regulated entities qualifying as small businesses .

the dhs would issue guidance on how alternative background checks would meet in full or in part any background check personnel security requirement .

finally , the dhs would be required to report to select congressional committees regarding its success at meeting the 180 day requirement , efforts to harmonize cfats and mtsa regulations , and on the number of jobs created or eliminated due to cfats regulation .

h.r .

901 was also referred to the house committee on energy and commerce to the subcommittee on environment and the economy .

the subcommittee has taken no further action on this bill .

h.r .

908 , the full implementation of the chemical facility anti - terrorism standards act , was reported as amended by the house committee on energy and commerce .

the act would extend the existing statutory authority to october 4 , 2018 .

h.r .

908 would authorize appropriations of $89.92 million for each fiscal year from fy2012 through fy2018 .

it would allow the secretary of homeland security to accept security background checks conducted for other purposes .

finally , it would also allow holders of transportation worker identification credential cards access to cfats - regulated facilities .

h.r .

916 , the continuing chemical facilities antiterrorism security act of 2011 , was referred to the house committee on energy and commerce and the house committee on homeland security .

the act would extend the existing statutory authority to october 4 , 2015 .

it would also amend the homeland security act of 2002 to direct the secretary of homeland security to establish a voluntary chemical security training program and a voluntary chemical security exercise program .

finally , it would authorize such sums as necessary for these programs .

h.r .

2017 / p.l .

112-33 , the continuing appropriations act , 2012 , became law on september 30 , 2011 .

it extended the existing statutory authority to october 4 , 2011 .

h.r .

2055 / p.l .

112-74 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 , became law on december 23 , 2011 .

it extended the existing statutory authority to october 4 , 2012 .

h.r .

5855 , the department of homeland security appropriations bill , 2013 , was passed by the house of representatives on june 7 , 2012 .

h.r .

5855 would extend the existing statutory authority to october 4 , 2013 .

s. 473 , the continuing chemical facilities antiterrorism security act of 2011 , was reported with an amendment by the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

s. 473 would extend the existing statutory authority to october 4 , 2014 .

in addition , it would amend the homeland security act of 2002 to direct the secretary of homeland security to establish a voluntary chemical security training program , a voluntary chemical security exercise program , a voluntary technical assistance program , and a chemical facility security advisory board .

s. 473 would authorize such sums as necessary for the programs and board .

s. 3216 , the department of homeland security appropriations bill , 2013 , was reported by the senate committee on appropriations .

s. 3216 would extend the existing statutory authority to october 4 , 2013 .

legislation has been introduced in both chambers that would modify the existing authority .

h.r .

225 , the chemical facility security improvement act of 2011 , was referred to the house committee on energy and commerce and the house committee on homeland security .

the act would prohibit the secretary of homeland security from approving a chemical facility site security plan if the plan did not meet or exceed existing state or local security requirements .

it would allow the secretary of homeland security to mandate the use of specific security measures in site security plans .

the bill would also cause cvi to be treated as sensitive security information in both general and legal proceedings .

finally , the act would no longer prohibit third - party individuals from bringing suit in court to require the secretary of homeland security to enforce chemical facility security regulations against a chemical facility .

h.r .

2890 was referred to the house committee on energy and commerce and the house committee on transportation and infrastructure .

the act would expand chemical facility security regulation to include public water systems and wastewater treatment facilities and direct the president to delegate such regulatory authority from the secretary of homeland security to the epa administrator .

s. 709 , the secure chemical facilities act , was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

the act would codify aspects of the cfats regulation .

it would require facilities to evaluate whether the facility could reduce the consequences of an attack by using a safer chemical or process .

the act would authorize dhs to require implementation of those safer measures if a facility has been classified as one of the highest - risk facilities , implementation of safer measures is feasible , and implementation would not increase risk overall by shifting risk to another location .

among other provisions , s. 709 also would increase the participation of employees and employee representatives in developing security plans .

s. 709 would alter the current information control regime , aligning it with that for sensitive security information .

finally , s. 709 would allow third - party individuals to file suit against the secretary of homeland security or submit a petition to the secretary to enforce compliance with statute .

s. 711 , the secure water facilities act , was referred to the senate committee on environment and public works .

the act would authorize the epa administrator to regulate community water systems and wastewater treatment facilities for security purposes .

s. 711 also would authorize implementation of methods to reduce the consequences of a chemical release from an intentional act .

among other provisions , the administrator would be directed to promulgate regulations as necessary to prohibit the unauthorized disclosure of controlled information .

s. 711 would authorize the administrator to provide grants or enter into cooperative agreements with states or regulated entities to assist in regulatory compliance .

