jared lee loughner was arrested on january 10 , 2011 , on a complaint charging him with attempting to kill a member of congress and of killing and attempting to kill federal officers and employees in the performance of the their official duties in violation of 18 u.s.c .

351 ( c ) , 1114 , 1111 , and 1113 .

what follows is a description of the federal procedures and attendant legal provisions generally associated with the prosecution of such cases .

comparable attributes of state law are beyond the scope of this report .

rules govern the general attributes and procedures of a federal criminal trial .

for example , the federal rules ban cameras from the courtroom .

they assure the defendant the right to be present at every stage of the trial , a right he may waive by choice or persistent disruptive behavior .

they supply the evidentiary standards within which a trial must be conducted .

yet application of the rules and control of a federal criminal trial rests primarily with the trial judge .

"[t]he trial judge has the responsibility to maintain decorum in keeping with the nature of the proceeding ; 'the judge ... is the governor of the trial for the purpose of assuring its proper conduct.' .

special procedures apply after a defendant is found guilty of a federal capital offense .

a sentencing hearing is held before a jury to determine whether the defendant should be sentenced to death .

first , in a murder case , the jury must determine whether the defendant acted with the intent necessary to qualify for imposition of the death penalty .

if it does so , the penalty may be imposed only if the jury also finds one or more of a series of aggravating factors and finds that the aggravating factor or factors outweigh any mitigating factors to an extent justifying a sentence of death .

as noted earlier , the statutory list of aggravating factors includes instances , for example , when ( 1 ) the death occurred during the course of an assault on a member of congress of some other designated felony ; ( 2 ) the homicide was committed in a particular heinous , cruel , or depraved manner ; ( 3 ) a federal judge was a victim of the offense ; ( 4 ) the defendant killed or attempted to kill more than one person in a single criminal episode ; or ( 5 ) when "any other aggravating factor for which notice has been given exists. .

mitigating factors include , for example , ( 1 ) the defendant's impaired capacity ; ( 2 ) the absence of a significant prior criminal record ; ( 3 ) commission of the offense "under severe mental or emotional disturbance. .

mitigating factors may also be found "in the defendant's background , record , or character or any other circumstance of the offense. .

a federal death sentence is subject to appellate review .

if upheld , the defendant is committed to the custody of the attorney general for execution .

the sentence of death , however , may not be carried out if the defendant lacks the mental capacity , as a result of mental disability , "to understand the death penalty and why it was imposed. .

in a capital case when the jury finds the defendant eligible for the death penalty but fails to unanimously recommend the death penalty , the court sentences the defendant to "life imprisonment without possibility of release or some other lesser sentence. .

when the prosecution elects not to seek the death penalty and when the defendant is convicted of a noncapital offense , the court sentences the defendant , without benefit of a jury .

although the federal sentencing guidelines are no longer binding , noncapital sentencing begins there .

the guidelines provide a series of sentencing ranges beneath the statutory maximum for the offense of conviction , calibrated to reflect the seriousness of the offense and the extent of the defendant's criminal record .

a sentencing court , with reasonable justification , may sentence a defendant outside the applicable guideline recommended sentencing range .

victims have a right to be reasonably heard during the capital sentencing hearing .

victims of a federal crime of violence are also entitled to an order of restitution , covering the cost of medical expenses , rehabilitation costs , and , in the case of a homicide , funeral expenses .

victims do not have a right to attend the execution of a defendant convicted of murdering a family member , although they may do so at the discretion of the director of the bureau of federal prisons and , to a more limited extent , at the discretion of the warden .

