increasing dependence on foreign sources of crude oil , concerns over global climate change , and the desire to promote domestic rural economies have raised interest in renewable biofuels as an alternative to petroleum in the u.s. transportation sector .

in response to this interest , u.s. policymakers have enacted an increasing variety of policies to directly support u.s. biofuels production and use .

policy measures include blending and production tax credits to lower the cost of biofuels to end users , research grants to stimulate the development of new biofuels technologies , and loans and loan guarantees to facilitate the development of biofuels production and distribution infrastructure .

perhaps most important , congress established minimum usage requirements to guarantee a market for biofuels irrespective of their cost .

this guaranteed market — the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) — requires refiners and other fuel suppliers to include an increasing amount of biofuels in transportation fuel .

by 2022 , the rfs requires the use of 36 billion gallons of renewable fuel .

within the larger mandate , there are sub - mandates ( "carve - outs" ) for the use of advanced biofuels ( fuels other than corn starch ethanol with at least 50% lower lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions than conventional fuels ) .

within the advanced biofuel quota , there are additional sub - mandates for cellulosic biofuels and for biomass - based diesel substitutes ( bbd ) .

in the near term , most expect that the majority of the bbd quota ( and a significant portion of the larger advanced biofuel quota ) will be met using biodiesel produced from soybean oil , although biodiesel from other feedstocks , as well as other biomass - based substitutes ( eg , synthetic diesel from cellulosic feedstocks or algae ) , could play a larger role in the future .

one of the key incentives , a $1.00-per - gallon tax incentive for the production and / or use of biodiesel and renewable diesel ( a related type of bbd ) , expired at the end of 2009 .

this tax incentive was eventually extended retroactively for 2010 through 2011 in december 2010 .

however , the absence of this incentive for most of 2010 , along with high soybean oil prices , caused 2010 biodiesel production to drop significantly — to the point that 2010 production is expected to be below that needed to meet the rfs mandate .

fuel suppliers comply with the rfs by submitting to the environmental protection agency ( epa ) sufficient credits ( renewable identification numbers , or rins ) to cover their annual obligations .

rins may be used by fuel suppliers to meet their obligations , banked for the next calendar year , or traded to other entities .

as bbd rins have become scarce , their price has increased dramatically ( by an order of magnitude over the past year ) .

analysis of the financial market for rins may serve as a useful method for evaluating the overall market for bbd fuels .

at some point , the value of the rins may increase enough to bring idled production capacity back online or to spur new capacity development , especially if bbd producers expect rin prices to stay high in the future .

some of the potential 2010 bbd shortfall may be met using rins generated in 2011 , although this added demand for 2011 rins could push their price even higher .

this report discusses the current market for bbd fuels and their corresponding rins under the rfs .

it examines the role that the rin market may play as an economic incentive for the production of biodiesel and other bbd fuels in the future .

lessons learned from the bbd quota and the associated rin market may provide insights into the future rin markets for other advanced biofuels and perhaps for the rfs as a whole .

biomass - based diesel ( bbd ) fuel is a term used for any type of biologically derived diesel fuel for compliance with the rfs .

bbd is an umbrella term that captures a range of fuels , including biodiesel , renewable diesel , synthetic ( fischer - tropsch ) diesel , algae - based diesel fuel , and cellulosic diesel .

the rfs mandates the use of bbd substitutes .

while this is often referred to as a "biodiesel mandate," the term biodiesel refers to a fuel produced through a specific process .

the rfs does not distinguish between different bbd fuels or the process by which they are produced , as long as they meet requirements for greenhouse gas emissions reductions .

for clarity , when referring to the larger class of fuels , this report uses the term biomass - based diesel , or bbd ; the term "biodiesel" is used when referring specifically to fuel that meets the statutory definition of biodiesel .

under the rfs , the mandated volumes that fuel suppliers must meet are administered through a system of credits called renewable identification numbers ( rins ) , which correspond to actual gallons of biofuel blended or sold .

a rin is a 38-digit number assigned to a batch of renewable fuel when it is produced .

rins can be seen as analogous to retail barcodes .

when a fuel supplier ( generally a refiner or terminal operator ) blends biofuels into conventional fuel or otherwise introduces the biofuels into commerce , the rin is "detached. .

once rins are detached , the owner of the rins may use them to meet the current - year obligation , save them for use in the coming year ( with certain limits ) , or trade them to another party .

the tax credit for the production and use of bbd fuels has been a major factor in their growth over the past few years .

while the rfs mandates could potentially provide a larger incentive — in the form of a guaranteed and growing market — biodiesel production has remained largely dependent on the $1.00-per - gallon tax credit .

despite a growing rfs mandate , the expiration of the tax incentives at the end of 2009 led to a drop in production from 2009 to 2010 .

the mandate was not sufficient to overcome the expiration of the tax credit , along with tight credit markets and an overall poor economy .

the national biodiesel board maintains that the extension of the tax credit that was enacted in december 2010 will "help kick - start the domestic biofuel industry," and that the credits make biodiesel competitive with conventional diesel at the pump .

while the tax incentives improve the competitiveness of bbd fuels , some stakeholders question whether they are warranted in the presence of a mandate to use the fuel .

they argue that if the mandate is binding , the incentives will not promote the use of additional fuel beyond the mandate , and that overall fuel prices are lowered , creating an incentive to use more conventional fuel .

a counterargument is that this perverse incentive is only likely if the mandate is binding and credible .

as seen in figure 1 , after the expiration of the tax credit , production declined from 2009 to 2010 .

if producers do not see the mandate as binding and certain , the presence of the tax credit may lower their perceived risk .

alternately , producers could be gambling on the likelihood that epa will waive the bbd mandate in the face of limited production , or they could be hedging their bets into 2011 based on the deficit carryover contingency while they wait to see what the epa will do with the bbd mandate .

bbd producers have already seen the epa waive the cellulosic rfs2 mandate in successive years due to lack of production .

meanwhile , bbd rin prices have risen steadily to about $0.90 per gallon .

if bbd rin prices remain high , producers may perceive less need for the tax credit , especially if rin prices ultimately exceed the per - gallon value of the tax credit .

going forward , the settlement of the 2009 / 2010 combined bbd mandate , as well as the trajectory of domestic production / consumption and bbd rin prices in 2011 , could provide insights for the future of other biofuel / rin markets .

for the bbd rin market to function effectively , epa most likely will need to hold firm to its 2011 rfs2 bbd mandate .

because of shortfalls in cellulosic biofuel production capacity , epa has waived the vast majority of the 2010 and 2011 cellulosic biofuel mandates .

epa lowered the 2010 and 2011 mandates from 100 million gallons to 6.5 million gallons , and from 250 million gallons to 6.6 million gallons , respectively .

in 2012 , the scheduled mandate is 500 million gallons , and it remains unclear whether there will be sufficient production capacity to meet that level .

if cellulosic biofuel production capacity does eventually catch up with the rfs schedule , long - run cellulosic rin prices may provide a significant financial incentive for cellulosic biofuel production , if the mandates are perceived as binding and credible .

however , if epa consistently provides waivers from the cellulosic biofuel mandate , and producers question the credibility of the mandate , cellulosic biofuel production — and cellulosic rin prices — could stay low .

the markets for biomass - based diesel fuel and for rins under the rfs raise many issues .

depending on one's perspective , there are a variety of policy options to address these issues .

on the tax policy side , these options fall into three categories: ( 1 ) maintain the existing incentive structure and extend it into the future ; ( 2 ) eliminate some or all of the incentives ; ( 3 ) modify the incentives to more directly address certain policy goals .

in the first category — maintaining existing incentives — efforts to extend tax incentives have been proposed and enacted .

most recently , the "tax extenders" bill that was enacted in december 2010 extended through the end of 2011 various biofuels tax incentives , including the biodiesel and renewable diesel tax credits .

a key question for congress is whether to extend these incentives past 2011 at their current levels , to modify them , or to let them expire .

proponents of the tax incentives argue that they spur domestic production of non - fossil fuels , reducing u.s. reliance on imported petroleum , promoting rural development , and raising farm incomes .

as noted above , some critics argue that layering tax incentives on top of mandates is a redundancy , provides unintended incentives for conventional fuel supply , and may add little further incentive for production / consumption ( beyond the mandate ) .

further , some stakeholders are concerned that as the rfs mandates grow , the liability for treasury revenues will continue to increase if the tax incentives are maintained .

thus some stakeholders have argued for an elimination or phaseout of the tax incentives .

other proposals have included modifying the existing tax incentives to base their value of performance measures , as opposed to simple per - gallon incentives .

possible performance measures could be based on various goals .

for example , the value of the tax credit could be based on the expected amount of petroleum displaced by the fuel , or by its environmental performance ( eg , greenhouse gas emissions reduction ) .

further , one of the key rationales for the tax incentives is to make biofuels more competitive with petroleum .

thus , the tax incentives could be keyed to the price of oil: as oil prices rise above a certain level , the incentives could phase out .

one potential concern for bbd is that supply may not keep pace with mandates set in the rfs , regardless of the tax incentives .

therefore , some stakeholders may look for ways to make it easier to meet the bbd mandate , either through additional economic incentives or through a lowering of the mandate .

the former would help spur production , while the latter would likely limit investment in new production .

