the potential outcome of the resignation of long - time egyptian president hosni mubarak is unknown and any ramifications for the oil and natural gas sectors are uncertain .

this paper examines the impact of a disruption of egypt's oil and natural gas sector or a complete halt to exports of either oil or natural gas and closure of the suez canal and the suez - mediterranean ( sumed ) oil pipeline , and the impact of those actions on world oil and natural gas markets .

it is important to keep in mind that even the most nationalistic , isolationist , or anti - western government would most likely not undertake all these measures .

oil , natural gas , and transit generate large amounts of revenue for egypt and taking these measures could precipitate outside intervention , particularly closing the suez canal .

additionally , the timing of these actions would also change the impact on oil and natural gas markets , i.e. , whether they occurred during the summer driving season or the winter heating season .

an additional factor mitigating the impact on world oil and natural gas markets is that in 2009 , egypt consumed much of the energy it produced and had to import coal , highlighting the limited importance of egypt as a global energy producer ; see figure 2 .

closing the suez canal would be one of the most visible actions a new government could take , particularly for the oil and natural gas industry .

although it would probably take only several weeks to re - route and re - size oil and natural gas tankers along with a possible drawdown of inventories , a closure of the canal would cause an immediate and most likely short - lived rise in global oil prices .

despite there being adequate spare production capacity in the world , oil prices tend to react quickly to market disruptions before settling back to their pre - existing price range .

however , if the canal remained closed indefinitely , shipping costs would likely increase , adding upward pressure on oil prices .

the same would likely be true for liquefied natural gas ( lng ) , but the effect would be less .

most lng is sold under long - term contract , and there is currently a glut of lng around the world to make up for any disruption .

in 2009 , an estimated 1.8 million barrels per day of oil ( mb / d ) ( of the world's roughly 80 mb / d of production ) moved through the canal — almost 1 mb / d northbound and 0.85 mb / d southbound .

this is down from 2.4 mb / d in 2008 .

the decline is mostly attributed to lower global demand for oil ; production cuts by the organization of the petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) , particularly from the persian gulf producing countries ; and piracy .

more oil is also flowing to asia from the middle east , while more west african oil is going to europe and north america , and does not have to traverse the canal .

2010 data shows an increase in cargos , but is incomplete for the year .

the last time the canal was closed , in 1967 until 1975 , approximately 60% of europe's oil supplies had been passing through the canal .

currently , only about 15% is shipped through the canal .

similar to the decrease in cargos through the canal , the sumed oil pipeline — which is owned through state companies by egypt ( 50% ) , saudi arabia ( 15% ) , the united arab emirates ( 15% ) , kuwait ( 15% ) , and qatar ( 5% ) — is operating below its capacity of 2.5 mb / d .

in 2009 , approximately 1.1 mb / d moved through the pipeline , a decrease of about 50% compared to 2008 .

the reduction resulted from many of the same causes as the canal's drop - off in oil transportation .

in 2009 , 331 billion cubic feet ( bcf ) of lng traversed the canal , which represents 4% of global lng trade and less than 1% of natural gas consumed globally .

unlike oil , lng cargos through the suez canal have been steadily rising .

between 2008 and 2009 , the volume of lng passing through the suez canal increased over 40% , more than doubling northbound cargos .

data for the first 10 months of 2010 show a 66% increase in lng shipments through the canal compared to the 2009 total .

the rise in lng cargos is mostly attributable to the large increase in qatar lng exports .

nevertheless , there is ample supply of lng in the global market , and rerouting lng cargos to demand centers could be accomplished in a relatively short time frame .

while egypt is a relatively small player in the global natural gas industry , it can have a larger impact on regional natural gas supply .

egypt produces all the natural gas consumed in lebanon , almost all the natural gas consumed in jordan , and more than half the natural gas consumed in israel .

on a world scale , egypt accounted for only 2.1% of global natural gas production and 2.1% of global natural gas trade in 2009 .

egypt holds 77 trillion cubic feet or 1.2% of the world's proved gas reserves .

egypt exports natural gas through two pipelines and two lng facilities .

currently , the arab gas pipeline connects egypt to jordan , lebanon , and syria .

there are plans to expand the pipeline further , enabling egypt to export natural gas through turkey to europe .

in 2008 , egypt opened an export pipeline to israel .

there was an explosion in early february that shut down both pipelines for a short time although the damage was primarily to the arab gas pipeline .

egypt has almost 600 bcf of lng export capacity , with one facility in damietta and one in idku .

egypt accounted for approximately 5% of global lng trade last year , with most cargos going to europe .

aside from its role as a transit center , withdrawal of egypt's own oil production from the global market would likely have limited impact on world oil prices .

in 2010 , egypt was a small net importer of oil , producing approximately 0.66 mb / d while consuming close to 0.71 mb / d .

egypt's oil production has been in decline since the early 1990s , a trend not likely to be reversed .

the country — which has the largest refining capacity in africa , with 975,000 barrels of processing capacity — did export some refined products , such as naptha , but imported others .

cutting off exports of naptha , an oil product that can be used in making petrochemicals and gasoline , could put minor upward pressure on european prices , which is a main market for egyptian exports .

global oil prices have already reacted to the unrest in egypt despite no disruption to egyptian production .

the reaction comes from two concerns: ( 1 ) the near - term risk that any disruption to oil transit through egypt could delay oil shipments for several weeks ( as they are rerouted around the cape of good hope , adding extra shipping time ) and ( 2 ) the more significant concern that political unrest could spread to other , more important energy exporters in the region , such as saudi arabia , iraq , or kuwait .

there has been some upward pressure on natural gas prices as companies scramble to hedge against a disruption of egyptian exports , but the benchmark natural gas price in the united kingdom is actually down .

should the scenario described above come to pass , there would likely be little impact on the global oil and natural gas market in the long term .

both industries will take some time to recalibrate flows , but should be able to accomplish that with minor or no disruptions .

additionally , the strategic petroleum reserves of member countries of the international energy agency , which are mostly from the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , could also be utilized to bridge any gap in oil flows should a disruption prove to be significant .

