the united states and the european union ( eu ) share a large , dynamic , and mutually beneficial economic relationship .

not only are trade and investment ties between the two partners huge in absolute terms , but the relative importance of bilateral trade and investment flows for each partner has remained high and relatively constant over time , despite the rise of china and other asian economies .

the eu as a bloc is the united states' largest merchandise or goods trade partner of the united states .

as shown in table 1 , the eu accounted for 17.5% of u.s. merchandise trade in goods in 2010 .

canada , the second - largest trading partner , accounted for 16.5% of total u.s. merchandise trade .

the eu is also the largest purchaser of u.s. exports of services , accounting for $170.2 billion ( or 31.0% of the total in u.s. services exports to the world ) in 2010 .

the importance of the eu is even greater on the foreign direct investment side , where european companies accounted for $1.5 trillion , or 63% , of total foreign direct investment in the united states and u.s. companies accounted for $1.7 trillion , or about 50% , of total foreign investment in europe in 2009 .

these investments account for 4 million workers on both sides of the atlantic being directly employed by the respective affiliates of u.s. or european - based companies .

the german company siemens , for example , employs some 60,000 people in the united states , and general electric employs some 70,000 workers in europe .

the u.s. - eu trade and investment relationship , what many call the transatlantic economy , is not only the largest in the world but also arguably the most important because of its sheer size .

as shown in table 2 , the flows of merchandise or goods trade , services trade , and income across the atlantic manifest a very active , strong , and large economic relationship .

in 2010 alone a total of $1,537.4 billion flowed between the united states and the eu , or an average of $4.2 billion per day .

with a combined population slightly over 818 million or about 12% of the world's population , the two partners produce around 50% of the world's gdp .

combined with bilateral trade flows in goods and services that account for 40% of the world total , the magnitude of transatlantic economic transactions means that the two sides have significant influence and leadership responsibilities in the world economy .

agreement and cooperation between the two partners in the past has been critical to making the global trading system more open and efficient .

the high degree of transatlantic economic interdependence , however , carries some downside risks , as demonstrated by the 2008 financial crisis , which started in the united states and was then transmitted to europe .

as the u.s. economy is now recovering from the deep recession , eu members greece , ireland , portugal , and spain are struggling to address sovereign debt crises which are slowing europe's economic growth and recovery .

with a significant stake in european economic growth , there is a concern that u.s. exports may be adversely affected at a time when the obama administration hopes to double u.s. exports by 2015 .

given the magnitude of commercial interaction , trade disputes are not unexpected .

policymakers tend to maintain that the united states and the eu always have more in common than in dispute , and like to point out that trade disputes usually affect a small fraction ( often estimated at 1% - 2% ) of trade in goods and services .

both sides have been working to resolve some of the biggest disputes for years .

these include a dispute between the aerospace manufacturers airbus and boeing , and conflicts over bio - engineered food products and protection of geographical indicators .

the airbus - boeing dispute involves allegations of unfair subsidization for both companies and is being adjudicated by the world trade organization dispute resolution process .

the agricultural - based disputes are rooted in different approaches to regulation , as well as different social preferences .

u.s. - eu trade and economic relations are also characterized by other forms of competition and rivalry .

each side aspires to lead in setting rules for global trade and investment , often in an effort intended to facilitate commercial success for its respective companies .

similarly , both economic powers often compete to secure bilateral and regional trade agreements to support jobs , markets , and foreign policy interests .

nowhere may this be more apparent than in the eu's rush to negotiate a free trade agreement with south korea following the negotiation of the u.s. - south korean fta in 2007 .

while the u.s. and eu economies are very open to trade and investment flows from both sides , some barriers to trade and investment remain .

various studies , in fact , estimate that substantial economic gains in terms of jobs and faster growth could be attained if progress were made in reducing a range of remaining tariff barriers at the border and regulatory "behind the border" non - tariff barriers .

private stakeholders on both sides have urged policymakers to cooperate more closely to reduce remaining barriers to trade and to provide greater leadership for the world economy .

such actions , stakeholders argue , are a way to boost transatlantic economic growth and jobs .

cooperation is said to be particularly important given that global economic wealth and political power is shifting towards emerging economies such as china , india , and brazil .

while these developing countries are providing new sources of economic growth , they have different views on the future direction of the world economy .

this could create a need for greater u.s. - eu cooperation in addressing global challenges that are important for job creation and growth for both sides .

at the november 28 , 2011 , eu - united states summit meeting , president obama , european commission president barroso , and european council president von rompuy directed the transatlantic economic council ( tec ) to establish a high level working group on jobs and growth .

led by u.s. trade representative ron kirk and eu trade commissioner karel de gucht , the working group was asked to identify policies and measures to increase u.s. - eu trade and investment to support mutually beneficial job creation , economic growth , and international competitiveness .

the working group will provide an interim report to leaders on the status of its work in june 2012 .

it will submit a report with findings , conclusions , and recommendations to the leaders by the end of 2012 .

the working group could recommend a number of possible initiatives , including enhanced regulatory cooperation , negotiation of a comprehensive free trade agreement , negotiation of a zero - tariff agreement , or negotiation of bilateral agreements liberalizing trade in services and investments .

the 112 th congress , in both its legislative and oversight roles , faces numerous issues that affect the u.s. - eu trade and economic relationship .

a select group of these issues are identified and briefly described in this report .

the issues are grouped into two categories: efforts to deepen u.s. - eu economic ties , particularly some that may be considered by the newly established u.s. - eu high level working group on jobs and growth ; and joint u.s. - eu efforts to strengthen the global economy .

as these issues cut across trade , economic , regulatory , and foreign policy subject matters , a number of congressional committees may have legislative or oversight responsibilities in whole or in part .

on the house side , these include the committees on agriculture , energy and commerce , financial services , foreign affairs , judiciary , transportation and infrastructure , and ways and means .

on the senate side , these include the committees on agriculture , banking , commerce , science , and transportation , energy and natural resources , environment and public works , finance , foreign relations , and judiciary .

proposals for deepening transatlantic economic ties include the reduction of regulatory barriers , the negotiation of a zero tariff agreement , and movement towards a barrier - free investment environment .

each proposal holds the prospect of producing economic gains in terms of jobs and growth for both sides , but each also faces obstacles as freer trade creates winners and losers when it comes to jobs .

a more comprehensive free trade agreement has also been proposed from time to time along with efforts to liberalize trade in selective services .

for much of the post - world war ii era , the united states and europe provided key leadership to the global economy .

given the heft of their combined economies , what was decided by the two powers was often adopted by the rest of the world .

while the united states and the eu still today remain central to the global economy , other countries have grown in prominence .

this redistribution of global economic power , in turn , arguably increases the need for the united states and eu to work together to promote their continued competitiveness , and to ensure that the rules of the global economy remain steeped in values and principles that both sides share .

such cooperation is already taking place on a wide range of issues including access to raw materials , intellectual property protection , and changes in global and financial market governance .

this section highlights mutual challenges on completing the doha round , influencing china to operate its economy more in accord with market principles , and reducing global imbalances .

u.s. - eu trade and economic relations are healthy , complex , and mutually advantageous .

joint concerns about slow growth , job creation , and increased competition , however , have prompted a number of proposals for deepening transatlantic economic ties .

over the course of this year , a high level working group on jobs and growth will assess a wide range of proposals to deepen economic ties , reduce remaining barriers to trade and investment , and to enhance regulatory cooperation .

whether any new , major policy initiative will be advanced by the working group to accelerate the integration of the two economies or to foster greater government - to - government cooperation in dealing with mutual global economic challenges remains to be seen .

much could depend on the views and measures supported by business , nongovernmental organizations , and other stakeholders on both sides of the atlantic .

any bold undertaking may also require sustained high level political support .

as u.s. - eu trade and economic interactions continue to play an important role in affecting growth and the creation of new jobs on both sides of the atlantic , the 112 th congress can be expected to monitor ongoing efforts to deepen transatlantic ties .

