housing is primarily a private market enterprise in the united states .

most housing in this country is privately built and owned and most regulation of that process is done at the state and local level .

however , the federal government has played a role for many years in assisting in the provision of safe , decent , and affordable housing for families of modest means .

the low - rent public housing program was the original effort through which the federal government supported this policy goal .

while public housing is a federally created and funded program , administered at the federal level by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , the properties are owned and managed at the local level by quasi - governmental public housing authorities ( phas ) under contract with the federal government .

given this unique federal - local relationship , the program is governed in part by federal rules and regulations and in part by policies set at the local level .

the program was controversial from the start , with opponents contending that it subverted local control and interfered with private enterprise .

later , criticism grew about the conditions of the housing the program provided .

concern was expressed about the quality of life public housing provided to the families it served , as well as the character of the tenants the program served and the effect public housing was having on the communities in which it was located .

over time , in response to these critiques and others , the public housing model — publicly owned and subsidized apartment buildings for poor families — was replaced with other models of assistance .

while no new public housing is authorized to be funded and built , much of the existing stock of public housing built under the original program remains .

today's roughly 1.2 million units of public housing are home to some of the poorest families in the nation , including persons who are elderly , persons living with disabilities , and other families with and without children .

in some cases , these families live in high - quality housing in neighborhoods of opportunity ; in other cases , these families live in housing that is physically decrepit , socially isolated , and plagued by social ills .

the federal government currently pays roughly $6 billion to $7 billion per year to support the remaining stock of public housing and there are differences of opinion about whether this program is a worthwhile federal investment or whether recent funding levels reflect an inadequate federal investment .

this report is meant to serve as an introduction to the federal public housing program .

it provides information on the history of the program , how it is administered and funded , and the characteristics of public housing properties and the households they serve .

while it introduces current policy issues , a full analysis of those issues and discussion of current legislation is not included in this report .

in order to understand today's public housing program , and the issues surrounding the program , it is useful to know the background of how it evolved .

the following section of this report provides a short history of the public housing program .

it should not be considered a comprehensive or exhaustive treatment of the topic .

the following section of this report provides basic information about today's public housing program .

it begins with a discussion of the unique administrative structure of the program , followed by a discussion of the program's policies and rules as they apply to public housing residents .

for a more detailed description of program policies , see the program regulations at 24 c.f.r .

parts 901-972 and in the public housing occupancy guidebook .

determining the exact number of public housing units is complicated .

the number of units under contract between hud and a pha at any given point in time is not necessarily the same as the number of physical units currently occupied by eligible families or available for occupancy .

phas may be receiving funding for units that are temporarily vacant awaiting occupancy of a new tenant , temporarily vacant due to litigation , temporarily vacant awaiting rehabilitation , or permanently vacant awaiting demolition or disposition .

there may also be units that are currently occupied that are slated for demolition or disposition and units that are in the process of being rehabilitated or built to replace units that were demolished or disposed of ( sold or otherwise removed from the public housing inventory ) .

generally , estimates of the current number of public housing units range from over 1.1 million units to just fewer than 1.2 million units .

figure 1 displays the trend over time in the number of public housing units eligible to receive payment .

the public housing program peaked at just over 1.4 million units in the mid - 1990s , and the number of units has declined fairly steadily since .

the public housing program today has about as many units as it did in the mid - 1970s .

the stock has been declining for two reasons: ( 1 ) phas have been demolishing and disposing of public housing units without fully replacing them ; and ( 2 ) congress has not authorized the addition of new units of public housing except to replace those being demolished and disposed of since the late 1990s .

between 1973 and may 2009 , nearly 250,000 units of public housing were approved for removal from the public housing inventory and more than 200,000 were actually removed .

as shown in figure 2 , the rate of removal has increased markedly since the mid - 1990s , and the most common way a unit has been removed has been through demolition or disposition , although some units have been converted to vouchers .

the rates of demolition and disposition increased markedly in the mid - 1990s , which coincided with the creation of the hope vi program and the removal of the long - standing requirement that each unit of public housing that is removed from the inventory must be replaced ( referred to as one - for - one replacement ) .

according to hud: although demolition / disposition activity has always been permitted , hud and its business partners have begun to actively pursue it as a management strategy option in the last ten years .

this is due to the realization that some developments have difficulties associated not only with physical deterioration , but also with the overall deterioration of the surrounding community .

it is also true that a large portion of the housing now being proposed for demolition / disposition was built in the late 1940s and early 1950s , and was built to a standard that is no longer acceptable for the general public .

developments meeting that description have very often become the housing of last resort within their communities .

the data presented in table 2 provide descriptive information about public housing properties .

despite public housing's reputation as "the projects," epitomized by the largest developments in major cities , the most common form for today's public housing projects is notably smaller in scale ; high - rise and mixed developments account for less than one - quarter of all public housing properties , while three - quarters of developments are row houses ; townhomes ; walk - up , garden style , detached , or semi - detached homes ; and scattered site housing .

further , less than half of all public housing properties are in central city locations and nearly half are located in low - poverty census tracts .

it is important to note , however , that these data are at the property rather than the unit level .

given that high - rise developments have greater density than other forms of housing and are more often located in central - city and high - poverty areas , the distribution of units is likely to be higher in these areas than that shown by the property data .

figure 3 displays the geographic distribution of public housing across the country .

states are shaded relative to the number of public housing units within their borders .

superimposed dots indicate the location of individual properties , with the relative size of the property reflected in the diameter of the dot .

as shown in the map , new york has the greatest number of public housing units .

new york is home to over 18% of the nation's public housing stock and has more than three times the number of units as the state with the next highest number of units ( pennsylvania , which has about 5.5% of the nation's public housing units ) .

new york is also home to the largest public housing projects , with several having well over 2,000 units .

while new york has the greatest number of units and the largest projects , both texas and pennsylvania have more public housing projects than new york .

overall , public housing is predominately located in the eastern half of the united states .

unlike other social assistance programs that target specific subpopulations of low - income individuals and families ( such as persons who are elderly , persons who are living with disabilities , or families with children ) , public housing is available to all types of low - income families and individuals .

as shown in figure 4 , today's public housing program serves families headed by persons who are elderly , persons who have a disability , and persons who are not elderly and not living with a disability , with and without children .

while no one household type accounts for the majority of public housing families , the most common household type in public housing is families headed by persons who are not elderly , not living with a disability , and have children .

these families account for over one - third of all households in public housing .

looking at the breakout of these families , the vast majority are single parent , female - headed households .

elderly households without children are the second largest category , accounting for over a quarter of all households .

households where the head of household is living with a disability ( including both those with and without children ) account for about one - fifth of total households .

overall , there are more families without children ( 59% of all households ) than with children ( 41% ) in public housing .

the over 1.26 million families living in public housing are made up of over 2.7 million people .

the overall average household size in 2010 was 2.2 people ; families with children tended to be larger ( an average of 3.5 people per family ) and families without children tended to be smaller ( an average of 1.3 people per family ) .

of the over 2.7 million people living in public housing in 2010 , about 40% were children under the age of 18 and about 15% were adults over the age of 62 .

in terms of race and ethnicity , just under half of all households living in public housing in 2010 were headed by a person who identified his or her race as white , and just under half of all households were headed by a person who identified his or her race as black .

twenty - one percent of households were headed by a person who identified his or her ethnicity as hispanic .

with income restrictions on eligibility for public housing , households living in public housing are low - income .

as shown in table 4 , the median family income of households living in public housing in 2010 was $9,644 per year .

to give this number context , it can be compared to the national poverty guidelines , which are used to define who is "poor" and therefore may be eligible for a number of other social assistance programs .

comparing the median income of all households living in public housing to the two - person poverty guidelines for 2010 ( $14,570 ) , the median income of families living in public housing was only about two - thirds of the poverty guideline .

comparing the median income of non - elderly , non - disabled families with children to the three - person poverty guidelines ( $18,310 ) , median family income for these households was less than half of the poverty guideline in 2010 .

different types of families living in public housing receive their income from different sources .

as shown in table 5 , in 2010 , over 80% of all elderly households reported receiving income from social security or pensions .

most households headed by persons with disabilities reported receiving supplemental security income ( ssi ) and / or other social security or pension income .

non - elderly , non - disabled ( nend ) families with children reported receiving income from a variety of sources .

over half reported income from work , 45% reported some income from welfare ( defined as payments from the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) program or state general assistance ( ga ) programs ) , and over one - fifth reported some income from child support payments .

about 5% of all households reported receiving no income from any source .

over the past several decades , social assistance programs have increasingly focused on promoting work and work activities among recipients of benefits , particularly non - elderly and non - disabled families .

the community service and economic self - sufficiency requirement in public housing is an example of such a policy .

given the policy interest in increasing work effort among non - elderly , non - disabled families , table 6 is provided to offer a closer look at the sources of income for these families .

among non - elderly , non - disabled families , just over half received income from work .

the majority of working families were not receiving welfare income ( defined as tanf or ga ) in 2010 .

dividing this population into those with and without children , in both cases the plurality of families received income from work and not welfare , although families without children were receiving income from work at a higher rate than families with children .

twenty - six percent of not - elderly , not - disabled households received income from welfare but not from work ; among those families , those with children were more likely to receive income from welfare and not work .

given the work requirements in the federal tanf program , it is likely that most of those families receiving income from welfare are or will be subject to work requirements as a condition of receiving assistance .

just over a quarter of nend families with children , and just under a fifth of nend families without children , report receiving no income or receiving income only from non - work and non - welfare sources .

these families are the most likely to be subject to the community service requirement in public housing , assuming they are not otherwise exempt .

as noted earlier in this report , families living in public housing pay income - based rents .

because the incomes of families living in public housing are quite low , the rents paid by those families are also quite low .

as shown in table 7 , looking at all households , the median rent paid by tenants in 2010 was $224 per month .

non - elderly , non - disabled families with children paid the lowest rent ( under $200 ) , which is not surprising , given that they tend to have the lowest incomes .

in order to provide a sense of the financial benefits to families of living in public housing , table 7 also compares the difference between what tenants pay in rent each month and the fair market rent ( fmr ) in their local communities .

in 2010 , the median difference was $563 per month for all households .

not - elderly , not - disabled families with children had the greatest difference between the rents they pay to live in public housing and the local fmr , a benefit of nearly $700 per month , or over $8,300 per year .

the public housing program does not impose limits on the length of time a family can live in public housing .

once a family is leasing a public housing unit , the family can continue to renew that lease until it is no longer eligible , either because the family's income increases too much to maintain eligibility or because the family violates program rules in some way .

the data presented in figure 5 provide a snapshot of the length of tenure of families living in public housing in december 2010 .

the bars provide a distribution of households by the number of years they have lived in public housing and household type , and the box in the center of the graph presents median and mean length of stay by household type .

more than half of all families living in public housing in 2010 had lived there for five years or less .

the greatest share of households living in public housing had been in public housing for between one and two years ; the next greatest share had been living in public housing for less than one year , although almost the same number had been living in public housing for more than 20 years .

while families with children make up the greatest share of those families that have been living in public housing for less than one year , elderly - headed families make up the greatest share of those families that have been living in public housing for more than 20 years .

presumably , many of these elderly - headed families entered the program as a different household type , perhaps families with children , and their category changed as they aged .

phas sustain public housing through a combination of federal funding , tenant rents , and other investment income .

congress typically appropriates several streams of funding to phas to help make up the difference between what phas receive in rent from tenants and what it costs to operate and maintain public housing .

operating funds are meant to fund the day - to - day operations of public housing ( administration and staffing , utilities , routine maintenance , etc. ) .

capital funds are meant to help pay for modernization needs , such as replacing a roof or a heating and cooling system , or remodeling units .

both operating funds and capital funds are allocated to phas based on a formula .

phas can also apply for competitive hope vi revitalization grants .

hope vi grants are used to demolish and rebuild , or substantially rehabilitate , severely distressed public housing .

while the purpose of this report is to provide an overview of and background information about the public housing program , it is important to also note that a number of policy issues about the program have been raised in recent years and have been and may be considered by congress .

while not fully addressed in this report , several of these issues are summarized below .

there is an acknowledged backlog of unmet capital needs in the nation's public housing stock .

the majority of the public housing stock is several decades old and much of the stock has not had the level of ongoing maintenance and major rehabilitation needed to keep it viable and habitable .

complicating matters , in some cases , is that properties were not built in such a way as to promote long - term viability ( in some cases due to the use of poor quality materials or poor design , perhaps resulting from low per unit cost caps ) .

the declining physical state of the public housing stock may be due in part to federal funding levels that , paired with federal rent collection rules , left phas with inadequate budgets to meet their properties' capital needs .

in some cases , it may also be due to poor management decisions at the local level .

regardless of the cause , there is an acknowledged backlog of unmet capital needs in public housing that current federal funding levels , unless they increase substantially , are unlikely to address ( notwithstanding the one - time increase in funding provided in the economic stimulus legislation in fy2009 ) .

as properties fall into disrepair , they are more likely to be candidates for removal from the public housing stock through demolition , disposition , or conversion .

the hope vi program was designed , in part , to address the unmet capital needs of those properties that are in the worst condition .

as hope vi grants became smaller , leveraging expectations increased and phas began using their hope vi grant funding to secure additional private financing .

today , many phas have become adept at leveraging private resources , even without hope vi grants , by pledging other federal funding , primarily their capital funding .

however , there are limits to the extent that phas can access these private mixed - finance markets .

in order to prevent phas from becoming over - leveraged , hud limits the share of future capital funding phas can pledge toward repaying debt .

phas are further limited in that they are not currently permitted to pledge their future operating fund dollars to repay debt , nor are they permitted to pledge the underlying property itself as security to leverage private funding .

additionally , phas seeking funding in the private market are dependent on the willingness of lenders to provide them with capital on terms that are agreeable .

if there is a policy desire to preserve the existing public housing stock , additional funding would likely be needed .

this could come in the form of increased federal appropriations .

the economic stimulus legislation in the 111 th congress provided one of the largest infusions of capital funding for public housing in recent years .

at nearly $4 billion dollars , it should have been sufficient to address around 20% of the estimated backlog in capital needs ( $18 billion - $20 billion ) .

these funds were designated as emergency supplemental funding , meant to stimulate the economy during the recession , and were therefore provided outside of the budget constraints of the regular annual appropriations process ; it is unclear if similar future infusions will be forthcoming .

in light of tight budget constraints and political questions about the popularity of the public housing program , future large infusions of federal funding are uncertain .

federal rent policies could be changed to allow phas to collect higher payments from tenants .

however , such a change would violate current standards of affordability and it is unclear , given the extremely low incomes of residents , if they could pay additional rent sufficient to meet unmet capital needs .

other options include making changes to existing policies to allow phas to better access private capital markets .

these options could include permitting phas to leverage their operating fund dollars , permitting phas to mortgage the underlying value of their public housing properties , and / or creating instruments , such as mortgage insurance programs through the federal housing administration ( fha ) , to encourage or provide incentives to lenders to make loans to phas on favorable terms .

some steps have been taken to increase the ability of phas to leverage private capital .

the rental assistance demonstration ( rad ) is an obama administration initiative designed to test changes to the way that public housing is funded to permit phas to access private capital , in part by removing the limitations on mortgaging public housing properties .

in the fy2012 hud appropriations law ( p.l .

112-55 ) , congress authorized a version of rad , which makes up to 60,000 units of public housing eligible to convert to project - based section 8 contracts .

the law provided no additional funding for this initiative .

the fy2013 appropriations law continued the authorization for the initiative , again , with no additional funding .

in light of the decline in the number of public housing units over time and the lack of authority to construct new units , the future role of the public housing program in federal housing policy is uncertain .

the public housing program began as a construction program designed to help stimulate the economy coming out of the great depression .

its role evolved over time: first , to meet housing shortages during and after world war ii ; later , to address shortages of decent housing in conjunction with urban renewal efforts ; and finally , to address shortages of decent housing that was affordable to the poorest families .

in this last role , as a provider of affordable housing to poor families , the program has declined in prominence as other models of providing direct housing assistance to the poor have been developed .

first , there were programs promoting the construction of properties owned by private market participants ( through fha insurance programs and later section 8 rental assistance contracts ) , and later there were programs subsidizing families' housing costs in the existing housing stock ( through the section 8 voucher program ) .

this last model , the section 8 voucher program , is the only direct rental assistance program serving poor families that has grown to serve more families in the last several decades .

at least part of that growth is attributable to declines in the number of public housing units , as families being displaced from public housing have received vouchers .

these other models were developed in direct response to perceived shortcomings — lack of mobility , cost effectiveness , and efficiency — in the public housing program .

with policies like mandatory and voluntary conversion of public housing to vouchers , the question may be raised as to whether the "vouchering - out" of public housing is an inevitability , or if public housing itself is valuable enough to warrant taking steps to preserve it .

critics of public housing point to its often poor locations and conditions and argue that it traps the most vulnerable families in the worst housing conditions .

they point to high rates of crime at some developments and low levels of social capital development and work effort , contending that public housing denies poor families choice and the option to live in communities of opportunity .

moreover , it is argued that the rent structure does little to promote self - sufficiency and may even discourage it .

advocates for public housing argue that the most vulnerable families are the least likely to have their needs met by the private market , even with a section 8 rental voucher .

landlords are not required to accept vouchers and are permitted to screen families for suitability .

phas , on the other hand , have a social mission to serve the poorest families .

further , advocates contend that high - quality public housing , particularly when it is enriched with services , can itself provide opportunities for families .

they point to successful hope vi mixed - income communities and research on how place - based interventions can promote family success , particularly for persons who are elderly , but also for families with children .

in addition to the policy arguments for and against preserving public housing , the issue of cost is relevant .

in recent years , the average annual "cost" to the federal government of providing a voucher to a family has been greater than the per unit funding provided to public housing .

this could serve to bolster arguments in favor of retaining public housing as a more cost - effective way of providing rental assistance to low - income families .

however , the low cost of public housing reflects what most agree is an underfunding of public housing .

if public housing was funded at its full funding needs — particularly in light of the backlog of capital needs — the cost to the federal government of public housing would likely be much higher , and potentially higher than the cost of vouchers .

however , in order to fully evaluate the costs and benefits of public housing one may wish to consider the underlying value of the public housing properties themselves , which were built with federal assistance and maintained with federal funds .

questions about to whom that value belongs may also be considered when evaluating the costs and benefits of the program in light of potential changes .

these questions about underlying value , which are beyond the scope of this report , may be difficult to answer and different observers may come to different conclusions .

