u.s. elections are highly decentralized , with much of the responsibility for election administration residing with local election officials ( leos ) .

there are thousands of such officials , many of whom are responsible for all aspects of election administration in their local jurisdictions — including voter registration , recruiting pollworkers , running each election , and choosing and purchasing new voting systems .

these officials are therefore critical not only to the successful administration of federal elections , but also to the implementation of the help america vote act of 2002 ( hava , p.l .

107-252 ) , the uniform and overseas citizens absentee voting act ( uocava , p.l .

99-410 , as amended ) and other federal statutes .

nevertheless , there has been little objective information on the perceptions and attitudes of leos about election reform .

such information may be useful to congress in deliberations about federal election reform activities .

this report discusses the results of three scientific opinion surveys that were designed to help fill that gap in knowledge about principal local election officials .

the surveys were performed pursuant to projects sponsored by the congressional research service ( crs ) .

the projects were developed in collaboration with and the surveys performed by faculty and students at the george bush school of government and public service at texas a&m university , and the center for applied social research at the university of oklahoma .

the university teams developed and administered the surveys , in consultation with crs , to samples of leos from all 50 states , with a response rate of approximately 40% for each survey .

the responses were analyzed by crs for purposes of this report .

see the appendix for information on the methods used in the surveys and analyses .

the surveys were administered following the 2004 , 2006 , and 2008 federal elections .

while they were not identical , many of the questions were the same , and comparisons of the results are discussed where appropriate .

the findings may be useful to congress as it considers funding for hava , oversight of its implementation , and possible revisions to current law .

the report begins with a description of some characteristics of local election officials and their jurisdictions .

that is followed by a discussion of perceptions and attitudes of leos about the different kinds of voting systems used in different jurisdictions — lever machines , punchcard ballots , hand - counted paper ballots , central - count optical scan ( ccos ) , precinct - count optical scan ( pcos ) , and direct - recording electronic ( dre ) systems such as "touchscreens. .

the report then describes how hava has affected local jurisdictions and the opinions leos expressed about the law .

the section after that discusses other election administration topics covered in the 2006 and 2008 surveys — preparations for election day , election - day incidents , characteristics of pollworkers , and attitudes about nonpartisan election administration .

the final sections discuss caveats to consider in interpreting the results , and potential policy implications of the findings .

there are about 9,000 local election jurisdictions in the united states .

in most states , they are counties or major cities , but in some new england and upper midwest states , they are small townships — for example , more than 1,800 townships in wisconsin .

the number of registered voters and polling places in a jurisdiction reported by leos also varies greatly ( figure 1 and figure 2 ) .

the reported number of registered voters ranged from fewer than 100 to more than 1 million , with a median of about 12,000 in 2006 and 13,000 in 2008 .

that 8% increase was consistent with the reported 7% - 10% increase in the number of registered voters nationwide during that period .

although leos were not asked to report the number of voters in their jurisdictions in the 2004 survey , in 2008 they were asked how the number changed from 2004 to 2008 .

about two - thirds reported that the number of registered voters had increased between 2004 and 2008 , and about one - fifth reported a decrease ( figure 3 ) .

the number of polling places in a jurisdiction averaged about a dozen , ranging from 0 to 1,000 or more , with about 15% of jurisdictions in each election having only one polling place and a similar percentage having more than 50 .

the number of election personnel working in a jurisdiction , in addition to the local election official , also varied greatly , from none to more than 10,000 , including pollworkers .

the 2008 survey also asked about the number of employees other than pollworkers .

the median was 5 , with a mean of 17 and a maximum of 800 .

the number of registered voters , polling places , and pollworkers was about 10 times greater in county jurisdictions than in townships .

leos from counties reported an average of about 56,000 registered voters , while those from townships averaged 6,000 .

there were 40 polling places per county on average , and 3 per township .

counties had about 290 pollworkers and townships 30 .

given such diversity and other differences among states — such as wealth , population , and the role of state election officials — responsibilities and characteristics of leos are likely to vary greatly .

nevertheless , some patterns emerged from the surveys .

most leos , about 90% , considered themselves familiar with and knowledgeable about hava's requirements in the surveys .

those who were "not familiar at all" with hava decreased from 4% in 2004 to less than 0.1% in 2008 .

about 90% of respondents believed that almost all jurisdictions in their state were in full compliance with hava provisions in 2006 .

as with all surveys , care needs to be taken in drawing inferences from the results .

one question that could arise is whether the sample is representative of leos as a whole .

for example , simply drawing the sample at random from the nationwide pool of election administrators would have resulted in a disproportionately large number of jurisdictions from new england and the upper midwest , where elections are administered by townships rather than counties .

steps were taken in the design of the studies to minimize the risk that the sample would not be representative ( see the appendix ) .

overall , neither the sample design nor the characteristics of the responses suggest that the results are unrepresentative of the views and characteristics of local election officials .

another potential caution for interpretation relates to the inherent limits of surveys such as these .

in particular , there is no way to guarantee that the responses of the election officials correspond to their actual beliefs .

in addition , there is no way to be certain that any particular belief corresponds to reality .

the question on voting - system characteristics ( see figure 19 ) provides an illustration of the possibility for disparity .

for several reasons , leos might be reluctant to rate their voting systems low in reliability , accuracy , and security , despite the anonymity of the results .

alternatively , they might truly believe that their voting systems are highly reliable , accurate , and secure , even if independent evidence does not support that view .

also , some caution is needed in assigning cause and effect .

the mere existence of an association or correlation between a factor and an effect does not necessarily mean that the factor caused the effect .

for example , the survey showed a strong association between the kind of voting system used in a jurisdiction and the number of pollworkers ( see figure 49 ) .

however , while the kind of voting system may have some independent effect , a more important factor is likely to be the number of registered voters .

a final caution involves how survey results might be used to inform policy decisions .

on the one hand , the results could be used to support the shaping of policy in directions expressed by leos in their responses .

in many cases , such policy changes might be appropriate .

on the other hand , it is possible that at least some of those desired changes would not in fact yield the most effective or appropriate policies .

in such cases , the results might more constructively be used to help policymakers identify issues for which improvements in communication and understanding are needed .

the survey results may have policy implications for several issues at the federal , state , and local levels of government .

some issues that may be relevant for congressional deliberations are highlighted below .

many observers have commented favorably on the experience and dedication of the nation's local election officials .

survey results are consistent with that view .

at the same time , other observers , including some election officials , have called for increased professionalism in election administration .

some survey results suggest areas of potential professional improvement , such as in education and in professional involvement at the national level .

congress could address this potential need by several means , for example facilitating educational and training programs for leos and promoting professional certification of election officials by entities accredited through the eac or a professional association .

the seemingly unique demographic characteristics of leos as a group of government officials may have other policy implications , but they are not altogether clear .

however , some observers may argue that efforts should be undertaken to ensure that leos reflect the diversity of the workforce or voting population as a whole , especially with respect to minority representation .

the issue of partisanship among election officials has been controversial for several years .

most national attention has been on state officials , but , given that most leos are elected and only about half the local jurisdictions in the united states are administered on a nonpartisan or bipartisan basis , policymakers may wish to consider the influence of partisanship among leos .

since the enactment of hava , controversy has arisen over whether dre voting systems are sufficiently secure and reliable .

the survey revealed that leos who have experience with dres are very confident in them , consider them superior for accessibility , and do not generally support the addition of a voter - verified paper audit trail ( vvpat ) to address security concerns , although those who use a vvpat are satisfied with its performance .

however , leos using other systems are much less confident in dres and more supportive of vvpat .

the strongly dichotomous results suggest that as congress considers whether to require changes in the security mechanisms used in voting systems , it might be useful to determine whether dre users are overconfident in the security of their systems and procedures in practice , or , alternatively , whether nonusers might be misinformed about the reliability and security of dre systems .

the survey results suggest that hava is in the process of achieving several of its policy goals .

the general and increasing support of most hava provisions — including those such as the creation of the eac and the provisional ballot requirement that have been somewhat controversial — implies that most leos are in agreement with the goals of the act and are active partners in its implementation .

the overwhelming selection by jurisdictions of new voting systems that assist voters in avoiding errors indicates that the hava goal of reducing avoidable voter error is in the process of being met .

the areas of concern expressed by leos — such as how to meet the costs of ongoing implementation of hava requirements — raise issues that congress may wish to address as it considers hava appropriations and reauthorization .

the close relationship between leos and the vendors of their voting systems seems unlikely to change as a result of hava .

however , with the codification by hava of the voting system standards and certification processes , the influence of the federal government in decisions about new voting systems might be expected to increase in relation to that of vendors and others .

the increased concerns of leos in 2006 that vendors , media , political parties , and advocacy groups have too much influence on such decisions may bear consideration .

scientific opinion surveys of local election officials are rare , and additional research may be useful to address some of the matters raised by these studies .

for example , a survey of state election officials might provide useful information and might additionally be helpful in assessing the most appropriate federal role in promoting the effective implementation of hava goals at all levels of government .

one common suggestion of leos for improving hava was to provide a means of adjusting requirements to fit the needs of smaller jurisdictions .

to determine what , if any , such adjustments would be appropriate , it may be useful to have specific information on how the needs and characteristics of different jurisdictions vary with size — something that was beyond the scope of these surveys .

it could also be useful to identify how the duties of leos vary with size and other characteristics of the jurisdiction .

in many jurisdictions , election administration is only part of the leo's job .

it is not known to what degree these other responsibilities might affect election administration — negatively or positively .

finally , these surveys have provided only snapshots of leo characteristics and perceptions over three election cycles .

it might be beneficial to perform similar surveys periodically to identify trends and explore new questions and issues .

the results presented and analyzed in this report are from three surveys sponsored by crs as part of its capstone program and performed by graduate students and faculty at the george bush school of government and public service at texas a&m university in 2004 and 2006 , and the department of political science at the university of oklahoma in 2008 .

for both studies the crs project manager was eric fischer and the project liaison was kevin coleman .

the topics for the surveys were developed collaboratively by crs and texas a&m and university of oklahoma participants .

the major factor in choosing the topics was potential usefulness of the results for congress .

the bush school and university of oklahoma teams developed and administered the survey instruments in consultation with crs and provided the authors with the data used in performing the analyses .

the three surveys were conducted after the november 2004 , 2006 , and 2008 federal elections , between december and the following april .

for each survey , a sample of approximately 3,800 leos was drawn from the roughly 9,000 election jurisdictions in the 50 states .

to ensure that leos from all states were included , but that states with large numbers of leos were not disproportionately represented ( see figure a - 1 ) , a modified random - sampling regime was used , as follows: surveys were sent to all leos in states with 150 or fewer local jurisdictions .

for the ten states with more than 150 leos , a sample of 150 was chosen at random from the local jurisdictions , and surveys were sent to those leos .

each survey was initially distributed in the month following the election ( december ) .

administration was mostly electronic , with respondents visiting a website to enter their responses .

in cases where electronic administration was not possible , leos were sent paper surveys via the u.s .

postal service .

those who did not respond were sent reminders or contacted by telephone , with the survey response period closing in march or april following the election .

for each survey , the overall final response rate was about 40% of the sample , or about 17% of all jurisdictions in the united states .

respondents answered 85% - 90% of questions , on average .

the response was sufficiently high to permit statistical analysis and comparison of the results among the surveys .

the distribution of responses among states was similar across the surveys ( see figure a - 2 ) .

individual response rates per state were between 25% and 50% for about three - quarters of states .

the remainder were evenly split between those for which under 25% of leos responded , and those for which the rate was greater than 50% .

response rates did not vary significantly for any survey with the number of local election jurisdictions in a state or its voting age population .

about 70% of respondents worked in county election jurisdictions , with most of the remainder working in townships ( figure a - 3 ) .

the small difference among the surveys in those choosing "town / township" and in those choosing "other" was almost certainly a result of a small change in the structure of the question after the 2004 survey .

however , as the figure implies , the proportion of respondents from county jurisdictions increased slightly over the course of the three surveys .

all the results presented in this report are from analyses by crs of data provided from the surveys by researchers at texas a&m university ( 2004 and 2006 ) and the university of oklahoma ( 2008 ) .

the raw data were first examined for errors , and corrections were made where necessary , in a few cases , such as if a leo claimed to work more hours per week than is physically possible .

where the correct answer could be reasonably discerned , the response was corrected .

otherwise it was discarded .

once cleaned , the data were analyzed using standard parametric methods , mainly analysis of variance , linear regression , and student's t - tests as appropriate .

three kinds of hypotheses were tested: differences between groups , such as whether results differed across the three surveys ; differences from a hypothetical value , such as whether leos were neutral about , agreed with , or disagreed with a particular statement ; and tests for associations , such as whether the number of pollworkers in a jurisdiction was correlated with the number of registered voters .

statistical significance was determined using a significance level ( α ) of .01 .

however , for display purposes , graphs with error bars were drawn showing 95% confidence intervals for the means .

most tests for which results are presented in this report yielded highly statistically significant results — p - values much lower than the significance level ( p < < .01 ) .

for reported data where statistically significant effects were not found , the lack of effect is noted in the text , for example , by stating that no change was found between 2004 and 2006 for a particular survey item .

additional methodological details can be provided upon request .

