introduction the deepwater horizon oil spill has caused significant socioeconomic injuries to the gulf of mexico fishing industry .

immediate economic injuries occurred because large areas of federal and state waters in or adjacent to the spill area were closed to fishing as a precautionary measure to ensure the safety of seafood .

perhaps of greater concern are intermediate and long - term harm to gulf of mexico ecosystems .

seafood production is dependent on gulf ecosystems for spawning areas , nurseries , and growth .

over 84 days beginning on april 20 , 2010 , the deepwater horizon oil well released over 200 million gallons ( 4.9 million barrels ) .

during the spill , oil was dispersed through the application of 1.8 million gallons of surface and subsurface chemical dispersants .

by june 2 , 2010 , the area of federal waters closed to fishing had grown to its maximum of 88,522 square miles or nearly 37% of federal waters in the gulf of mexico .

the maximum portions of state waters closed to fishing during the spill were alabama ( 40% ) , florida ( 2% ) , louisiana ( 55% ) , and mississippi ( 95% ) .

survey teams also have documented 1,053 total linear miles of oiled shoreline .

at issue for congress is whether current efforts will be sufficient to restore the fishery to pre - spill conditions .

congress may continue to conduct oversight of efforts to promote fishing industry recovery and gulf restoration .

immediate issues are likely to focus on providing financial compensation to fishermen , ensuring seafood safety , and maintaining gulf seafood markets .

congress also may consider long - term efforts to restore the gulf environment and related fishery productivity .

in addition to restoration requirements defined in statute by the oil pollution act ( opa , p.l .

101-380 ) and national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) natural resource damage assessment ( nrda ) regulations under opa , the administration has proposed a long - term plan to restore the gulf region .

the plan would redirect clean water act penalty revenues for this purpose and establish a gulf restoration council to coordinate restoration efforts .

congress may consider the administration's proposal and related issues such as the allocation and use of restoration funds .

the primary objective of this report is to summarize information related to damages caused by the oil spill to gulf fisheries and efforts to mitigate these damages .

many uncertainties exist because of the complexity and scale of gulf fisheries and ecosystems that have been affected by the oil spill .

direct and indirect damages to fisheries and the gulf environment are still being assessed and these efforts are likely to continue for years to come .

commercial and recreational fisheries other than alaska , historically , the gulf region has produced the greatest amount of seafood by volume and value in the united states .

in 2008 , gulf commercial fishery landings totaled 1,273 million pounds with a dock - side value of $697 million .

when related processor , wholesale , and retail businesses are included , the seafood industry of the gulf states supported over 213,000 full - and part - time jobs with related income impacts of $5.5 billion .

the top commercial species by value were shrimp ( $366 million ) , menhaden ( $64 million ) , oysters ( $60 million ) , and blue crab ( $39 million ) .

table 1 provides commercial landings and revenue for major species by state in the gulf of mexico region .

recreational fisheries also make significant contributions to the region's economy by supporting businesses such as charters , bait and tackle shops , restaurants , and hotels .

in 2008 , 5.7 million gulf recreational fishermen , both visitors and residents , took 24 million fishing trips .

in 2008 , recreational fishermen spent over $12.5 billion on durable equipment and trips in the gulf region .

some of the main species targeted by recreational fishermen include snappers , several types of drum , sheepshead , and spanish mackerel .

although recreational expenditures cannot be directly compared to commercial revenues , these figures provide an indication of the magnitude of economic activity related to these fisheries .

commercial and recreational fisheries are among the main activities supporting the economy and social well - being of many gulf coastal communities .

the deepwater horizon oil spill has directly harmed the fishing industry through closures and changes in seafood demand .

large areas of federal and state waters were closed to fishing as a precautionary measure to ensure the safety of seafood .

during the closures fisheries landings and associated revenues decreased significantly in central gulf fishing ports .

it is likely that demand for gulf seafood has decreased because of changes in consumer perceptions related to the spill .

the spill also has harmed the gulf environment , resulting in mortality of organisms , eggs , and early life stages and harm to habitat and other elements of the gulf ecosystem .

the scale and nature of the spill make it difficult for the public or government to quantify these effects .

several mechanisms exist to provide short - and long - term assistance to the fishing industry .

financial assistance to compensate for economic injuries to individuals and businesses affected by an oil spill are defined in statute by the oil pollution act .

another source of assistance can be provided in cases where a fishery failure is declared by the secretary of commerce under the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act ( msfcma , p.l .

109-479 ) .

additional sources of assistance have been provided through bp grants , the vessels of opportunity program , and the small business administration .

gulf fisheries production is dependent on healthy gulf ecosystems , including the quantity and quality of fisheries habitat .

restoration of gulf ecosystems would likely maintain and enhance current fisheries production .

the two main restoration efforts focusing on oil spill damages are the natural resource damage assessment ( nrda ) and the administration's gulf coast restoration plan .

the 111 th congress held 62 hearings related to the gulf oil spill and at least 14 were directly related to natural resources and impacts on small businesses .

the 112 th congress may continue to conduct oversight of efforts on fishing industry recovery , adequate compensation , and gulf restoration .

ongoing efforts by federal agencies and states to ensure seafood safety and to regain and maintain the reputation of gulf seafood are the most immediate challenges .

as the nrda process moves from the planning to restoration phase , questions may arise regarding the level of the potential settlement and the types of restoration activities identified by the trustees .

in contrast to restoration efforts developed under nrda that are based on existing law , funding and governance of the administration's comprehensive and long - term gulf of mexico restoration plan would require congressional action .

to fully implement and fund the administration's plan , congress may consider whether to commit clean water act civil penalties for this purpose as was recommended by the administration's gulf recovery plan and the national commission on the bp deepwater horizon oil spill and offshore drilling .

congress also may consider how the fund should be allocated and whether to establish a gulf restoration council to coordinate restoration efforts .

several bills were introduced during the 111 th congress that included these elements of the administration's plan , but no action was taken on any of them .

an ongoing issue , especially for gulf states , is the allocation and permitted uses of funding under the administration's restoration plan .

three bills have been introduced in the 112 th congress that address elements of the administration's restoration plan , including the gulf coast restoration act ( h.r .

56 ) and title iv of recommendations of the bp oil spill commission act of 2011 ( h.r .

501 ) , which are identical , and the gulf of mexico economic and environmental restoration act of 2011 ( h.r .

480 ) .

all three bills would establish a gulf coast ecosystem restoration fund and require 80% of any amounts collected by the united states as penalties , settlements , or fines under the federal water pollution control act ( 33 u.s.c .

ยง 1319 , ยง 1321 ) to be deposited into the fund .

they would also establish a governing body to distribute funding and coordinate restoration efforts such as a gulf coast ecosystem restoration task force ( h.r .

56 and h.r .

501 ) or a gulf of mexico recovery council ( h.r .

480 ) .

in contrast to h.r .

56 and h.r .

501 , h.r .

480 would provide a formula for allocating funding among gulf states , and establish and fund four gulf of mexico programs , including an observation system , a grant program for sea grant colleges , a seafood marketing program , and a clean energy program .

