adaptive management is the process of incorporating new scientific and programmatic information into the implementation of a project or plan to ensure that the goals of the activity are being reached efficiently .

adaptive management promotes flexible decision - making to modify existing activities or create new activities if existing programs are not meeting set goals , or if new circumstances arise ( eg , new scientific information ) .

the federal government has incorporated the concept of adaptive management into the management of certain natural resources , particularly in cases where scientific information is incomplete and uncertainty exists .

the concept of adaptive management has been widely endorsed by scientists , land managers , and academic observers .

advocates argue that traditional management can be improved by a paradigm that incorporates knowledge based on experimentation and monitoring during ongoing project operations .

while adaptive management is widely accepted to be a promising management tool , its implementation has also been criticized .

in particular , some have faulted the ability of adaptive management to stimulate meaningful change in programs or projects .

according to some , results from adaptive management experiments are difficult to incorporate into programs that are constrained by pre - existing requirements or laws .

others contend that politics can also effect the implementation of adaptive management recommendations .

the perceived ineffectiveness of adaptive management generally centers more on its implementation as opposed to its conceptual merits .

congressional interest in adaptive management has often related to its ability to guide federal efforts to restore large - scale freshwater ecosystems ( eg , wetlands ) .

in prior congresses , adaptive management has been proposed as a guiding principle for some large - scale ecosystem restoration efforts , including the everglades , chesapeake bay , and lake tahoe .

implementation of ecosystem restoration initiatives often centers around initial uncertainties which may be understood and incorporated into restoration efforts over time .

rather than authorizing only initial actions or projects to achieve restoration , congress has also authorized adaptive management programs to guide and / or complement restoration .

these programs have generally been intended to improve monitoring and research to support restoration efforts and provide flexibility for management decisions over time .

previous experience with adaptive management can inform congress both in the authorization of new adaptive management efforts and in providing funding and oversight of ongoing efforts .

some have argued that shortcomings in early adaptive management efforts provide lessons learned that could be incorporated into ongoing and future efforts .

this report provides general background on adaptive management , including its benefits and drawbacks .

it focuses on the application of adaptive management to ecosystem restoration , with a focus on federal efforts to restore freshwater ecosystems .

it provides an analysis of adaptive management's usage to date , including the strengths and weaknesses of the concept as they have been observed in practice .

it concludes by providing information and preliminary issues for congress to consider when providing authorization , funding , and oversight of these efforts .

the concept of adaptive management was applied to natural resource management in the early 1970s to help managers take action on conservation issues in the face of uncertainty and when unforeseen conditions or changes in managed ecosystems appeared .

since then , the application of adaptive management has evolved into several forms , depending on the objectives and goals of the initiative or project it accompanies .

adaptive management also has been characterized as being either passive or active .

according to one author , passive adaptive management focuses on a "best apparent management option" at each key decision point for restoring an ecosystem .

generally speaking , passive adaptive management efforts "use the information available to choose good management or restoration options at the start , but they also specify future decision points where feedback and new information are analyzed so that the choice of subsequent restoration actions is based on the total information available at each decision point. .

by contrast , active adaptive management experimentally tests multiple hypotheses and explores a range of options during all phases of implementation to select the best path towards achieving objectives .

active adaptive management relies on monitoring and incorporating results from experiments into models or activities that comprise the restoration effort .

active adaptive management is more costly than passive adaptive management , but it can also yield more information about the ecosystem and its properties .

the implementation of adaptive management has trade - offs .

from a policy perspective , the built - in flexibility of adaptive management may be key to solving complex technical problems and changing restoration strategies that are not achieving their goals .

further , some contend that having an adaptive management program may justify the initiation of restoration activities when scientific uncertainty exists .

additionally , adaptive management may provide a forum to engage stakeholder groups and allow for them to provide input into decisions so that the effects adaptive management has on stakeholders are considered .

on the other hand , adaptive management can create uncertainty among stakeholders who rely on ecosystem services for their livelihood .

flexible implementation of a restoration initiative can create uncertainty about outcomes and consistency of restoration projects .

a more detailed discussion of the benefits and drawbacks of adaptive management is provided later in this report ( see " analysis and lessons learned " ) .

as previously mentioned , adaptive management is currently being implemented for a range of activities related to the management of natural resources .

for example , adaptive management is being implemented in national oceans policy ( including the management of national marine sanctuaries ) , in conservation efforts to improve species , and to restore large aquatic ecosystems in freshwater habitats .

some also contend that adaptive management can also be used to improve our understanding of and capacity to respond to climate change .

while adaptive management is an important concept for all of these activities , this remainder of this report focuses on the application of the concept to large - scale ecosystem restoration ( referred to as "ecosystem restoration" in this report ) .

large - scale ecosystem restoration is noted for its complexity , and has recently garnered increased attention from congress .

it often incorporates scientific , managerial , cultural , and political factors .

some argue that the complex and dynamic nature of ecosystems make their restoration and management amenable to an adaptive management approach , while others argue that these same characteristics make application of the concept more difficult .

observers note both benefits and difficulties resulting from federal efforts to implement adaptive management in a natural resource management context .

these observations demonstrate some of the broad strengths and weaknesses of adaptive management that may be of use when contemplating the application of adaptive management to a specific management regime .

the congressional role in providing guidance for federal adaptive management programs can range from authorizing agencies to implement adaptive management to prescribing an adaptive management process in legislation .

previously , congress has refrained from providing extensive guidance related to the structure and substance of individual adaptive management efforts .

the primary means of authorization for adaptive management programs has been either to explicitly reference the concept of adaptive management in legislation and leave more detailed guidance up to the agency ( eg , everglades restoration program ) or provide broad authorization language that may be interpreted by the executive branch as a mandate for an adaptive management program ( eg , glen canyon program ) .

additionally , in several instances ( including the platte river program ) adaptive management has been initiated with no congressional guidance or authorization .

congress may choose to maintain this limited role in the authorization adaptive management programs .

this would continue to provide the executive branch with a considerable amount of autonomy in conducting adaptive management , but would also make it the central party responsible for addressing concerns with these efforts .

some contend that difficulties associated with ongoing adaptive management efforts could have at least in part be solved with more guidance from congress .

if congress decides to play a greater role in directing adaptive management programs , there are several potential areas which may be of interest to policymakers .

if congress chooses to weigh in on adaptive management efforts in legislation , it may provide guidance or oversight in several areas .

examples of ways in which congress could provide oversight include: outline federal leadership responsibilities .

congress could designate a federal representative or agency to be in charge of implementing an adaptive management program .

for instance , in the glen canyon program , a secretarial designee leads the working group .

such a designation could be made in legislation by congress .

assign stakeholder representation .

congress could assign specific groups or numbers of stakeholders to committees to oversee and recommend changes to adaptive management efforts .

stakeholders could also be appointed to a committee in charge of creating the adaptive management program itself .

mandate procedures .

congress could specify procedures for carrying out adaptive management , including how the results from adaptive management research and monitoring are to be tied to operational or project - based changes in the ecosystem restoration initiative .

for instance , congress could require that changes to operations be subject to a vote by a working group , or that changes would be implemented solely at the discretion of program or project managers .

set goals and objectives .

congress may set broad or specific goals associated with an initiative .

recently , some initiatives ( such as the platte river and glen canyon initiatives ) have moved towards quantitative restoration goals .

congress could establish formal goals as targets for restoration , or else require that goals be specified in a future strategy or plan .

it could also require a formal reporting process ( including reports to congress ) on the progress of an initiative .

provide assurances to stakeholders .

congress may provide assurances to stakeholders in the form of requirements that an adaptive management effort will not significantly alter certain ongoing operations or specified resource allocations .

congress might consider variations in these potential actions to better suit the needs of individual ecosystem restoration initiatives .

a "one model fits all" approach to addressing adaptive management might not work for all restoration initiatives given their varying objectives , resources , and scope .

for example , restoration initiatives that have the potential to alter water supplies for users might need broader assurances in legislation that restoration water requirements for restoration will not exceed a certain level , or that the actual procedures for carrying out an initiative will be decided by a joint federal / non - federal working group .

conversely , adaptive management plans that address threatened or endangered species may need assurances that certain species will not be jeopardized by an adaptive management plan .

while more prescriptive congressional guidance has the potential to clarify some issues associated with adaptive management , it could also subject congress to criticism by outside observers who disagree with part or all of the planning approach .

additionally , future changes to prescriptive or detailed programs could entail amending the underlying authorization , which could be more difficult than simply adopting changes within the program administratively .

thus , providing federal agencies with broad authority to construct individual adaptive management programs ( as has largely been the practice to date ) may in the long - run provide greater flexibility for changing the adaptive management process .

congress could also address adaptive management by increasing its oversight of adaptive management in restoration initiatives .

in the past , congress has had limited oversight of adaptive management programs .

however , it could weigh in at various stages of this process .

for instance , in the early stages of developing an adaptive management governance structure , congress could conduct oversight hearings that provide a forum to discuss issues such as stakeholder representation and management structures .

it could also hold hearings outlining progress and problems implementing adaptive management .

finally , it may require periodic reviews of these efforts by independent evaluators , such as the government accountability office or the national academy of sciences .

the concept of adaptive management is straight - forward , but its implementation can be difficult .

theoretically , adaptive management uses the best available science and monitoring to guide a project or program towards its stated goals .

however in practice , the ability of adaptive management to achieve its objectives is often burdened by political , economic , and sometimes cultural constraints and barriers .

this has caused some to contend that adaptive management has been more influential as a concept than as a process for improving the management of natural resources .

difficulties with adaptive management may be due to a number of factors , including the balance between the flexibility required to make changes to project operations and requirements for certainty among some stakeholder interests .

an adaptive management program that has the authority to significantly infringe on the interests of multiple stakeholders ( eg , farmers might not be able to plan for crops if future water supplies are uncertain ) is likely to be unwelcome among many stakeholders .

in contrast , an adaptive management process that cannot implement any changes in response to research and monitoring might be ineffective .

compromise between these two extremes might not be fully satisfactory to any of the parties involved .

another reason that adaptive management is rarely viewed as an unqualified success may be due , in part , to the complexity and depth of some of the resource challenges it purports to solve .

agreement to an adaptive management program by stakeholders is not the same thing as agreeing to a long term change in a group's objectives ( eg , operation or restoration ) , especially if such a change involves giving up something important .

this may be why implementing the early stages of adaptive management , such as monitoring and experimentation , has generally been easier than collaboration and decision - making .

an additional consideration is that meaningful changes in ecosystems due to restorative actions can take years , and measuring restoration progress is still preliminary for several ecosystems that are currently employing adaptive management .

the nominal experiences of some adaptive management efforts suggests that a number of other important considerations shape the practical application of the concept .

many of these relate to the governance of adaptive management initiatives .

important choices in framing and overseeing an initiative may include federal and non - federal roles in leadership and representation ; the type of decision - making process that is used and the extent to which it fosters collaboration among all stakeholders ; and agreement on a meaningful set of quantitative goals and objectives .

adaptive management is currently guiding a number of large - scale ecosystem restoration initiatives , and is expected to play a significant role in future initiatives .

previously congress has provided limited guidance for implementing adaptive management for ecosystem restoration initiatives .

however , as the concept of adaptive management matures in practice , congress may choose to weigh in more on this process , or even require federal agencies to develop a uniform set of guidelines for implementing adaptive management .

as existing adaptive management efforts mature , congress may also be asked to address the concept through appropriations and oversight .

case studies in adaptive management adaptive management has been adopted to guide research and manage natural resources in multiple ecosystems throughout the country .

this section provides brief summaries of several cases of adaptive management in different regions that demonstrate varying degrees of maturity in the implementation process , as well as varying approaches to governance , leadership , and implementation of adaptive management .

it provides a summary of each program's governance structures , activities to date , and in some cases , reviews of the successes and failures of each program .

for a map of the geographical areas encompassed by these strategies , as well as other large - scale ecosystem restoration efforts employing adaptive management strategies throughout the united states , see figure a - 5 .

glen canyon dam adaptive management program one of the most comprehensive examples of an adaptive management program in the united states is the glen canyon dam adaptive management program ( amp ) .

this program was initiated in 1997 in response to the 1992 grand canyon protection act ( p.l .

102-575 ) .

this act required that the operations of glen canyon dam mitigate impacts on downstream resources of the colorado river while also maintaining and adhering to requirements under existing laws that govern the colorado river ( including water and power deliveries ) .

the amp was formed to address uncertainty and seek balance among these competing requirements .

the central governing entity of the amp is the glen canyon dam adaptive management working group ( amwg , or working group ) .

the working group is a federal advisory committee comprised of 25 representatives from designated federal , state , private and non - profit groups , each appointed by the secretary of the interior ( secretary ) .

it meets biannually and is responsible for making recommendations to the secretary pertaining to operations of glen canyon dam .

the working group is chaired by a representative appointed by the secretary of the interior , who establishes meeting agendas , finalizes minutes , defines project outcomes , and guides other internal processes .

for its decision - making process , the amwg employs a collaborative decision model that seeks consensus and employs a decision rule when consensus cannot be reached .

the amwg practices active adaptive management , which includes running experimental water flows to determine their effects on ecosystem parameters .

based on these results , it recommends changes to the secretary of the interior .

the working group considers information from several sub - groups , including research by the grand canyon monitoring and research center ( gcmrc , operated by the u.s. geological survey ) , as well as information from a technical working group , which collaborates with the gcmrc .

additionally , it considers reviews by an independent science advisory panel , which includes a number of subgroups of its own ( see figure a - 1 ) .

the working group processes results from the various subgroups and makes recommendations for changes to the program to the secretary of the interior ( via the designee ) based on consensus or 2 / 3 majority votes .

the amp has recommended and conducted experimental water flows on multiple occasions over the past 13 years .

these experiments have been extensively monitored and analyzed by the gcmrc , and have been used to inform research and ongoing management and operational changes to glen canyon dam , including recommendations to the secretary of the interior for ongoing experimental flows and future adaptive management .

most parties agree that the scientific foundation of the program has improved scientific understanding of the colorado river ecosystem .

despite improved knowledge of the ecosystem , some have concluded that the glen canyon program has failed to address the fundamental concerns that led to its creation .

specifically , they contend that the amp has not resolved the fundamental question of how power generation should be reconciled with other water uses , including environmental flows .

critics have noted several factors that may contribute to this perceived failure , including issues with the program's leadership , governance structure , and actions .

for instance , observers argue that although the amp provides a useful experimental approach for monitoring and evaluating dam operations ( thus improving scientific understanding of the ecosystem ) , a similar feedback mechanism to monitor and adjust the regulatory program in response to this information has not been developed .

furthermore , they argue that the work of the program has been made more difficult because neither congress nor the awwg identified measurable goals for the restoration program .

without measurable goals , attaining agreement on operational changes can be difficult .

some have also criticized the structure of the collaborative decision - making model under the amp .

the working group itself acknowledged the failure of amp participants to reach consensus on several important issues , and cites a lack of collaboration as a major concern .

some note that the option of a 2 / 3 majority vote may have the effect of discouraging negotiation and collaboration , and may even lead to entrenched voting blocs in many cases .

further , the central authority within the department of the interior ( i.e. , the secretary's designee ) has been criticized by some who argue that the designee ( or doi ) possesses too much authority over the amp , and plays too prominent of a role in its funding and structural design , including the initial selection of voting representatives .

among observers , there is no consensus on whether the difficulties that the glen canyon program has encountered are unique to this particular program or whether they are fundamental to the related processes of adaptive management and collaborative decision making .

recently doi has attempted to make several substantive modifications to revamp the program .

among other changes , the department has moved toward achieving agreement on quantifiable targets for desired future conditions ( dfcs ) that would more clearly establish objectives for management activities to target .

the amwg has recommended proposed narrative dfcs to the secretary , but it has yet to agree on quantitative targets .

platte river adaptive management plan the platte river adaptive management plan is part of the larger platte river recovery implementation program ( implementation program ) .

it is designed to provide endangered species act ( 16 u.s.c .

§§1531-1543 ; esa ) compliance for existing and certain new water - related activities in the platte river basin .

the program originated in a 1997 cooperative agreement between the governors of colorado , nebraska , and wyoming , and the secretary of the interior that created a program to conserve and protect the habitat of federally listed species in the river basin .

the signatories worked together to establish a governance committee ( made up of 10 voting members , including the signatories ) whose charge was to formulate a detailed program to improve and maintain habitats of four target species on the platte river , and to provide compliance under the esa for certain existing and future water activities in each state .

members of the governance committee collaborated to form the structure and substance of the adaptive management program over the next 10 years .

the adaptive management plan ( am plan ) was formulated by the adaptive management working group of the governance committee , and was introduced in 2006 .

the plan guides all adaptive management work for the platte river recovery implementation program .

the am plan has four central objectives pertaining to species management ( including milestones for habitat and flows ) and two priority hypotheses for testing .

observers note that the inclusion of the two hypotheses represents a significant compromise between two fundamentally different visions for ecosystem restoration .

while the parties were not able to agree on a vision for restoration for the river , they agree that the habitat of listed species needs to be enhanced .

under the am plan , the governance committee ( which includes multiple stakeholders ) is responsible for all policy decisions pertaining to the adaptive management part of the implementation program , including any changes to proposed management activities .

governance committee decisions are made by consensus , or a 9 / 10 vote when consensus cannot be reached .

a rotating chair ( a representative of one of the five original signatory organizations ) is responsible for coordinating the governance committee .

similar to adaptive management for the glen canyon program , multiple subgroups advise the working group with both technical and financial / coordination support .

these subgroups are centrally coordinated through an executive director ( hired by the governance committee ) , who works with his / her own staff to carry out program activities at the direction of the governance committee .

a diagram of this governance structure is shown in figure a - 2 .

to date , no major outside review of the platte river implementation program has been conducted .

however , the program's plan is notable for its level of detail , which was negotiated among stakeholders over the course of 10 years .

despite the relative maturity of the overall initiative , it has not attracted the level of criticism of the glen canyon amwg .

since 2007 , the implementation program has achieved consensus on several major action items , including preliminary progress on hypothesis testing and achievement of all preliminary program milestones .

only one vote has been required , and in that case the motion passed nine to zero ( with one abstention ) .

progress toward achieving the program's primary objectives ( including its additional milestones ) is to be evaluated annually , and based on these evaluations , the governance committee will consider changes to ongoing work under the plan .

missouri river recovery program ( mrrp ) the missouri river recovery program ( mrrp ) provides an example of an adaptive management program that is still in the early stages of development .

mrrp was authorized by congress in §5018 of the water resources development act ( wrda ) of 2007 ( p.l .

110-147 ) , and established by the corps in 2008 .

the program consists of activities to restore the missouri river ecosystem and recover three federally listed species: pallid sturgeon , interior least tern , and piping plover .

actions are being taken by the corps to meet the requirements laid out in the u.s .

fish and wildlife service's ( fws ) 2000 biological opinion ( later amended in 2003 ) .

the corps has committed to using adaptive management as a guiding principle for this initiative , and has published a draft of its framework for conducting adaptive management activities .

adaptive management for the mrrp is expected to be conducted through a mix of federal and non - federal entities , and is currently being developed by federal officials within the corps and fws .

however , in accordance with current law , ultimate management authority is expected to reside with the corps .

the adaptive management work group ( amwg ) is proposed to be the primary lead entity to develop adaptive management strategies for the mrrp .

the amwg is made up of federal and state agencies , academics and consulting expertise .

strategies formulated by the amwg are to focus on sets of related actions / projects , which the amwg plans to use to inform the relevant bodies within the corps ( most notably , project managers and product delivery teams ) in the development and implementation of adaptive management strategies and reviews .

several other entities would also work to support adaptive management strategy development and implementation for the mrrp by providing scientific information and coordinating functions .

 ( a chart depicting these various entities is provided in figure a - 3 .

the primary non - federal collaborative forum for missouri river recovery activities will be the missouri river implementation committee ( mrric , or implementation committee ) .

the mrric was also authorized in wrda 2007 ( §5018 ) .

it has 70 members , including 28 non - governmental stakeholders ( representing 16 categories ) , eight states , 18 american indian tribes , and 13 federal agencies .

the committee has a rotating chair who is selected by the mrric .

the mrric currently makes its advisory recommendations to the secretary of the army based on consensus vote .

in cases where consensus cannot be reached , additional meetings can be called .

there are no decision rules or voting requirements to force a decision in these situations .

although the corps and fws have committed to using adaptive management as a tool for implementing the mrrp , these entities have yet to finalize a formal mechanism for non - federal stakeholder participation .

to date , the mrric has only informally coordinated with mrrp on adaptive management activities , including an emergent sandbar habitat project and environmental assessment by the corps .

while the corps has committed to a set of principles for future adaptive management efforts , it is not known whether future structures will fully incorporate the broad base of stakeholders reflected in the mrric , and how this might change the profile of current and future efforts .

since the mrrp has yet to finalize and begin implementing its adaptive management processes , there have been no formal reviews of the program's use of the concept to date .

however , going forward , program managers note that one of the main challenges for the adaptive management program under mrrp will be to incorporate feedback from its broad base of stakeholders .

key choices may include the number and proportion of representation by various interest groups .

lower colorado multi - species conservation program the lower colorado multi - species conservation program ( mscp ) is a multi - stakeholder initiative to conserve 26 species along the lower colorado river while maintaining water and power supplies for farmers , tribes , industries and urban residents .

the mscp began in 2005 and is expected to last for 50 years .

the primary driver to implement the mscp is achieving compliance under the esa for federally listed species .

to achieve compliance under esa , the bureau of reclamation ( bor ) consulted with fws and obtained a biological opinion ( biop ) with a duration of 50 years .

non - federal entities received an incidental take permit for the same period .

in exchange , these interests agree to support efforts to improve habitat and fish and wildlife populations .

the mscp is managed by a set of program documents that include the 2005 biological opinion , 2004 biological assessment , 2005 section 10 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) incidental take permit ( incidental take permit ) , environmental impact statement / environmental impact report , funding and management agreement ( fma ) , implementing agreement ( agreement ) , and habitat conservation plan ( hcp ) .

the lower colorado adaptive management program ( lcamp ) was developed by the mscp to address scientific uncertainty in habitat creation and fish augmentation methods and changed or unforeseen circumstances in the implementation of the mscp .

the lcamp is implemented by bureau of reclamation ( bor ) .

bor , in consultation with a steering committee ( consisting of parties to the implementing agreement ) , appointed a program manager to run the mscp and consequently the lcamp .

the lcamp is expected to use the best scientific and commercial information available , additional monitoring and research , and scientific reviews to evaluate the effectiveness of existing and proposed conservation measures under the mscp .

adaptive management in the lcamp involves consultation among the program manager , the steering committee , and fws .

a monitoring and research program conducts studies to evaluate techniques used to create habitat and augment fish populations .

these data provide a basis for modifying existing projects or developing alternatives for future projects .

modifications generated by the lcamp are proposed to the steering committee with an estimate of costs .

they are also identified in the annual implementation report , work plan , and budget .

the steering committee evaluates proposed changes to ensure that they are consistent with the mscp goals and can be accomplished within budget limits .

action plans and budgets that reflect proposed changes are reviewed by fws for concurrence that they conform to the terms and conditions of the incidental take permit issued for the program .

changes to actions proposed under the lcamp fall under two categories: foreseen and unforeseen changes .

changes that are envisioned under the hcp ( i.e. , foreseen changed circumstances ) do not require an amendment to the mscp , the agreement , or incidental take permit .

foreseen changed circumstances have remedial measures listed in the hcp that can be implemented .

if changed circumstances occur that have not been contemplated under the hcp ( i.e. , unforeseen circumstances ) , they are to be resolved within the framework of regulations addressing hcps .

the director of the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( director ) is responsible for determining if unforeseen circumstances exist .

proposed minor changes due to unforeseen circumstances are not expected to require an amendment to the mscp , the permit , or the agreement .

this implies that the adaptive management process might not lead to changes in the program documents , which is an assurance to stakeholders who have based their plans on the actions and framework of the documents .

however , significant changes due to unforeseen circumstances can require a change to the mscp .

the costs of addressing unforeseen circumstances are limited for non - federal stakeholders .

the commitment of additional land , water , or financial compensation , or additional restrictions on the use of land , water , or other natural resources beyond the level specified in the plan cannot be demanded by the federal government without the consent of stakeholders covered under the permit .

no studies have been completed that evaluate the lcamp's effectiveness .

the future success of adaptive management , however , could be tied to the foreseen and unforeseen circumstances included in the program documents .

if future conditions are limited to those envisioned under foreseen circumstances , future efforts ( including changes ) will be more straightforward .

while some contend that these foreseeable changes and their mitigation measures are limited in scope in the mscp , others contend that the list of foreseeable changes is comprehensive for the 50-year time frame and the chance of an unforeseen change is small .

notably , the mscp does not directly address climate variability as a foreseen circumstance , although it does address the potential effects of climate change in the region ( eg , lower water supplies and drought ) .

the remedy for these circumstances is to prioritize the distribution of available water among habitats to ensure the greatest benefits for covered species .

however , 'available water' is not defined , and if available water is not sufficient to address habitat requirements it is unclear what the next steps might be .

a common criticism of adaptive management is whether the process has enough flexibility and authority to implement changes in a conservation program .

flexibility in adaptive management generally reflects two key factors: ( 1 ) the steps involved in approving a change to the initiative ; and ( 2 ) the size of the change allowed .

the mscp has a process for making changes to the program that involves approval by the steering committee and concurrence by the fws .

if the proposed change does not pass either of these two steps it appears that there is no additional process that would result in implementation .

under the agreement , it states that "each party shall , to the maximum extent practicable , fully cooperate with the amp. .

a change passed through the amp might not be implemented by a party if it is not practicable .

the limits of what is practicable are not defined , and it is unclear what the consequences might be for a party not cooperating or participating in the amp .

everglades restoration the everglades is a unique network of subtropical wetlands in florida that has shrunken to half its original size .

in response to the overall decline of the ecosystem , federal , state , tribal , and local agencies collaborated to develop the comprehensive everglades restoration plan ( cerp ) .

cerp aims to increase storage of wet season waters to augment the supplies during the dry season for both the natural system and urban and agricultural users .

federal restoration of the greater everglades ecosystem is guided by the water resources development act of 2000 ( wrda 2000 ; p.l .

106-541 ) .

under §601 of this act , congress approved cerp as a framework for everglades restoration .

the law also authorizes the creation of programmatic regulations for implementing cerp , which aim to ensure that new information resulting from changed or unforeseen circumstances , new scientific or technical information , information generated through the use of adaptive management , and future authorized changes to cerp , are incorporated into cerp .

wrda also authorized funding for an adaptive assessment and monitoring program .

an outline of this program was promulgated as a regulation in 2003 .

since then , multiple documents to guide adaptive management efforts have been produced .

however , since few restoration projects have been initiated , there have been limited opportunities to put adaptive management plans into action .

adaptive management is expected to be conducted at the programmatic and project level in the everglades as new restoration projects are initiated .

at the programmatic level , adaptive management is to be used to adjust the monitoring and assessment plan , project components , sequencing of implementing projects , and operations of multiple projects .

at the project level , adaptive management is to be tailored to fit each project , including its degree of complexity and its potential number of management or implementation options .

implementation guidance for restoration projects requires that all ecosystem restoration projects under cerp have an adaptive management plan .

the project is also to be structured so that it can incorporate uncertainty and operate effectively under variable conditions .

pursuant to the 2003 regulations , adaptive management in the everglades is guided by the restoration , coordination and verification ( recover ) team , which is responsible for the science and monitoring of cerp .

recover is comprised of the recover leadership group ( rlg ) , which is the primary coordinating body in this effort , three supporting technical teams ( planning , evaluation , and assessment ) and a management body .

the rlg includes 12 members who have an equal role in decision making .

recover is responsible for , among other things , developing system - wide performance measures for evaluating projects and goals , preparing project implementation reports , developing proposals for a monitoring plan for cerp , conducting adaptive assessment activities , considering proposed revisions to cerp , and developing interim goals for cerp .

an overview of the adaptive management framework under cerp is provided in figure a - 4 .

notably , recover is not responsible for management and science integration in the form of actual changes or updates to cerp .

this task resides within an entity known as the system planning and operations team ( also known as the spot ) and the corps of engineers .

if cerp , or any of its components are to be changed , the corps , in consultation with other federal , state and tribal agencies , is to prepare a report detailing the changes .

changes are expected to fall in one of three categories , including ( 1 ) altering the sequencing of project implementation to adjust the storage , treatment , or delivery of water ; ( 2 ) implementing operational changes to improve a project ; and ( 3 ) adjusting cerp , including adding , deleting , or modifying projects .

if the changes to a project or to cerp are significant , congressional authorization is needed .

two documents are expected to guide adaptive management in the everglades under the recover program: the cerp adaptive management strategy ( am strategy ) and the cerp adaptive management integration guide ( am guide ) .

the am strategy sets up a learning process to better understand the south florida ecosystem and is to incorporate improvements to cerp when new scientific and technical information becomes available .

when it is published , the am guide is expected to identify specific steps for implementing adaptive management at the program and project levels .

stakeholder participation in the adaptive management process under cerp consists largely of reviewing and commenting on various reports during each of the stages of adaptive management process .

there is no formal advisory body with stakeholders that addresses adaptive management in the everglades .

furthermore , due to federal advisory committee act ( faca ) constraints , corps project development team meetings , as well as recovery team meetings , currently do not allow for a direct dialogue between government and non - government stakeholders .

due to the ongoing nature of the process to refine adaptive management planning , combined with the reality of few projects being initiated to date , there are no major examples of adaptive management being implemented for cerp projects .

however , some have analyzed the current adaptive management process in the everglades and provided feedback .

one criticism of adaptive management in the everglades is that it only involves broad , indirect stakeholder participation in the process of making changes to cerp projects .

stakeholder participation in the process is largely based on reviewing and commenting on documents produced by various adaptive management committees , and there is no single forum for direct stakeholder participation and recommendations .

some contend that the lack of a central committee or forum for non - governmental stakeholders to contribute to decision - making may deprive the effort of a "space" in which stakeholders can discuss these issues .

they also contend that the current setup benefits special interests , and potentially disregards the broader ecological values of the area .

others state that there is a lack of transparency in the process of deciding whether or not to act upon recommendations generated by the adaptive management process .

in the adaptive management strategy , the description of how senior - level decision - makers decide on changes to cerp or cerp projects based on adaptive management recommendations is unclear .

the strategy does state that the preferred option ( i.e. , a recommended change ) will best represent societal values , scientific input , and reconciliation of policy conflicts .

