on march 23 , 2010 , president obama signed into law a comprehensive health care reform bill , the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 ) .

among its provisions , the aca creates a mandate for most u.s. residents to obtain health insurance and provides for the establishment of insurance exchanges through which certain individuals and families will be able to receive federal subsidies to reduce the cost of purchasing that coverage .

the new law expands eligibility for medicaid ; amends the medicare program in ways that are intended to reduce the growth in medicare spending that had been projected under preexisting law ; imposes an excise tax on insurance plans determined to have high premiums ; and makes other changes to the federal tax code , medicare , medicaid , and numerous other programs .

the aca also reenacts , amends , and permanently reauthorizes the indian health care improvement act ( ihcia ) .

specifically , section 10221 ( a ) of the aca enacted the indian health care improvement reauthorization and extension act of 2009 ( s. 1790 ) ( hereinafter referred to as the ihcia reauthorization and extension act ) .

section 10221 ( b ) of the aca amended sections of the ihcia reauthorization and extension act ( eg , sections 111 , 134 , and 201 ) and amended one section of ihcia not included in the ihcia reauthorization and extension act ( section 806 ) .

another report , crs report r41152 , indian health care: impact of the affordable care act ( aca ) , by [author name scrubbed] , more briefly summarizes the major changes made by the aca to ihcia and includes a discussion of other provisions in the aca that may affect the indian health service ( ihs ) , american indian and alaska native health , and their access to health care .

ihcia authorizes many specific ihs activities , sets out the national policy for health services administered to indians , and sets health condition goals for the ihs service population to reduce "the prevalence and incidence of preventable illnesses among , and unnecessary and premature deaths of , indians. .

prior to the aca , ihcia was last fully reauthorized by the indian health amendments of 1992 , which extended authorizations of its appropriations through fy2000 .

the authorizations for all ihcia programs were later extended through fy2001 .

although authority had expired , ihcia authorized programs continued to receive annual appropriations since fy2001 .

the ihs , an agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , provides health care for approximately 2.2 million eligible american indians / alaska natives through a system of programs and facilities located on or near indian reservations , and through contractors in certain urban areas .

ihs provides services in 35 states , subdivided into 12 geographic "areas" that consist of one or more states .

each area is administered by an area office ; areas , in turn , are further subdivided into service units that consist of one or more facilities .

ihs may provide services directly , or indian tribes ( its ) or tribal organizations ( tos ) may operate ihs facilities and programs themselves through self - determination contracts and self - governance compacts negotiated with ihs .

although most ihs facilities are located on or near reservations , ihs also funds urban indian health projects ( uihps ) , through grants or contracts to urban indian organizations ( uios ) .

the ihcia authorizes many specific ihs activities , sets out the national policy for health services administered to indians , and declares that one of the federal goals for the health condition of the ihs service population is to "provide the quantity and quality of health services that will permit the health status of indians to be raised to the highest possible level. .

significantly , ihcia authorizes direct collections from medicare , medicaid , and other third - party insurers .

ihcia also gave ihs authority to grant funding to uios , authorized programs to expand the health care workforce providing services at ihs - funded facilities , and authorized programs that address health concerns for the american indian and alaska native population ( eg , substance abuse , suicide , diabetes ) .

this report summarizes the provisions of the ihcia reauthorization and extension act as enacted by section 10221 of the aca .

this report is primarily for reference purposes .

the material in it is intended to provide context to help the reader understand the intent of the aca's individual provisions at the time of enactment .

the act includes two titles .

title i contains amendments to the eight ihcia titles .

title ii amends and reauthorizes the native hawaiian health care act , which authorizes health education , health promotion , disease prevention services , and health professions scholarship programs for native hawaiians .

this report focuses on title i , which contains eight sections , each of which amends a specific ihcia title .

title i also , with some exceptions , consolidates ihcia appropriations into a single section , repealing authorizations that had previously been included at the end of each of ihcia's eight titles .

the section numbers below refer to the section numbers in the ihcia reauthorization and extension act .

where appropriate , sections amended by section 10221 ( b ) of the aca are noted .

the subtitles below refer to those in the ihcia reauthorization and extension act , which correspond to the ihcia title they amend .

each subtitle begins with some background on the ihcia title it amends to provide context for the descriptions of the law's provisions .

this background reflects the policy issues at the time of enactment and does not reflect the effects of the aca .

table 1 describes the major differences between the ihcia and the ihcia reauthorization extension act .

appendix a includes a detailed timeline of effective dates for the ihcia reauthorization and extension act provisions .

appendix b includes a list of acronyms used in this report .

the term "secretary," as used in this report , means the secretary of hhs , unless otherwise indicated .

the term "indian" in this report refers to "indian" as defined in ihcia .

under this definition , an indian is a person who is a member of a federally recognized tribe , band , nation , or other organized group or community , including any alaska native village or group , or regional or village corporation , as defined in or established pursuant to the alaska native claims settlement act .

the aca also defined a number of new indian - related terms .

two of the new terms most frequently used in this report are indian health program and tribal health program .

"indian health program" ( ihp ) is defined as ( 1 ) any health program administered by the ihs , ( 2 ) any tribal health program , or ( 3 ) any indian tribe or tribal organization to which the secretary provides funding under the buy indian act .

"tribal health program" ( thp ) is defined as any it or to operating any health program , service , function , activity , or facility funded , in whole or part , by the ihs through , or provided for in , a contract or compact with the ihs under the indian self - determination and education assistance act ( isdeaa ) .

title ii of the indian health care improvement reauthorization and extension act , as enacted , contains one provision that amends and reauthorizes the native hawaiian health care act of 1988 ( nhhca , p.l .

100-579 , as amended ; 42 u.s.c .

§11701-11714 ) , which authorizes health education , health promotion , disease prevention services , and health professions scholarship programs for native hawaiians .

this section reauthorizes expired appropriations authorities in the nhhca [42 u.s.c .

§11701-11714] through fy2019 .

this section also amends the nhhca [42 u.s.c .

§11705] , effective on december 5 , 2006 , to permit a specified private educational organization ( kamehameha schools bishop estate ) identified in section 7202 ( 16 ) of the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 [20 u.s.c.7512 ( 16 ) ] to continue to offer educational programs and services to native hawaiians ( as defined in that act ) first , and to other groups only after the needs of native hawaiians have been met .

this section also amends the definition of "health promotion" in nhhca section 12 ( 2 ) .

appendix a. timeline of ihcia provisions in the aca in some instances , the aca specifies dates for key administrative or programmatic activities or requirements .

the following timeline ( see table a - 1 ) lists the provisions summarized in this report that include dates , such as those that include dates for reports .

other activities or requirements that have no date specified in the aca and are implicitly effective upon enactment ( march 23 , 2010 ) are not included in this timeline .

all activities authorized in the ihcia are discretionary and subject to appropriations by congress .

given this , all deadlines below may not be considered binding since they are subject to appropriated funds .

where available , the timeline includes information on action that ihs , or other federal agencies , have taken in response to deadlines within the two and a half years after enactment ( i.e. , through september 23 , 2012 ) .

table a - 1 lists the aca dates , which are grouped by subtitle in the ihcia reauthorization and extension act of 2009 .

not all subtitles are included , as some subtitles do not include provisions with specified deadlines .

within each subtitle , table entries are organized with key dates in chronological order .

effective dates stated in terms of days , months , or years after enactment have been converted to calendar dates ( eg , 180 days is 9 / 19 / 2010 ; six months is 9 / 23 / 2010 , etc. ) .

table entries for specific implementation requirements or deadlines that are not tied to a specific calendar date are presented at the end of each title .

each table entry includes the ihcia reauthorization and extension act section number as enacted by section 10221 of the aca ; a descriptive title for each activity or requirement ; a brief description of the activity or requirement ; the associated start date , or effective date .

all of ihcia title vii is amended by section 181 of the ihcia reauthorization and extension act ; therefore , for requirements contained in section 181 , the subsection of ihcia title vii it amends is noted in parentheses .

for additional information on provisions that appear in the timeline , refer to the more detailed section summaries in the report .

for definitions of acronyms used in the timeline , refer to appendix b .

unless otherwise stated , references in the table to "the secretary" refer to the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) .

appendix b .

acronyms used in the repor .

