congress has long had an interest in the revitalization of distressed areas through expanded business and employment opportunities .

this interest continues today , with combined federal government expenses of $10.9 billion and $5.1 billion in foregone tax revenue in fy2009 for the purpose of community and regional development .

given this commitment towards the goal of economic development , it is natural to ask about the effectiveness of the underlying programs .

empowerment zones ( ezs ) , enterprise communities ( ecs ) , and renewal communities ( rcs ) are federally designated geographic areas characterized by high levels of poverty and economic distress , where businesses and local governments may be eligible to receive federal grants and tax incentives .

the objective of this report is to provide a comparative overview of the similarities and differences among the three programs , specifically policies to target and provide federal incentives to economically distressed zones .

the report also examines studies that have evaluated the impact of ezs , ecs , and rcs , and provides information on their current status .

finally , the report discusses recent legislative activity and congressional issues and options .

since 1993 , congress has authorized three rounds of ezs ( 1993 , 1997 , 1999 ) , two rounds of ecs ( 1993 , 1997 ) , and one round of rcs ( 2000 ) with the objective of revitalizing selected economically distressed communities .

in addition , round i contained a supplemental round established by the clinton administration .

the three programs have different benefits and eligibility criteria .

for example , the nine initial ezs each received tax incentives and grants of $100 million ( urban ) and $40 million ( rural ) , whereas the 95 initial ecs each received tax benefits and smaller grants of $2.95 million for smaller urban counties and rural communities .

rcs did not receive grants , but benefitted from wage credits , and tax investment incentives .

eligibility varied depending on levels of population , unemployment , and poverty .

in its fy2010 and fy2011 budgets , the administration requested that congress extend tax incentives for ezs and rcs until december 31 , 2010 and 2011 .

ez and rc tax incentives were extended in the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) , through december 31 , 2009 .

ez and rc tax benefits lapsed from january 2010 until december 2010 .

currently , the estimated $1.8 billion in grant incentives provided to ezs and ecs since 1993 have mostly been expended .

the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) , enacted on december 17 , 2010 , extended ez tax benefits , but not rcs , until the end of 2011 .

in addition , legislation such as the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) provided broadband education , training , and equipment for selected facilities located within ezs and ecs , and recovery zone bonds for ezs .

in 2009 , p.l .

111-8 and p.l .

111-80 provided $3 million in appropriations for ezs and ecs .

while a short - term extension of ez tax incentives was enacted in the 111 th congress , a similar extension of the rc tax incentives might continue to be an issue in the 112 th congress .

after congress authorized the programs , federal agencies responsible for administering the programs held competitions to designate a selected number of communities .

according to estimates by the government accountability office ( gao ) , 993 communities applied for designation and 184 were selected .

in addition to funding authorized through legislation in the three rounds , designated communities also received funding through annual appropriations laws from 1999 to 2009 .

federal block grant funds for round i remained available to finance qualified projects until december 31 , 2004 .

by contrast , round ii funds are available to communities until expended , with the exception of fy2003 appropriations for round ii , which were available until september 30 , 2005 .

tax incentives expired on december 31 , 2009 .

table 1 summarizes the three rounds of ez , ec , and rc programs and the number of designated communities by urban and rural category .

communities designated as ezs , ecs , and rcs are eligible for a combination of tax , grant incentives to encourage economic development , and preferences .

since the initial authorizing legislation was enacted , the number of tax incentives offered has grown , while the value of grant incentives has declined .

in dollar terms , for example , the value of grants provided through the first 15 years of the programs is roughly equal to the tax incentives currently being offered every 16.5 months .

a number of studies have evaluated the effectiveness of the ez , ec , and rc programs .

government - sponsored studies by the government accountability office ( gao ) and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) have failed to link ez and ec designation with improvement in community outcomes .

it is worth noting that these studies examined the round i ezs and ecs , which received significant grant funding for community organizations .

in addition , several non - governmental economic studies have evaluated the effectiveness of zone incentives .

overall , these studies have found modest , if any , effects and call into question the cost - effectiveness of these programs .

this inability to link these programs to improvements in community level outcomes should not be interpreted as meaning that the ez , ec , and rc programs did not aid economic development .

clearly , businesses and investors that received program benefits were made better off .

the main conclusion from these studies is that the ez , ec , and rc programs have not been shown to have caused a general improvement in the economic conditions of the locals .

one possible cause for this inability to generalize the program effects is the size of the programs is small compared to the economic activity within any of the zones .

congress has shown an ongoing interest in extending and reforming the ez , ec , and rc programs , and several bills were introduced in the 111 th congress proposing changes .

at the end of the 111 th congress , empowerment zone tax incentives were extended through december 31 , 2011 , by the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) .

some of the bills in the 111 th congress would have extended tax benefits and revised benefits and requirements for these programs .

changes would have included a temporary extension of the programs , changes in eligibility requirements , adjustment of tax and grant benefits , and changes in boundaries .

changes would also have included the use of the empowerment zone concept to target federal assistance for other programs .

in addition , some of the proposed legislation would have incorporated the department of commerce — previously not involved in the ez , ec , and rc initiatives — and allowed for the provision of grants through this new venue .

although most of the grant funding of ezs , ecs , and rcs expired several years ago , some of the legislation would have initiated new grant programs , and created new tax incentives for the ec program .

one congressional proposal would have targeted ez funds to manufacturing , clean energy , and agricultural enterprises by establishing an ez revolving loan fund for small and medium - sized manufacturers to improve energy efficiency and to produce clean energy technology ; the legislation would have provided a tax credit for farmers' investments in value - added agriculture .

finally , one bill would have created an air and health quality empowerment zone under the environmental protection agency .

these policy issues and legislation are discussed in more detail below .

there are several options that congress can consider regarding the ez , ec , and rc programs in particular , and for federal economic development policy in general .

two contrasting options are to permanently extend the programs as currently constituted or to allow the programs to expire .

allowing the ez , ec , and rc programs to expire as scheduled might marginally improve the nation's fiscal condition , but could result in a slight reduction in economic recovery in these areas .

on the other hand , permanently extending the programs would not weaken the economic recovery , but would worsen the longer - term fiscal outlook .

in addition to these options , other options or combinations of options are also available .

the number of competing federal government economic development programs suggests a diffuse national economic development policy .

this fragmented policy is the result of years of initiatives that have occurred in the absence of a unifying set of economic development principles .

this may follow from the inherent difficulty in identifying economic distress using metrics .

current policy typically uses metrics such as unemployment and poverty rates as proxies for economic distress .

supporters of the current diffuse approach could argue that the numerous federal economic development programs allow for the targeted application of policy tools to a diverse set of economic development needs .

proponents could further assert that the current federal approach best allows for congress to target efforts as economic development needs evolve over time .

detractors might argue that the absence of unifying principles renders current federal efforts ineffectual .

that is , detractors may argue that without a clear goal , it is unlikely federal policy can efficiently spur economic development .

further , detractors argue that the current set of efforts increase the difficulty in conducting objective effectiveness studies , which hinders congressional oversight of these programs .

if the lack of unifying economic development principles is seen as a detriment to effective economic development policy , then a straightforward policy prescription is apparent .

that is , a consolidation of economic development programs could result in the application of a unifying set of principles to the ongoing issue of economic development .

as an alternative to consolidation , congress could allow the existing programs to expire and implement a new program built around a single set of economic development principles .

the various competing federal economic development programs have evolved little over time .

in most cases , the designation of economic development zones is a "one - time" event that may not be revisited .

one result of this stagnation is that current efforts are not likely targeted at the areas of greatest current need for economic development .

for example , some may argue that the current reliance on unemployment or poverty rates results in poor targeting of scarce economic development resources .

they may argue that metrics such as foreclosure rates , retail vacancy rates , or the long - term unemployment rate would lead to more efficient targeting of these monies .

others may argue that the stability inherent in the current set of programs acknowledges the long - term nature of any solution to economic distress .

if this stagnation is seen as a detriment to effective economic development policy , then a straightforward policy prescription is apparent .

that is , the existing programs could be retained , but with a redesignation of the various economic development zone designation .

this option would allow congress to realign its economic development efforts to the areas of greatest current need for economic development assistance .

in several reports , gao has indicated that conducting effective program oversight on these economic development programs is difficult .

specifically , gao has noted that data limitations make a conclusive study of program effectiveness difficult and made recommendations to allow increased oversight .

if congress chooses to implement these recommendations , then , gao argues , these programs can be properly evaluated .

coupled with a limited term extension , this option could allow congress to reevaluate the programs after a full consideration of their effectiveness .

appendix a .

list of empowerment zones , enterprise communities , and renewal communities round i urban ezs ( 6 ) atlanta , ga baltimore , md chicago , il detroit , mi new york , ny philadelphia , pa / camden , nj round i rural ezs ( 3 ) kentucky highlands , ky mid - delta , ms rio grande valley , tx round i urban ecs ( 65 ) akron , oh albany , ga albany / schenectady / troy , ny albuquerque , nm birmingham , al boston , ma bridgeport , ct buffalo , ny burlington , vt charleston , sc charlotte , nc cleveland , oh columbus , oh dallas , tx denver , co des moines , ia east st. louis , il el paso , tx flint , mi harrisburg , pa houston , tx huntington , wv indianapolis , in jackson , ms kansas city , mo / kansas city , ks las vegas , nv little rock / pulaski , ar los angeles , ca louisville , ky lowell , ma manchester , nh memphis , tn miami / dade county , fl milwaukee , wi minneapolis , mn muskegon , mi nashville / davidson , tn new haven , ct new orleans , la newark , nj newburgh / kingston , ny norfolk , va oakland , ca ogden , ut oklahoma city , ok omaha , ne ouachita parish , la phoenix , az pittsburgh , pa portland , or providence , ri rochester , ny san antonio , tx san diego , ca san francisco , ca seattle , wa springfield , il springfield , ma st. louis , mo st. paul , mn tacoma , wa tampa , fl waco , tx washington , dc wilmington , de round i supplemental empowerment zones ( 2 ) cleveland , oh los angeles , ca round i enhanced enterprise communities ( 4 ) boston , ma houston , tx kansas city , mo / kansas city , ks oakland , ca round i rural ecs ( 30 ) accomack and northampton county , va arizona border region , az beadle / spink counties , sd central appalachia , wv central savannah river area , ga chambers county , al city of east prairie , mo city of lock haven , pa city of watsonville , ca crisp / dooly county , ga east arkansas , ar fayette / haywood county , tn greater portsmouth , oh greene - sumter , al the halifax / edgecombe / wilson empowerment alliance , nc imperial county , ca jackson county , fl josephine county , or la jicarita , nm lake county , mi lower yakima county , wa macon ridge , la mcdowell county , wv mississippi county , ar north delta mississippi , ms northeast louisiana delta , la robeson county , nc scott , tennessee / mccreary , ky southeast oklahoma , ok williamsburg - lake city , sc round ii urban ezs ( 15 ) boston , ma cincinnati , oh columbia / sumter , sc columbus , oh cumberland county , nj el paso , tx gary / hammond / east chicago , in ironton , oh / huntington , wv knoxville , tn miami / dade county , fl minneapolis , mn new haven , ct norfolk / portsmouth , vz santa ana , ca st. louis , ms / east st. louis , il round ii rural ezs ( 5 ) desert communities , ca griggs - steele , nd oglala sioux tribe , sd southernmost illinois delta , il southwest georgia united , ga round ii rural ecs ( 20 ) allendale alive , sc bowling green , ky city of deming , nm clare county , mi clinch - powell , tn empower lewiston , me empowerment alliance of southwest florida , fl fayette , pa five star , wa fort peck assiniboine & sioux tribe , mt four corners , az futuro communities , tx huron - tule , ca metlakatla indian community , ak molokai , hi northwoods niijii , wi town of austin , in tri - county indian nations , ok upper kanawha , wv wichita county , ks round iii urban ezs ( 8 ) fresno , ca jacksonville , fl oklahoma city , ok pulaski county , ar san antonio , tx syracuse , ny tucson , az yonkers , ny round iii rural ezs ( 2 ) aroostook county , me futuro , tx urban rcs ( 28 ) atlanta , ga buffalo - lackawanna , ny camden , nj charleston , sc chattanooga , tn chicago , il corpus christi , tx detroit , mi flint , mi hamilton , oh lawrence , ma los angeles , ca lowell , ma memphis , tn milwaukee , wi mobile , al new orleans , la newark , nj niagara falls , ny ouachita parish , la philadelphia , pa rochester , ny san diego , ca san francisco , ca schenectady , ny tacoma , wa yakima , wa youngstown , oh rural rcs ( 12 ) burlington , vt central louisiana , la eastern kentucky , ky el paso county , tx greene - sumter , al jamestown , ny northern louisiana , la orange cove , ca parlier , ca southern alabama , al turtle mountain band of chippewa , nd west - central mississippi , ms source: u.s. general accounting office , federal revitalization programs are being implemented , but data on the use of tax benefits are limited , gao - 04-306 , march 2004 , p. 55 , http: / / www.gao.gov / new.items / d04306.pdf .

appendix b .

federal tax incentives available to distressed communitie .

