the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides a range of benefits to veterans who meet specific eligibility rules .

benefits are provided through the veterans health administration ( vha ) , the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) , and the national cemetery administration ( nca ) .

the focus of this report is travel benefits offered through vha to assist veterans in accessing health care by providing reimbursements for some travel costs .

in most cases , veterans must enroll to receive health benefits through vha .

all enrolled veterans are offered a standard medical benefits package ; additional health benefits may be available to veterans based on their veteran status , the presence of service - connected disabilities or exposures , income , and other factors , such as status as a former prisoner of war or receipt of a purple heart .

in order to improve access to va health care services , and because veterans may need to travel significant distances to reach va medical centers or clinics , congress authorized va to reimburse some veterans for travel expenses related to medical appointments as part of the medical benefits package with the passage of p.l .

76-432 in 1940 .

since its authorization , the veterans beneficiary travel program has undergone a number of significant legislative and regulatory changes affecting eligibility and the type of transportation covered , as well as the cost to va for the benefit .

congress has changed mileage reimbursement rates and veteran deductible costs for this program .

the most recent changes to the program were made by the caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-163 ) .

appendix a provides a summary of legislative and regulatory changes to the program .

benefit changes have affected actual and projected program costs ; details on program funding are included in appendix b .

not all veterans are eligible for travel benefits , and not all travel costs are covered by the veterans beneficiary travel program .

va determines eligibility for veterans beneficiary travel program benefits based on the characteristics of the veteran , the type of medical appointment , or a combination of the two .

travel benefits are also provided for a limited group of non - veterans .

although the benefits are standardized nationally , specific mileage calculations and reimbursements are made individually at va's 153 hospitals ( medical centers ) around the country through their business or travel offices .

time limits also apply for requesting reimbursement .

veterans can receive travel reimbursement if they meet certain criteria , generally related to service connection and income levels .

"service connection" refers to disabilities that veterans have incurred or aggravated in the line of duty in the active military , naval , or air service .

travel reimbursement is provided for veterans rated 30% or more service - connected for travel relating to any condition .

veterans who receive pensions or who would qualify to receive a pension based on income are also eligible for travel reimbursement .

veterans receiving va pension benefits can receive travel benefits for appointments related to all conditions .

veterans who do not qualify for pensions ( eg , those who did not serve during a period of war ) , but with annual incomes below the maximum annual rate for va pensions , can receive benefits for travel related to all conditions .

veterans who can present clear evidence that they are unable to defray the cost of travel can receive benefits for travel related to all conditions .

for two categories of appointment , travel costs are covered for all veterans , without regard to income or service - connected disability status .

all veterans who travel for compensation and pension ( c&p ) exams have all travel costs covered and do not pay a deductible for the travel .

all veterans traveling to a transplant center for transplant care have travel costs covered .

veterans who are rated less than 30% service - connected are eligible for travel reimbursement for appointments that are related to their service - connected condition .

a limited group of non - veterans is also eligible for reimbursement of some travel costs related to medical appointments at va facilities: an attendant of a veteran , if a va provider determines the attendant is required ; donors or potential donors of tissue , organs , or parts to a veteran receiving va - authorized care ; veterans' immediate family members traveling for bereavement counseling related to the death of the veteran in the active line of duty ; veterans' immediate family members , guardians , or those in whose home a veteran lives if traveling for consultation , counseling , training , or mental health services relating to a veteran receiving care for a service - connected disability ; allied beneficiaries , if the travel and reimbursement have been authorized by the appropriate foreign government agency ; and beneficiaries of other federal agencies , when authorized by that agency .

travel benefits are provided only for care that is being paid for by va , and only for care that has been previously scheduled , unless it is emergency care .

in general , for those eligible to receive benefits through the program as described above , va will provide a per - mile payment for travel by car , reimbursement for "special mode" transportation when justified , and in some circumstances reimbursement for air travel .

veterans must submit requests for reimbursement within 30 days of the travel , although certain cost reimbursements must be requested before the travel takes place .

deductibles apply in most cases .

eligible veterans who drive in private cars to appointments are reimbursed at a per - mile rate for travel both to the appointment and back home .

if two or more eligible beneficiaries are riding in the same car , only one mileage reimbursement will be made ( i.e. , the reimbursement is provided for costs actually incurred , not per person traveling ) .

"special mode" transportation refers to travel in an ambulance , wheelchair van , or other vehicle specially designed for transporting people with disabilities .

other types of transportation , such as subways , trains , airplanes , and privately owned vehicles , are not considered special mode even if they have been adapted or are capable of transporting people with disabilities .

to receive benefits for special mode transportation , the veteran must be eligible for the benefit , as described above , and the special mode transportation must be medically required , as determined by a va clinician .

reimbursement for special mode transportation must be requested prior to the trip , except in the case of medical emergencies .

special mode transportation from a va facility to a community emergency facility and back is authorized for reimbursement if the transportation is required because the va facility could not provide the needed care .

special mode transportation to an emergency facility for treatment can be retroactively authorized if the emergency episode of care is approved for va payment .

the caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 clarified that "actual necessary expense of travel includes the reasonable costs of airfare if travel by air is the only practical way to reach a department facility.' .

the veteran's medical condition and any other impediments to the use of ground transportation should be considered in the evaluation of whether travel by air is practical .

va will reimburse for actual cost up to 50% of the government employee rate for meals and lodging when deemed appropriate by va based on medical condition , distance required to travel , weather conditions , time of appointment , and other factors .

reimbursement for food and lodging should be requested in advance .

tolls , parking fees , luggage fees , and costs for travel by taxi or other hired vehicle may be reimbursed if receipts are offered .

travel benefits are distributed as reimbursements for actual costs incurred ( with the exception noted above for meals and lodging capped at 50% of government employee rates ) , and a deductible applies in most cases .

deductible rates have varied in recent years ( see appendix a ) .

current deductible rates are $3 for one - way travel and $6 for round - trip travel , with a monthly cap of $18 ( six one - way trips or three round - trips ) .

deductible waivers are available for those receiving va pensions or qualifying based on income , and for those traveling for c&p exams .

mileage rates have also changed several times in recent years ( see appendix a ) .

the current reimbursement rate is set at 41.5 cents per mile .

mileage rate calculation methods vary between va facilities .

some facilities calculate mileage based on zip codes ; others use online mapping tools , such as mapquest , to determine miles traveled .

veterans are reimbursed based on their current place of residence , whether or not it is the address to which official mail is sent .

generally travel reimbursement is paid only from the place of current residence to the nearest facility that can provide the required care .

veterans are usually able to apply for travel reimbursement at the va medical center in which their appointment was held , through a travel office or business office within the facility .

medical centers also establish procedures to provide benefits for eligible veterans traveling to community based outpatient clinics or other facilities under their jurisdiction .

claimants must apply in person or in writing within 30 calendar days of completing the travel .

special mode transportation must be preapproved for reimbursement .

in cases of emergency that involved special mode transportation , applications for reimbursement must be made within 30 days .

if a veteran does not qualify for travel reimbursement based on eligibility criteria , the veteran may be able to access other resources to assist in funding travel .

va facilities will provide reduced - fare request forms to veterans for submission to bus companies and other transportation providers .

the transportation provider determines whether reduced fare will be offered to the veteran .

veterans may also be able to access transportation assistance or services from non - governmental veterans service organizations , such as the disabled american veterans' ( dav ) transportation network .

the only exceptions to the service - connected disability or income qualification eligibility criteria for the benefit are for those traveling for a c&p exam or those traveling to a transplant center for transplant care .

operation enduring freedom / operation iraqi freedom / operation new dawn veterans , veterans with spinal cord injuries , and other "special groups" must meet standard eligibility criteria to receive the benefit .

only veterans receiving inpatient va care and considered to be in a "terminal condition" ( expected to live six months or less ) are eligible to receive travel benefits to relocate to a health care facility that is not located in the area where they lived when they entered their current facility .

va will not pay return travel for a beneficiary who has been irregularly discharged .

if a veteran arrives at a medical center for non - emergency services without an appointment and receives care or services , va will approve payment only for return trip costs ; if no services are provided , va will not approve payment for travel .

if a veteran has a travel claim denied , the veteran must be provided with written notice of the decision .

veterans have rights to appeal the decision , which can be filed with the board of veterans appeals .

appendix a .

beneficiary travel program history appendix b .

beneficiary travel program funding according to the department of veterans affairs , the costs associated with the travel beneficiary program have risen in recent years due to the increased number of veterans claiming mileage reimbursement , a rise in the average number of claims per veteran , and higher costs per veteran claim .

va showed a 30% increase in the number of veterans claiming reimbursement ( estimated at 450,000 in fy2008 and 586,000 in fy2009 ) , and showed the average number of claims per veteran increased from 5.5 to 7.1 during that same period .

as shown in table b - 1 , spending for the beneficiary travel program increased by approximately 285% between fy2006 and fy2010 .

it is estimated that va will spend approximately $798 million in fy2011 .

it should be noted that the funding for this program comes directly from the va health care appropriation .

