the obama administration , in the fy2012 budget proposal , has proposed eliminating a variety of federal tax deductions and credits available to the oil and natural gas industries .

this year's proposals are similar to those sent to congress in conjunction with the fy2010 and fy2011 budget requests .

new revenue estimates for the 2012 proposed tax changes are $43.6 billion over the next decade , contrasted with estimates of $31 billion and $36 billion in 2010 and 2011 , respectively , for essentially the same proposed changes .

although these proposals have failed to be implemented by congress in fy2010 and fy2011 , the current atmosphere of high deficits and high earnings by the major oil companies , coupled with a price of gasoline over $3 per gallon , might reduce resistance to increasing taxes on the industry .

the administration characterizes the deductions and credits slated for elimination as tax preferences , or oil and gas subsidies , that are costly to u.s. taxpayers and do little to either provide incentives for increased production or reduce prices to consumers .

a contrasting description is provided by the american petroleum institute ( api ) , which describes the tax provisions slated for elimination as "cost - recovery methods that are similar to cost - recovery methods for many other types of taxpayers. .

the administration characterizes repealing these tax preferences as eliminating market distortions , and links them to providing resources for investments in clean , renewable , and more efficient energy resources .

the administration's proposals to shift the nation away from oil and to try to control the federal deficit have led to eight proposed changes for the oil and natural gas industries .

table 1 identifies the proposed tax changes and the administration's estimates of the revenue gains for 2012 , the five - year period , 2012-2016 , and the 10-year period 2012-2021 .

many of these proposed tax changes have the effect of equalizing the tax treatment of independent oil producers to that of the major oil companies .

equalization is accomplished by eliminating preferential tax treatment of the independent companies not available to the major oil companies .

in some cases , for example , the expensing of intangible drilling expenses , the major oil companies have been excluded from the benefits of the tax provision for years , while the independent companies continued to receive the benefit .

as shown in table 1 , the proposed tax changes would have the effect of raising almost $3.5 billion in 2012 .

almost all ( 96% ) of the revenues from the proposed tax preference repeal from 2012-2021 would come from only three of the proposals .

the repeal of the expensing of intangible drilling expenses , the repeal of percentage depletion , and the repeal of the manufacturing tax deduction for the oil industry would increase the industry's estimated tax payments by $41.9 billion through 2021 .

the american petroleum institute ( api ) , in responding to president obama's fy2012 budget proposal , identifies a number of other proposed tax changes which would affect the oil industry .

these changes include the repeal of the last - in - first - out ( lifo ) accounting method , reinstating superfund taxes , and modifying the dual capacity rule .

on the one hand , the tax changes proposed in table 1 would increase tax collections from the oil and natural gas industries and may have the effect of decreasing exploration , development , and production , while increasing prices and increasing the nation's foreign oil dependence .

these same proposals , from an alternate point of view , might be considered to be the elimination of tax preferences that have favored the oil and natural gas industries over other energy sources and made oil and gas products artificially inexpensive , with consumer costs held below the true cost of consumption , when the external costs associated with environmental costs and energy dependence , among other effects , are included .

whichever view is adopted , the real effects of these proposals on oil and natural gas production , consumption , and import are likely to be small relative to both the federal deficit and the revenues of the oil and natural gas industries .

