over the past several decades , u.s. household indebtedness has generally risen regardless of macroeconomic or financial conditions .

in light of the 2007-2009 recession , however , households are reducing their debt burdens .

household debt balances fell in the third quarter of 2008 and continued to do so until the second quarter of 2011 when they rose by 0.55% before resuming their downward trend .

simultaneous declines in household income and net worth made it difficult for some households to support previous debt levels , thus encouraging them to reduce debt service obligations and work toward restoring the health of their balance sheets .

household debt reduction ( or deleveraging ) may have important implications for job creation and economic recovery .

deleveraging may translate into a reduction in near - term consumption , which typically accounts for approximately 70% of gross domestic product and likely an important source of economic recovery .

deleveraging may also manifest itself in the form of above normal loan defaults that weaken the banking system and discourage new lending , which can be the source of job creation .

moreover , when consumer spending and bank lending are curtailed , fiscal policy initiatives ( eg , tax cuts or spending increases ) become less effective at stimulating the economy .

for example , academic experts have proposed large - scale mortgage refinancing efforts to propel economic stimulus .

in light of these recommendations , the purpose of policy initiatives ( eg , the home affordable refinance program [harp] , h.r .

363 and its companion s. 170 , the housing opportunity and mortgage equity act of 2011 ) is to facilitate the refinancing of mortgages .

in addition , the obama administration announced an initiative to assist qualified homeowners , whose mortgages are not owned or guaranteed by any institution affiliated with the federal government , in lowering their mortgage rates .

if refinancing activity results in lower mortgage payments , then households may have more discretionary income to spend and , therefore , spur economic stimulus .

some households , however , are choosing to pay down current debt obligations , which means any additional income that would have gone toward mortgage interest still may not be applied to new spending .

hence , policies aimed at stimulating near - term consumption may instead enhance future borrowing capacity and longer - term consumption if households continue to strengthen their balance sheets via near - term deleveraging .

this report presents data illustrating household deleveraging since 2008 in comparison to previous trends in household credit use .

it also presents various explanations for deleveraging — in particular , changes in both consumer demand and lending supply .

on the demand side , job losses and declining wealth particularly associated with declining real estate values are factors that made it difficult for households to repay old loans or secure new ones .

on the supply side , rising loan losses caused lenders to write off more obligations , which put a strain on lenders' ( regulatory ) capital reserves .

consequently , lending standards are higher and likely to remain until lenders feel more confident that borrowers have the ability to repay .

 figure 1 illustrates the federal reserve's aggregate household debt service burden ratio ( dsr ) .

the dsr is the percentage of disposable personal income required to make minimum repayments on outstanding mortgage and consumer debt .

beginning in the mid - 1990s , the dsr rose but then declined after 2008 .

the dsr movements are affected by changes in the amount of household debt , changes in household income , and changes in interest rates ( debt costs ) .

rising incomes and falling interest rates would cause the dsr to fall over time .

given the rise in real disposable income prior to the financial crisis coupled with falling interest rates , the rise in the dsr reflects household debt usage rising at a faster pace than household income growth .

conversely , the dsr might be expected to rise during recessions when incomes tend to fall .

during the 2007-2009 recession , however , the dsr began to decline in 2008 , which reflects a shift toward deleveraging by households as well as the refinancing of some debt at lower interest rates .

figure 2 illustrates the quarterly percentage change in total household debt balances since 1968 , and the shaded areas indicate u.s. recessions .

household debt balances consist of home mortgages , revolving or credit card debt , and nonrevolving credit , which consists primarily of automobile and student loans .

note that the growth rate of household debt declined during the 1981-1982 , 1990-1991 , and 2001 recessions but still remained positive .

beginning in the second quarter of 2008 through the first quarter of 2011 , however , the rate of change in debt usage became negative and was sustained .

post - 2008 household deleveraging , therefore , appears to be atypical compared with previous economic contractions occurring over the past few decades .

table 1 illustrates the percentage changes in household debt usage from the second quarter of 2008 through the third quarter of 2011 by loan type .

mortgage debt represents the largest share of all household debt .

a significant share of the decline in mortgage debt outstanding can be attributed to declining home equity loan balances , which can be used as a substitute for other types of consumer credit .

revolving or credit card debt use also declined , but growth in nonrevolving credit remained positive over this period .

household deleveraging may be explained by factors influencing both the demand for and supply of credit .

beginning with demand - side explanations , the spike in unemployment and a decline in household net worth , which occurred during the recession of 2007-2009 and has continued along with declining home values , can lead to debt reduction either by inducing households to curtail credit use ( and pay down existing debt ) or in the form of defaults .

on the supply side , lenders experiencing large volumes of loan losses may have also grown more reluctant to make loans .

this section explains these factors in more detail .

"trigger events" are defined as sudden changes in circumstances that can lead to greater loan defaults .

a steep rise in unemployment is an example of a trigger event .

during the 2007-2009 recession , the unemployment rate soared to 10.0% , which was the highest it has climbed since 1982 .

job losses can translate into income disruptions that make it difficult to repay existing credit obligations or seek new loans .

a sharp , unanticipated decline in household net worth is another example of a trigger event .

during the 2007-2009 recession , households saw a decline in household net worth that had not occurred in previous recessions over the past three decades ( figure 3 ) .

net worth ( i.e. , the difference between the value of assets and liabilities ) fell for seven consecutive quarters beginning in the third quarter of 2007 .

the most recent decline in net worth was larger and persisted for more successive quarters than did the steep decline in the stock market of the late 1990s , which lasted until approximately 2002 .

much of the decline in net worth is attributable to real estate assets that many households financed through borrowing .

the federal housing finance agency and case - shiller house price indices show that u.s. house prices began declining in 2007 , and homeowners were increasingly likely to find themselves "underwater" or "upside - down" as the amount of their outstanding mortgage balances exceeded current home values .

academic research suggests that changes in real estate values generate a greater response in consumer spending and borrowing decisions than do changes to stock values .

for one reason , most households purchase stocks with cash , which means there are no debt obligations to repay based upon the original purchase prices should their stock assets fall in value .

second , stock market declines are often short - lived in comparison to declines in real estate values , which means volatile short - term fluctuations are less likely to prompt investors to reassess longer term financial decisions .

housing assets are also typically a much larger component of household balance sheets .

hence , stock market declines tend to have a smaller impact on household consumption and borrowing decisions relative to declines in real estate prices .

given that declining real estate asset values may lead to permanent wealth reductions that would prevent existing ( mortgage ) debt obligations from being repaid , two possible reasons for household deleveraging are worth considering .

households may have a precautionary savings motive that influences them to reduce borrowing when household wealth drops .

if households wish to maintain a certain level of wealth to protect against unexpected economic reversals , their consumption behavior is likely to change if those balances fall below desired thresholds .

households may reduce spending ( and borrowing ) and increase saving until net wealth has been restored to more desirable levels .

for example , figure 4 shows that "cash - in" mortgage refinancings became more common relative to "cash - out" refinancings by 2008 .

during the mid - 2000s housing boom , many borrowers pulled equity out of their homes to finance expenditures .

freddie mac refers to this type of transaction as a "cash - out" refinance when the outstanding mortgage balance increases by more than 5% .

conversely , a "cash - in" refinance occurs when borrowers refinance and pay down some mortgage principal , which reduces outstanding balances .

the percentage of cash - in mortgage refinances began to exceed cash - out refinances in mid - 2010 .

a corresponding reduction of home equity loan balances can represent an array of borrowing given that this type of mortgage product was used to consolidate existing debt obligations , finance new consumption , and even finance the acquisition of new ( real estate ) assets .

moreover , the soaring unemployment rate may have influenced many households to reduce debt obligations just in case their continued employment prospects seemed at risk .

hence , such a marked increase in cash - in refinances arguably may reflect an increase in precautionary savings behavior by households in response to an adverse trigger event , which generates greater economic and financial uncertainty .

a negative trigger event in the form of job losses ( or shifts to part - time status ) is likely to disrupt income streams .

a severe and persistent disruption , when coupled with circumstances that prevent , for example , the sale of housing assets for amounts necessary to pay off outstanding mortgage balances , may cause households to default on existing loans .

moreover , risky mortgage underwriting practices prior to the 2007-2009 recession made it possible for some borrowers to receive mortgages that could only be repaid assuming continued house price growth rather than income growth .

the combination of relaxed underwriting standards , which allowed for rapid debt accumulation , and the unexpected trigger event , which was the large and pronounced downturn in u.s. house prices , resulted in greater household defaults on all types of loans .

figure 5 shows charge - off rates for commercial bank loans in three categories: single - family residential mortgages , credit card debt , and other consumer loans .

charge - offs occur when lenders conclude that a debt will not be repaid and charge it against their loss reserves .

during the past few years , all three major categories of household debt experienced rising loss rates .

the previous explanations involved factors influencing the demand for credit , but household deleveraging may also be affected by a reduction in credit supply .

rising loan losses may cause lenders to be more skeptical about extending new credit without greater assurances of repayment .

many banks may be unable to make new loans if they are still struggling to rebuild their required loan loss reserves and capital reserves , which have been diminished by loan defaults .

the observed household deleveraging , therefore , may reflect both decreasing supply and demand for credit given the extent to which lenders tightened underwriting standards , lowered existing lines of credit , and restricted new lending to stabilize profitability and satisfy regulatory capital requirements .

the federal reserve's senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices , which is conducted quarterly , asks bankers about changes in the standards and terms of bank lending as well as changes in the demand for loans .

figure 6 presents a graphical illustration of the responses collected between 1996 and 2011 .

the two dotted lines represent the net percentage of loan officers reporting that they expect to tighten standards for credit card and other consumer loans .

the greatest tightening of loan standards over the period began in 2007 .

