on april 20 , 2010 , the deepwater horizon oil drilling rig was nearing completion of bp's deepwater oil well when an uncontained release of hydrocarbons ( oil and natural gas ) caused explosions and fire , resulting in 11 crew member fatalities .

the incident produced the largest oil spill that has occurred in u.s. waters , releasing more than 200 million gallons over approximately 84 days .

although several companies were and are involved ( to varying degrees ) with the deepw ater horizon incident , bp was ( and continues to be ) the most prominent private party in oil spill response and compensation activities .

thus , for the purpose of this report , bp is discussed as if it is the sole responsible party — a key term in the existing liability and compensation framework .

the united states has not encountered a spill comparable to the 2010 gulf spill since the 1989 exxon valdez in prince william sound , alaska .

the exxon valdez spill tallied approximately $2 billion in cleanup costs and $1 billion in natural resource damages in 1990 dollars .

these combined figures equate to approximately $5 billion in today's dollars and do not include the wider array of claims for which responsible parties are now liable .

the total costs of the 2010 gulf spill are projected to dwarf those of the exxon valdez .

in its 2010 financial statement , bp estimated the combined oil spill costs — cleanup , natural resource and economic damages , potential clean water act ( cwa ) penalties , and other obligations — will be approximately $41 billion .

this estimate includes payments made to date as well as projected future payments , such as claims .

however , bp acknowledges the difficulty in estimating some costs and does not include these costs in its projection .

therefore , this estimate is subject to considerable uncertainty .

the incident received considerable attention in 2010 , highlighting multiple policy matters regarding oil spills and their aftermath .

an issue that has generated ( and to some degree continues to generate ) particular interest is the oil spill liability and compensation framework .

this framework , which is grounded in federal statute and regulations , determines the following: 1. who is responsible for paying for oil spill cleanup costs ; 2. who is responsible for paying for economic and natural resource damages associated with an oil spill ; 3. how these costs and damages are defined ( i.e. , what is covered ) ; and 4. the degree to which ( or conditions in which ) the costs and damages are limited and / or shared by other parties , including general taxpayers .

the first section of this report provides an overview of the existing liability and compensation framework .

the second section highlights many of the liability and compensation issues raised by the deepwater horizon event .

the third section discusses options for policymakers to adjust , amend , or supplement the current framework .

president george h. w. bush signed into law the oil pollution act of 1990 ( opa ) on august 18 , 1990 , consolidating existing federal oil spill laws , expanding authorities within the cwa , and creating new provisions regarding oil spill liability and compensation .

the opa liability and compensation framework includes a combination of elements that distribute the costs of an oil spill between the responsible party ( or parties ) and a trust fund , which is largely financed through a per - barrel tax on domestic and imported oil .

responsible parties are liable up to their liability caps ( if applicable ) ; the oil spill liability trust fund covers costs above liability limits up to a per - incident cap of $1 billion .

these elements are discussed in some detail below .

the 2010 deepwater horizon oil spill generated considerable interest in the existing oil spill liability and compensation framework .

the incident placed a spotlight on multiple elements of the framework , in particular the liability limits and the size and limitations of the osltf .

the issues raised by the spill highlight a central policy debate: how should policymakers allocate the costs associated with a catastrophic oil spill ? .

what share of costs should be borne by the responsible party ( eg , oil vessel owner / operators ) compared to other groups , such as the oil industry ( eg , through the per - barrel tax ) , and / or the general treasury ( assuming congress would appropriate funds to compensate for unpaid costs / damages ) ? .

policymakers may want to consider the magnitude of the deepwater horizon incident and the liability and compensation issues raised under a scenario in which bp had refused to finance response activities or establish a claims process to comply with the relevant opa provisions .

bp has either directly funded oil spill response operations or reimbursed the federal government for actions taken by various agencies .

according to bp , response costs have tallied over $10 billion .

bp has paid damage claims well above its liability limit of $75 million ( assuming it would apply ) and outside the scope of its liable damages ( eg , human health - related claims ) .

bp and the obama administration jointly announced on june 16 , 2010 , the creation of the gulf coast claims facility ( gccf ) , an independent claims facility that bp will finance with incremental payments eventually totaling $20 billion .

the current combination of liability limits and $1 billion per - incident cap is not sufficient to withstand a spill with damages / costs that exceed a responsible party's liability limit ( assuming it would apply ) by $1 billion .

even if the per - incident cap were increased , the current ( and projected ) level of funds in the osltf may not be sufficient to address costs from a catastrophic spill .

the options available to address these issues depend upon on the overall objective of congress .

one objective — which has been expressed by many in and outside congress — is to provide full restoration and timely compensation for the impacts from a catastrophic spill , without directly burdening the general taxpayers .

in the context of this objective , "timely" compensation means that an injured party would have access to compensation without going through a court system , which would likely require more of a claimant's time and resources .

with that objective in mind , several options are discussed below .

potential options for congress include ( but are not limited to ) the following , many of which were proposed in various legislation in the 111 th congress and some of which are included in proposals in the 112 th congress: increase the liability limits , so that the responsible party would be required to pay a greater portion of the total spill cost before accessing trust fund dollars .

congress may consider different limits for different offshore activities .

precedent exists in opa for setting different liability limits to account for different oil spill risks: the liability limit for single - hulled tank vessels is approximately 50% higher than for double - hulled vessels .

in the outer continental shelf ( ocs ) oil exploration and development sector , policymakers may consider a wide array of factors that could influence ( 1 ) the risk of an oil spill occurring and ( 2 ) the risk that the oil spill could not be contained before impacting sensitive ecosystems and / or affecting large populations .

policymakers could then structure the liability limit framework based on certain behavior , the use of specific technologies , and / or the location of the activity .

however , crs is not aware of a comprehensive risk assessment of individual factors ( or their combinations ) regarding ocs drilling activities .

a rigorous analysis of possible risk factors could be instructive to policymakers .

increase the required financial responsibility coverage , either matching the increased liability limit ( as opa requires for vessels ) or setting the coverage at a level based on other factors , such as capacity in the insurance market .

congress could increase coverage amounts through a staggered approach , to allow more time for the market to adjust .

remove or raise the per - incident cap on the trust fund .

if removed entirely , the fund could be at risk of depletion with one incident .

increase the per - barrel oil tax to more quickly raise the fund's balance .

authorize "repayable advances" to be made ( via the appropriations process ) to the trust fund , so that the fund would have the resources to carry out its functions ( cleanup efforts , claim awards ) .

up until 1995 , the fund had this authority , in order to ensure it could respond to a major spill before the fund had an opportunity to grow ( via the per - barrel tax ) .

require industry to establish a pool of funds ( of significant magnitude ) that would be available to finance response actions , injured party compensation , or both .

such a fund could either replace or complement the existing opa system of individual liability and support from the osltf .

this would be analogous to the framework for the nuclear power industry created by the price - anderson act ( primarily section 170 of the atomic energy act of 1954 , 42 u.s.c .

§ 2210 ) .

another objective might be to maintain the existing system , which may be sufficient to address all but the most extreme scenarios .

catastrophic spills in u.s. waters have historically been rare .

some may argue that establishing a system that can withstand a catastrophic event would impose costs and yield consequences that would not justify the ( expected ) ability to address a catastrophic event .

interest in issues raised by the 2010 gulf oil spill has waned in recent months .

however , members in the 112 th congress have introduced multiple proposals , many of which would address liability and compensation framework issues .

legislative activity in the 112 th congress may be influenced by several factors , including ( but not limited to ) assessments of conditions in the gulf region , reports from other independent inquiries , further information regarding the claims process , and results from the natural resource damage assessment process .

moreover , it may be worth noting that passage of the oil pollution act of 1990 occurred 18 months after the exxon valdez spill .

