the unemployment insurance ( ui ) system has two primary objectives: ( 1 ) to provide temporary , partial wage replacement for involuntarily unemployed workers ; and ( 2 ) to stabilize the economy during recessions .

in support of these goals , several ui programs may currently provide benefits for unemployed workers .

in general , when eligible workers lose their jobs , the joint federal - state unemployment compensation ( uc ) program may provide up to 26 weeks of income support through the payment of regular uc benefits .

uc benefits may be extended in two ways: ( 1 ) for up to 47 weeks by the temporarily authorized emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) program ; and ( 2 ) for up to 13 or 20 weeks by the extended benefit ( eb ) program if certain economic situations exist within the state .

on september 13 , 2011 , senator reid introduced s. 1549 , the american jobs act of 2011 , by request , which contains the legislative language of the president's american jobs act of 2011 proposal .

also by request , representative larson introduced h.r .

12 , the house companion version of the american jobs act of 2011 , on september 21 , 2011 .

s. 1660 contains the same ui provisions found in the president's american jobs act of 2011 , s. 1549 , and h.r .

12 .

s. 1660 differs from the president's american jobs act of 2011 , s. 1549 , and h.r .

12 in some non - ui provisions proposed to offset the legislation .

the president's american jobs act of 2011 proposal would provide a year - long extension of the euc08 authorization and the 100% federal financing of eb through calendar year 2012 .

in addition , it would extend authorization for states to use three - year lookbacks for state eb triggers during this period .

it would not expand the number of weeks of unemployment benefits available to the unemployed beyond what is currently available .

 ( the proposal does not include a "tier v" of euc08 benefits. ) .

the president's american jobs act of 2011 proposal would also impose new federal requirements and appropriate new federal funds for states to provide reemployment and eligibility assessments to certain euc08 claimants .

the proposal would require states to enter into agreements with the u.s. dol and require new euc08 claimants to report to or check in with their local one - stop career centers .

the president's plan would provide $200 per unemployed worker in federal funding for states to conduct reemployment and eligibility assessments in order to review new euc08 claimants' eligibility for benefits and provide an assessment of their work search efforts .

the president's american jobs act of 2011 proposal would authorize states to enter into agreements with the u.s. dol to pay self - employment assistance ( sea ) benefits for up to 26 weeks to eligible individuals who ( 1 ) have at least 26 weeks of remaining benefit entitlement through the euc08 program and ( 2 ) are participating in entrepreneurial training activities .

sea benefits would be paid in the same amount as euc08 benefits and participants would be exempt from the work availability and work search requirements under euc08 .

sea benefits would be available to up to 1% of all euc08 claimants in each participating state .

an individual receiving sea benefits would be able to stop participation and receive any remaining euc08 benefits .

states with agreements to pay sea benefits would be able to use reemployment now funds ( see description below ) to finance sea administrative , start - up costs , if specified in an approved state reemployment now plan .

the president's american jobs act of 2011 proposal would extend the temporary extended railroad unemployment benefits — authorized under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ) , as amended — for an additional year through june 30 , 2012 , to be financed with funds still available under the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) .

the president's american jobs act of 2011 proposal would establish a "reemployment now" program with $4 billion in appropriations from the general fund of the treasury .

these federal funds would be allotted to the states based on a two - part formula: ( 1 ) two - thirds would be distributed to the states based upon the state share of the u.s. total number of unemployed persons and ( 2 ) one - third would be distributed to the states based on the state share of the long - term unemployed ( measured as unemployment spells of at least 27 weeks ) .

up to 1% of the funds would be available for program administration and evaluation .

to receive a reemployment now allotment , a state would have to submit a plan describing ( 1 ) activities to assist the reemployment of eligible individuals ; ( 2 ) performance measures ; ( 3 ) coordination of efforts with title i of the workforce investment act of 1998 , the wagner - peyser act , and other appropriate federal programs ; ( 4 ) timelines for implementation ; ( 5 ) estimates of quarterly enrollments ; ( 6 ) assurances that the state will provide appropriate reemployment services to any participating euc08 claimants ; and ( 7 ) assurances that the state will provide information to the u.s. dol relating to the fiscal , performance , and other matters , including employment outcomes and program impacts that the u.s. dol determines are necessary to effectively monitor the activities .

the u.s. dol would be required to provide congress and the public with both guidance and program evaluation for activities conducted with reemployment now funds .

allowable program uses of reemployment now funds would include the following: the "bridge to work" program would allow individuals to continue to receive euc08 benefits as wages for work performed in a short - term work experience placement .

the bridge to work placement would last up to eight weeks and would be required to compensate claimants at a rate equivalent to the minimum wage .

the state would be permitted to augment the euc08 benefit with reemployment now funds to meet this criteria ( the euc08 benefit would count as wages for that calculation ) .

for individuals participating at least 25 hours per week in a bridge to work program , work search requirements would be suspended during the participation and wages paid would not offset euc08 benefit amounts .

any earnings acquired during program participation would not be considered earnings for the purposes of employment taxes , but would be treated as unemployment benefits for tax purposes .

wage insurance would authorize states to provide an income supplement to euc08 claimants who secure reemployment at a lower wage than their separated employment .

the benefit level would be determined by the states , although it could not be more than 50% of the difference between the worker's wage at the time of separation and the worker's reemployment wage .

states would also establish a maximum benefit amount that an individual could collect .

the duration of wage insurance payments would be limited to two years .

wage insurance under this proposal would also be limited to individuals who ( 1 ) are at least 50 years of age ; ( 2 ) earn not more than $50,000 per year from reemployment ; ( 3 ) are employed on a full - time basis as defined by the state ; and ( 4 ) are not employed by the same employer from which the individual was separated .

enhanced reemployment services would allow states to use funds to provide euc08 claimants and individuals who have exhausted all entitlements to euc08 benefits with reemployment services that are more intensive than any reemployment services provided by the states previously ( for instance , one - on - one assessments , counseling , or case management ) .

start - up of sea state programs would authorize states to use funds for any administrative costs associated with the start - up of sea agreements ( as described above ) .

additional innovative programs would allow states to use funds for programs other than the programs described above .

these programs would be required to facilitate the reemployment of euc08 claimants , among other requirements .

the president's american jobs act of 2011 proposal would clarify requirements related to short - time compensation ( stc or "worksharing" ) programs and provide temporary federal financing to support state worksharing programs .

this proposal would temporarily federally finance 100% of stc benefits for up to three years in states that meet the new definition of an stc program , with a transition period for states with existing stc programs that do not meet the new definition ( currently 23 states and the district of columbia have stc programs ) .

states without existing stc programs would be allowed to enter into an agreement with the u.s. dol for up to two years in order to receive federal reimbursement for administrative expenses , as well as temporary federal financing of 50% of stc payments to individuals , with employers paying the other 50% of stc costs .

under this proposal , if a state enters into an agreement with the u.s. secretary of labor and then subsequently enacts a law providing for stc , that state would be eligible to receive 100% of federal financing .

the president's proposal would award u.s. dol grants to eligible states , with one - third of each state's grant available for implementation and improved administration purposes and two - thirds of each state's grant available for program promotion and enrollment of employers .

the maximum amount of all grants to states would be $700 million .

finally , this proposal would provide $1.5 million for the u.s. dol to submit a report to congress and the president , within four years of enactment , on the implementation of this provision , including a description of states' best practices , analysis of significant challenges , and a survey of employers in states without stc programs .

the president's american jobs act of 2011 proposal would add a targeted group for purposes of the work opportunity tax credit ( wotc ) for individuals who have been unemployed for six months or more during the one - year period prior to being hired .

for those long - term unemployed who are hired and remain on a firm's payroll at least 400 hours , an employer would be able to claim a non - refundable income tax credit of 40% of the first $10,000 in wages paid during the worker's first year of employment .

for eligible hires who remain employed for 120 hours to 399 hours , the credit rate would be 25% .

under certain circumstances , tax - exempt employers may take the credit for hiring long - term unemployed individuals .

the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) extended the authorization of wotc through december 31 , 2011 .

h.r .

3346 and s. 1804 — both named the emergency unemployment compensation extension act of 2011 — propose to extend expiring ui provisions and make various changes , including to the financing of ui benefits .

h.r .

3346 and s. 1804 would provide a year - long extension of the euc08 program , the 100% federal financing of the eb program , and the authorization for states to use three - year lookbacks for state eb triggers through calendar year 2012 .

these bills also propose to allow states to temporarily suspend the lookback for the eb triggers , "by statute , regulation , or other issuance having the force and effect of law," through the end of calendar year 2012 .

h.r .

3346 and s. 1804 would also extend the temporary extended railroad unemployment benefits ( authorized under p.l .

111-5 , as amended ) for an additional year ( i.e. , through june 30 , 2012 ) using existing funds from p.l .

111-312 .

h.r .

3346 and s. 1804 would also allow states to enter into an agreement with the u.s. dol to temporarily suspend the accrual of interest for loans to the states for fy2012 .

in addition , states that otherwise have employers facing a decreased state tax credit on federal unemployment taxes would be able to opt to suspend the reduction in credit for tax year 2012 .

to have these options available to the state , the state would be required to continue to calculate regular unemployment benefit entitlements ( both in weekly amount and total weeks available ) as required by state law on the date of enactment of this proposal .

states with no outstanding unemployment loans within the unemployment trust fund ( utf ) would earn an additional two percentage points in interest on the ( positive ) average daily balance in the state's utf account .

in addition to the president's american jobs act of 2011 proposal , s. 1549 / h.r .

12 / s. 1660 , and h.r .

3346 / s. 1804 , there have been several other legislative proposals to address ui expirations .

for instance , subtitle f of h.r .

3638 proposes a one - year extension ( i.e. , through calendar year 2012 ) of the three expiring ui provisions: the authorization for the euc08 program , the 100% federal financing of the eb program , and the three - year lookback option for eb triggers .

additionally , h.r .

3638 would add 14 weeks to the current duration of tier i of the euc08 program , amending tier i of euc08 to provide up to 34 weeks of unemployment benefits rather than the current up to 20 weeks of benefits .

s. 1885 would extend the euc08 authorization and the 100% federal financing of the eb program for another year ( i.e. , through calendar year 2012 ) .

s. 1885 would not , however , extend the authorization for states to use three - year lookbacks in their eb triggers .

s. 1885 proposes to offset the ui extensions using $44 billion in unobligated , federal discretionary funds .

h.r .

3743 would have extended the eb and euc08 provisions until the week ending on or before march 6 , 2012 .

representative camp introduced h.r .

1745 , the jobs , opportunity , benefits , and services act of 2011 ( the jobs act of 2011 ) , on may 5 , 2011 .

h.r .

1745 proposes a number of changes to ( 1 ) state uc eligibility requirements and ( 2 ) the funding of federal unemployment benefits ( i.e. , euc08 and eb ) .

for instance , it would create new federal requirements related to work availability and work search activities that would require changes in state uc laws .

in order to satisfy the new "actively seeking work" federal requirement , h.r .

1745 would require individuals receiving regular state uc benefits to ( 1 ) register for employment services within 14 days of initial uc claim ; ( 2 ) post a resume , record , or other employment application on a database as required by each state ; and ( 3 ) apply for work that is similar to an individual's previous job and that pays comparable wages for similar work in the local labor market where an individual resides or is actively seeking work .

h.r .

1745 would also impose new federal educational requirements ( i.e. , high school degree , ged or equivalent , or progress toward ged ) for uc claimants in state programs .

this bill would allow states to create and conduct demonstration projects to improve and accelerate the reemployment of uc claimants , although these projects would not be able to increase the net costs to a state's account in the utf .

h.r .

1745 would also transform the financing of federal unemployment benefits ( including euc08 benefits ) from a mandatory , individual entitlement to a block grant to states for fy2011 and fy2012 ( $31 billion over both years ) in an amount proportional to federal benefit payments in each state during the previous 12 months .

h.r .

1745 would allow states to use block grant funds to pay federal unemployment benefits ( i.e. , euc08 and eb benefits ) or , if states pass their own legislation to do so , to use the funds to pay any type of unemployment benefit ( including regular uc ) , to repay outstanding federal loans ( including interest payments on federal loans ) , or to provide additional reemployment services .

h.r .

1745 would end the 100% federal financing of the euc08 and eb programs , effective july 6 , 2011 .

states would continue to pay euc08 benefits with block grant funds .

under current law , a state has the option to terminate the federal - state euc08 agreement with 30 days notice to the u.s. dol , and this termination would not impact the state's share of the block grant .

states would continue to pay eb if the program were still active ( i.e. , triggered "on" ) .

the broader financial crisis facing the states is mirrored in the states' accounts within the utf .

on december 30 , 2010 , 31 states owed a cumulative $40.8 billion to the federal accounts within the utf .

arra temporarily stopped the accrual of interest charges on loans through december 31 , 2010 , but those charges are once again accruing .

states currently are prohibited from actively legislating a decrease in regular benefits ( restricted for the duration of the euc08 program ) ; as a result , state unemployment taxes on employers are likely to increase .

at the same time , employers in 21 states face an increased net federal unemployment tax ( futa ) in 2011 because they have borrowed funds from the federal utf loan account for two consecutive years .

the president's budget proposal for fy2013 attempts to address some of these concerns .

the proposal includes extending the suspension of interest accrual through 2014 and temporarily suspending net futa tax increases through 2015 .

currently , the u.s. dol projects that states accrued $1.22 billion in interest charges in fy2011 and $1.79 billion in fy2012 without these suspensions .

the proposal would increase the futa taxable wage base from $7,000 to $15,000 in 2015 while increasing the futa tax rate to 0.8% for fy2013 and fy2014 and then decreasing the futa tax rate from 0.6% to 0.38% .

beginning in 2015 , the futa tax base would be indexed to wage growth .

under federal law , the taxable wage base for suta taxes in states must be at least the taxable wage base for futa .

therefore , the proposed increase in the futa taxable wage in the president's budget proposal would have the effect of requiring states to have a suta taxable wage bas e of at least $15,000 in 2014 and indexed to wage growth beginning in 2015 .

additionally , the proposal included up to $4 billion in funds for certain reemployment activities similar to what was described earlier in the " reemployment now program and funding opportunities " subsection under the description of the president's american jobs act of 2011 proposal .

s. 386 would extend the suspension of interest accrual on federal loans to states through 2012 ; temporarily suspend net futa tax increases through 2012 ; increase the futa taxable wage base from $7,000 to $15,000 in 2014 while lowering the net futa tax rate to 0.38% ; and index the futa taxable wage base to wage growth after 2014 .

unlike the president's budget proposal for fy2013 , s. 386 would forgive a certain percentage ( 20% , 40% , or 60% ) of the outstanding federal loan to the state based upon a state - level need - based measure as of december 31 , 2010 .

 ( this measure was originally constructed for temporarily increasing the medicaid federal medical assistance percentages ( fmap ) in p.l .

111-5 . ) .

states without an outstanding federal loan would receive an additional 0.5% in interest compared with what they would otherwise receive on their state utf account balances .

employers in states that maintain a programmatic measure of sufficient reserves would face a net futa tax rate that was 0.1 percentage point less than it would otherwise have been .

in addition , s. 386 would require that any state taking advantage of the provisions in s. 386 submit a "reasonable" plan to the u.s. dol explaining how the state would repay any outstanding federal loans and how the state would attain a programmatic measure of sufficient reserves within a "reasonable" time .

h.r .

650 would extend the suspension of interest accrual on federal loans to states through 2012 .

recent congressional hearings have raised the issue of how to aid long - term unemployed workers , especially those individuals who have exhausted all available unemployment benefits .

as of july 2012 , about 41% of unemployed individuals had been without a job for more than 26 weeks .

these long - term unemployed workers are at risk of exhausting current benefits while remaining unemployed .

one policy strategy to address the needs of unemployment insurance benefit exhaustees is to create additional federal benefits .

h.r .

589 and h.r .

3638 would add up to 14 additional weeks of unemployment benefits to the existing tier i of the euc08 program , amending tier i of euc08 to provide up to 34 weeks of unemployment benefits to eligible individuals .

h.r .

494 would create a civilian conservation corps to employ unemployed or underemployed u.s. citizens in the construction , maintenance , and carrying on of works of a public nature , such as forestation of u.s. and state lands , prevention of forest fires , floods , and soil erosion , and construction and repair of national park system paths and trails .

the proposal would require placement preference to the employment of additional persons in the corps in the following order: ( 1 ) unemployed armed forces veterans ( including reserve members ) ; ( 2 ) unemployed u.s. citizens who have exhausted their unemployment compensation ; ( 3 ) unemployed u.s. citizens who are eligible for unemployment compensation immediately before employment in the corps , including any additional compensation or extended compensation ; and ( 4 ) other unemployed or underemployed u.s. citizens .

h.r .

3615 would create a new federal requirement for states to drug test all uc claimants as a condition of benefit eligibility .

if an individual tests positive for certain controlled substances ( in the absence of a valid prescription or as otherwise authorized under a state's laws ) , he or she would be required to retake a drug test after a 30-day period and test negative in order to be eligible for uc benefits .

h.r .

3601 would add a new federal requirement that individuals undergo a substance abuse risk assessment for each benefit year as a condition of eligibility for uc in all states .

this new federal requirement would also require individuals deemed to be at high risk for substance abuse — based on the assessment results — to test negatively for controlled substances within one week after the assessment to qualify for uc benefits .

h.r .

2001 would create a new federal requirement that individuals be deemed ineligible for uc benefits based on previous employment from which they were separated due to an employment - related drug or alcohol offense .

this proposal would require states to amend their state uc laws .

h.r .

3598 would define any fee associated with electronic benefit transfer ( ebt ) cards used by states to distribute unemployment benefits as administrative expenses under federal law .

such a federal definition would prohibit states from deducting ebt fees from unemployment benefit payments made with state unemployment tax ( suta ) funds .

under this proposal , any ebt fees would need to be financed through state administrative funds rather than an individual's unemployment benefit payment .

several bills have been introduced that have the intent to restrict or recover unemployment insurance benefits paid to high income individuals or households .

s. 1944 would create a new income tax on unemployment benefit income for any taxpayer filing jointly with an adjusted gross income ( agi ) of at least $1 million ( and $500,000 in the case of an individual filing a single tax return ) .

the tax rate for this unemployment benefit income would be 55% in tax years 2011 and 2012 and then 50% for tax years after 2012 .

 ( the ui income would continue to be used in the calculation of agi and thus subject to "regular" federal income tax. ) .

among other provisions , s. 1931 would create a new tax on unemployment benefit income for certain high - income taxpayers .

for individual taxpayers with more than $1 million in agi ( $2 million for joint filers ) , any income from unemployment benefits would be taxed at an additional 100% rate .

 ( the ui income would continue to be used in the calculation of agi and thus subject to "regular" federal income tax. ) .

under this proposal , individual filers with an agi of at least $750,000 ( and $1.5 million for joint filers ) would also face the new tax on unemployment benefit income with the rate proportional to agi over these limits and the maximum rate set at 100% .

any tax receipts collected from this new federal income tax on unemployment benefits from a particular state would be transferred into that state's account in the federal utf .

among other provisions , h.r .

235 would prohibit the use of federal funds — from the euc08 and eb programs — to pay unemployment benefits to anyone with resources of at least $1 million in the preceding year .

an individual's resources would be determined in the same way as the resource test for the medicare part d drug benefit subsidy .

this provision would be effective for any weeks of unemployment benefits beginning on or after january 1 , 2011 .

s. 310 would prohibit any euc08 or eb benefit payments to individuals with resources in the preceding year of at least $1 million , as determined through the resource test for the medicare part d drug benefit subsidy .

for the purposes of the drug benefit subsidy , resources are defined by the individual states and include savings and investments but do not include the value of a primary residence or the value of a car .

unlike h.r .

235 , the prohibition provision in s. 310 would be effective on or after the date of enactment of this legislation .

h.r .

569 is a house companion bill to s. 310 and contains the same legislative language .

h.r .

3427 and s. 1826 are companion bills that , among other provisions , would authorize states to create self - employment assistance ( sea ) programs available to recipients of euc08 and eb benefits .

sea allowances would be paid in lieu of ( and in the same amount as ) unemployment benefits under the euc08 and eb programs for up to 26 total weeks to eligible individuals who ( 1 ) have at least 13 weeks of remaining benefit entitlement through the euc08 and eb programs and ( 2 ) are participating in entrepreneurial training activities .

sea participants would be exempt from the work availability and work search requirements under euc08 and eb .

under h.r .

3427 and s. 1826 , sea benefits would be available to up to 1% of all euc08 and eb claimants in each participating state .

participants would be able to discontinue sea participation at any time and receive any remaining entitlement to euc08 or eb benefits .

under current law , states are authorized to set up sea programs for recipients of regular uc benefits , but not recipients of euc08 or eb benefits , as proposed by h.r .

3427 and s. 1826 .

h.r .

3427 and s. 1826 would also provide federal funds to states that submit approved applications to be used for ( 1 ) the creation , development , and administration of the proposed sea programs and ( 2 ) the promotion and enrollment of euc08 and eb recipients in sea programs .

appropriated funds for these grants to states would total $35 billion for each fy2012 through fy2014 .

the sea provisions in h.r .

3427 and s. 1826 are substantively similar to the sea provisions that were included in p.l .

112-96 .

s. 1743 would give states the option to create a "learn to earn" program , if approved by the u.s. dol .

all learn to earn state programs would be authorized for fy2013 and fy2014 only .

a learn to earn program ( which is similar to the "bridge to work" program proposed in the american jobs act [ s. 1549 , s. 1660 , h.r .

12 ] ) would allow individuals to continue to receive euc08 benefits as wages for work performed in a short - term work experience placement of up to 10 weeks for not more than 38 hours per week .

learn to earn state programs would be required to compensate claimants at a rate equivalent to the minimum wage , with the euc08 benefit payment counted as wages for that calculation .

the state would be permitted to augment the euc08 benefit .

for individuals participating in a learn to earn program , work search requirements would be suspended during the participation and additional wages paid by the program would not offset euc08 benefit amounts .

any earnings acquired during program participation would not be considered earnings for the purposes of employment taxes , but would be treated as unemployment benefits for tax purposes .

under s. 1743 , federal funding for states to establish learn to earn programs would come from savings determined by the office of management and budget ( omb ) through the termination and consolidation of existing job training programs deemed by omb to be "duplicative or ineffective. .

these federal funds would be allotted to the states based on a two - part formula: ( 1 ) two - thirds would be distributed to the states based on the state share of the u.s. total number unemployed persons and ( 2 ) one - third would be distributed to the states based on the state share of the long - term unemployed ( measured as unemployment spells of at least 27 weeks ) .

up to 1% of the funds would be available for program administration and evaluation .

h.r .

2731 would allow states to enter into agreements with the u.s. dol to set up reemployment demonstration projects .

reemployment demonstration projects in states would be approved for no more than three years and could be conducted no later than five years after enactment of the legislation .

h.r .

2731 would prohibit these state reemployment demonstration projects from using any funds from the state's account in the federal utf .

this legislation would be effective for weeks beginning after september 30 , 2011 .

h.r .

2137 would provide the authority , over the five years following enactment , for states to set up a particular type of demonstration project within their uc programs — an employment assistance voucher program .

this employment assistance voucher program would allow states to use their state uc funds to provide subsidies to employers who hire individuals eligible for state uc benefits and likely to exhaust those unemployment benefits in lieu of paying unemployment benefits to such individuals .

h.r .

2137 would provide no additional federal funding to states that participate in this uc demonstration project .

h.r .

2868 would eliminate employer social security payroll taxes on the earnings of newly hired individuals employed for at least 30 hours a week if those individuals had been receiving any unemployment benefits ( eg , uc , euc08 , eb , ucx , and dua ) or had exhausted any of these unemployment benefits as of the day prior to the new employment start date .

h.r .

2806 would repeal the federal income taxation of unemployment benefits and any trade adjustment assistance payments .

it would also eliminate the penalty for early distributions from a qualified retirement plan to an individual after separation from employment if the individual had received at least 24 weeks of uc .

the bill would apply to benefits received after december 31 , 2010 .

h.r .

2120 proposes to expand the definition of a targeted group for purposes of the work opportunity tax credit to include individuals who have exhausted entitlement to euc08 .

for those euc08 exhaustees who are hired and remain on a firm's payroll at least 400 hours , an employer would be able to claim an income tax credit of 40% of the first $10,000 in wages paid during the worker's first year of employment .

for eligible hires who remain employed from 120 hours to 399 hours , the subsidy rate would be 25% .

in the second year of employment , an employer would be able to claim an additional income tax credit of up to 25% of the first $10,000 in wages paid to that eligible worker during the second year .

the income tax credit would be refundable .

h.r .

1663 proposes a temporary tax credit for certain small businesses that hire eligible , unemployed workers .

this hiring credit would be calculated following section 51 of the internal revenue code of 1986 .

it would be available to businesses with gross receipts in the previous taxable year of no more than $20 million ( among other requirements ) that hire unemployed individuals who ( 1 ) have received unemployment benefits — either regular uc or other federal benefits , including euc08 and eb — for at least four weeks during the year prior to the hiring date and ( 2 ) reside in a "high unemployment zone" ( defined as any county with an unemployment rate that exceeds both the national unemployment rate and 4% ) .

the hiring credit proposed in h.r .

1663 would be temporarily authorized for individuals starting work for an employer after december 31 , 2011 , and until december 31 , 2013 .

s. 2095 would expand the types of training that may be considered approved training while an individual is receiving unemployment compensation to specifically include any coursework necessary to attain a recognized postsecondary credential if that individual is likely to exhaust his or her regular unemployment compensation , and the credential can be attained within a certain time period .

the proposal defines "recognized postsecondary credential" as a credential consisting of an industry - recognized certificate , a certificate of completion of an apprenticeship , or an associate or baccalaureate degree .

s. 2081 would require an individual receiving extended unemployment compensation to perform at least 20 hours of public service each week and engage in at least 20 hours of active job searching each week .

