the federal government's statutory debt limit was reinstated on march 16 , 2015 , at a level that accommodated the borrowing incurred during the suspension period , which ended on march 15 , 2015 ( p.l .

113-83 ) .

treasury immediately began using its authority outside of its typical cash management practices to pay federal obligations to delay the date by which the debt limit would impede the federal government's ability to make timely payments on all of its obligations ( through a debt issuance suspension period as well as other methods discussed in more detail later in this report ) .

similar actions have been taken previously .

if these financing options are exhausted and treasury is no longer able to pay for all federal obligations , some federal payments to creditors , vendors , contractors , state and local governments , beneficiaries , and other entities would be delayed or limited .

this could result in significant economic and financial consequences that may have a lasting impact on federal programs and the federal government's ability to borrow in the future .

this report examines the possibility of the federal government reaching its statutory debt limit and not raising it , with a particular focus on government operations .

first , the report explains the nature of the federal government's debt , the processes associated with federal borrowing , and historical events that may influence prospective actions .

it also includes an analysis of what could happen if the federal government may no longer issue debt , has exhausted alternative sources of cash , and , therefore , depends on incoming receipts or other sources of funds to provide any cash needed to liquidate federal obligations .

a discussion of the effects that prior debt limit impasses have had on the economy is also included .

finally , this report lays out considerations for increasing the debt limit under current policy and what impact fiscal policy could have on the debt limit going forward .

the gross federal debt , which represents the federal government's total outstanding debt , consists of: the debt held by the public and the debt held in government accounts , also known as intragovernmental debt .

federal government borrowing increases for two primary reasons: ( 1 ) budget deficits and ( 2 )  investments of any federal government account surpluses in treasury securities as required by law .

the debt held by the public represents the total net amount borrowed from the public to cover the federal government's accumulated budget deficits .

annual budget deficits increase the debt held by the public by requiring the federal government to borrow additional funds to fulfill its commitments .

the debt held in government accounts represents the federal debt issued to certain accounts , primarily trust funds , such as those associated with social security , medicare , and unemployment compensation .

generally , government account surpluses , which include trust fund surpluses , by law must be invested in special non - marketable federal government securities and thus are held in the form of federal debt .

treasury periodically pays interest on the special securities held in a government account .

interest payments are typically paid in the form of additional special securities issued by treasury to the trust funds , which also increases the amount of intragovernmental debt and federal debt subject to limit .

when a trust fund invests in u.s. treasury securities , it effectively lends money to the rest of the government .

the loan either reduces what the federal government must borrow from the public if the budget is in deficit , or reduces the amount of publicly held debt if the budget is in surplus .

at the same time , the loan increases intragovernmental debt .

the revenues exchanged for these securities then go into the general fund of the treasury and are indistinguishable from other cash in the general fund .

this cash may be used for any government spending purpose .

congress created a statutory debt limit in the second liberty bond act of 1917 .

this development changed treasury's borrowing process and assisted congress in its efforts to exercise its constitutional prerogatives to control the federal government's fiscal outcomes .

the debt limit also imposes a form of fiscal accountability that compels congress and the president to take deliberate action to allow further federal borrowing if necessary .

almost all of the federal government's borrowing is subject to a statutory limit .

from time to time , congress has considered and adopted legislation to change or suspend this limit .

because the statutory limit applies to debt held by the public as well as intragovernmental debt , both budget deficits and government account surpluses may contribute to the federal government reaching the existing debt limit .

treasury's standard methods for financing federal activities can be disrupted when the level of federal debt nears its legal limit .

if the limit prevents treasury from issuing new debt to manage short - term cash flows or to finance an annual deficit , the government may be unable to obtain the cash needed to pay its bills .

the limit may also prevent the government from issuing new debt in order to invest the surpluses of designated government accounts , such as federal trust funds .

treasury is caught between two requirements: the law that requires treasury to pay the government's legal obligations or invest trust fund surpluses , on one hand , and the statutory debt limit which may prevent treasury from issuing the debt to raise cash to pay obligations or make trust fund investments , on the other .

the level of federal debt changes throughout the year due to fluctuations in revenue and outlays , regardless of whether or not the government has an annual surplus or deficit .

seasonal fluctuations could still require treasury to sell debt even if the annual level of federal debt subject to limit does not increase ( i.e. , if the budget were balanced and trust funds were not in surplus ) .

even on a day - to - day basis , the level of federal debt can vary significantly .

for example , treasury issues large volumes of individual income tax refunds in february and march , because taxpayers expecting refunds tend to file early .

on the other hand , treasury tends to collect more revenue in april because taxpayers making payments tend to file closer to april 15 .

past treasury secretaries , when faced with a nearly binding debt ceiling , have used special strategies to handle cash and debt management responsibilities .

since 1985 , these measures have included suspending sales of nonmarketable debt ( savings bonds , state and local government series , and other nonmarketable debt ) ; trimming or delaying auctions of marketable securities ; under - investing or disinvesting certain government funds ( social security , government securities investment fund of the federal thrift savings plan , the civil service retirement and disability trust fund , postal service retiree health benefit fund , exchange stabilization fund ) ; and exchanging treasury securities for non - treasury securities held by the federal financing bank ( ffb ) .

under current law , if the secretary of the treasury determines that the issuance of obligations of the united states may not be made without exceeding the debt limit , a "debt issuance suspension period" may be determined .

this determination gives treasury the authority to suspend investments in the civil service retirement and disability trust fund , postal service retiree health benefit fund , and the government securities investment fund ( g - fund ) of the federal thrift savings plan .

in addition , this gives treasury the authority to prematurely redeem securities held by the civil service retirement and disability trust fund and postal service retiree health benefit fund .

debt issuance suspension periods were previously in effect from november 15 , 1995 , through january 15 , 1997 ; april 4 through april 16 , 2002 ; may 16 through june 28 , 2002 ; february 20 through may 27 , 2003 ; may 16 through august 2 , 2011 ; december 31 , 2012 , through february 4 , 2013 ; may 20 , 2013 to october 17 , 2013 ; and february 10 , 2014 , to february 15 , 2014 .

most recently , a debt limit suspension period began on march 16 , 2015 , and is still currently in effect .

if the federal government were to reach the debt limit and treasury were to exhaust its alternative strategies for remaining under the debt limit , then the federal government would need to rely solely on incoming revenues to finance obligations .

if this occurred during a period when the federal government was running a deficit , the dollar amount of newly incurred federal obligations would continually exceed the dollar amount of newly incoming revenues .

it is not possible for crs to specifically predict what congress , the president , the office of management and budget ( omb ) , treasury , federal agencies , and financial markets would do in certain situations .

nevertheless , it is possible to scope out some aspects of what could happen under a specific scenario , in which the federal government is no longer able to issue debt , has exhausted alternative sources of cash , and therefore is dependent upon incoming receipts or other sources of funds to provide any cash that is necessary to pay federal obligations .

that said , crs cannot state the full range of events that may occur if the described scenario were to actually take place .

in this scenario , the federal government implicitly would be required to use some sort of decision - making rule about whether to pay obligations in the order they are received , or , alternatively , to prioritize which obligations to pay , while other obligations would go into an unpaid queue .

in other words , the federal government's inability to borrow or use other means of financing implies that payment of some or all bills or obligations would be delayed .

there are various viewpoints about how to deal with debt limit issues .

the debt subject to limit will generally continue to rise as long as the budget remains in deficit and / or trust funds remain in surplus .

to avoid raising the debt limit and continue normal government operations , significant spending cuts and / or revenue increases would be required .

it is extremely difficult for congress to effectively influence short - term fiscal and budgetary policy through action on legislation adjusting the debt limit .

for example , the debt could reach the statutory limit after spending and revenue decisions for the current fiscal year have already been made .

the need to raise ( or lower ) the limit during a session of congress is driven by previous decisions regarding revenues and spending .

these decisions stem from legislation enacted earlier in the session or in prior years .

from the congressional budget office: by itself , setting a limit on the debt is an ineffective means of controlling deficits because the decisions that necessitate borrowing are made through other legislative actions .

by the time an increase in the debt ceiling comes up for approval , it is too late to avoid paying the government's pending bills without incurring serious negative consequences .

nevertheless , the consideration of debt limit legislation often is viewed as an opportunity to reexamine fiscal and budgetary policy .

consequently , house and senate action on legislation adjusting the debt limit often is complicated , hindered by policy disagreements , and subject to delay .

many in congress have stated that the debt limit should not be raised without accompanying deficit reduction legislation .

generally , the following scenarios dictate whether or not an increase in the debt limit would be necessary , all else constant: if the federal budget is in deficit and intragovernmental debt is rising , an increase in the debt limit would be necessary .

if the federal budget is in deficit and intragovernmental debt falls by an amount that is smaller than the budget deficit , an increase in the debt limit would be necessary .

if the federal budget is balanced or in surplus and intragovernmental debt rises by an amount that is larger than the budget surplus , an increase in the debt limit would be necessary .

if the federal budget is balanced or in surplus and intragovernmental debt is falling , an increase in the debt limit would not be required .

in other words , increases in the statutory debt limit would be required if the budget remains in deficit , even if future deficit levels are lower than they are at present , or if there are increases in the level of intragovernmental debt .

if intragovernmental debt is declining , presumably due to the need of certain trust funds to redeem their holdings of treasury securities in order to pay benefits , treasury would have to provide the trust funds with cash either from the general fund resources or by issuing additional debt to the public to raise cash .

if the federal budget is in deficit , treasury would have to raise the necessary cash to redeem trust fund securities by issuing debt to the public .

this would not require an increase in the debt limit , as the decline in intragovernmental debt would be offset by an equal increase in debt held by the public .

a decline in intragovernmental debt as a result of a redemption in trust fund securities could be financed by using surplus cash if the federal budget is in surplus at that time .

in this situation , debt held by the public , debt held by government accounts , and total federal debt would decrease .

if the budget surplus were less than the reduction in intragovernmental debt , the increase in the debt held by the public would be offset by the decline in intragovernmental debt , resulting in a decrease in the total debt .

selected actions in 1985 in september 1985 , the treasury department informed congress that it had reached the statutory debt limit .

as a result , treasury had to take extraordinary measures to meet the government's cash requirements .

treasury used various internal transactions involving the federal financing bank ( ffb ) and delayed public auctions of government debt .

it also was unable to issue , or had to delay issuing , new short - term government securities to the civil service retirement and disability trust fund , the social security trust funds , and several smaller trust funds .

issuing new government securities to the trust funds would have caused the federal debt to exceed the debt limit .

during this period , the bulk of social security payroll tax revenues were kept in a non - interest bearing account .

treasury took the additional step of "disinvesting" the civil service retirement and disability trust fund , the social security trust funds , and several smaller trust funds by redeeming some trust fund securities earlier than usual .

premature redemption of these securities created room under the debt ceiling for treasury to borrow sufficient cash from the public to pay other obligations , including november social security benefits .

as a result of these various actions , social security benefit payments and other federal payments were not jeopardized .

the debt limit was subsequently temporarily increased on november 14 , 1985 ( p.l .

99-155 ) , and permanently increased on december 12 , 1985 ( p.l .

99-177 ) , from $1,824 billion to $2,079 billion .

both p.l .

99-155 and p.l .

99-177 included provisions to require treasury to restore any interest income lost to the trust funds as a result of delayed investments and early redemptions .

concerning treasury's management of the social security trust funds during the 1985 debt limit impasse , the general accounting office ( gao , now the government accountability office ) wrote: "we conclude that , although some of the secretary's actions appear in retrospect to have been in violation of the requirements of the social security act , we cannot say that the secretary acted unreasonably given the extraordinary situation in which he was operating. .

in particular , gao found that not all the delayed investment and securities redemptions during the period from september through november 1985 were necessary to meet social security benefit payments , and the excess was used to finance general government operations .

following the 1985 debt limit crisis , congress formally authorized the secretary of the treasury to declare a debt issuance suspension period and , during such periods , to depart from normal trust fund investment practices with respect to certain funds such as the civil service retirement and disability fund and the tsp's g fund ( p.l .

99-509 , the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1986 ) .

funds raised by procedures authorized during a debt issuance suspension period can only be used to the extent necessary to prevent the public debt from exceeding the debt limit .

after the debt issuance suspension period has ended , p.l .

99-509 requires treasury to make the trust funds whole by issuing the appropriate amount of securities and crediting any interest lost due to non - investment or early disinvestment of these funds .

such authority to depart from normal trust fund investment practices was not provided with respect to the social security trust funds .

a provision to allow such authority was dropped from p.l .

99-509 during conference .

selected actions in 1995-1996 following the enactment of this additional authority , the first debt issuance suspension period was announced on november 15 , 1995 .

treasury , once again , used non - traditional methods of financing , including some of the methods used during the 1985 crisis as well as not reinvesting some of the maturing treasury securities held by the exchange stabilization fund .

in addition , treasury utilized the new authority that was enacted under p.l .

99-509 to declare a debt issuance suspension period .

in early 1996 , treasury announced that it had insufficient cash to pay social security benefits for march 1996 .

congress responded on february 1 , 1996 , by passing p.l .

104-103 , which provided treasury with temporary authority to issue securities to the public in an amount equal to the march 1996 social security benefit payments .

treasury issued about $29 billion of securities on february 23 , 1996 , and , under p.l .

104-103 , these new securities were not to count against the debt limit until march 15 , 1996 .

on march 7 , 1996 , congress passed p.l .

104-115 , which amended p.l .

104-103 to permit treasury to continue investing payroll tax revenues in government securities and also to extend the exemption of the securities issued under p.l .

104-103 from counting against the debt limit until march 30 , 1996 .

the debt limit was permanently increased on march 29 , 1996 ( p.l .

104-121 ) from $4,900 billion to $5,500 billion .

p.l .

104-121 also codified congress's understanding that the secretary of the treasury and other federal officials are not authorized to use social security and medicare funds for debt management purposes .

ssa states the following: specifically , the secretary of the treasury and other federal officials are required not to delay or otherwise underinvest incoming receipts to the social security and medicare trust funds .

they are also required not to sell , redeem , or otherwise disinvest securities , obligations , or other assets of these trust funds except when necessary to provide for the payment of benefits and administrative expenses of the programs .

these restrictions apply to the federal old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) trust fund , the federal disability insurance ( di ) trust fund , the federal hospital insurance ( hi ) trust fund , and the federal supplementary medical insurance ( smi ) trust fund .

selected actions in 2011 beginning in january 2011 , treasury again took actions to avoid reaching the debt limit and began notifying congress of its intentions .

on january 6 , 2011 , treasury secretary geithner sent a letter to congress stating that treasury had the ability to delay the date by which the debt limit would be reached by utilizing similar methods used during past crises , including declaring a debt issuance suspension period , if necessary .

according to treasury , these actions could delay the date that the debt limit would be reached by several weeks .

however , if the debt limit was not raised after that point , payment of other obligations and benefits would be "discontinued , limited , or adversely affected. .

on april 4 , 2011 , secretary geithner issued another letter to congress stating that the debt limit would be reached no later than may 16 , 2011 , and the use of extraordinary measures would extend treasury's ability to meet commitments through july 8 , 2011 .

beyond these extraordinary measures discussed in the letter and detailed earlier , treasury stated that it did not have other actions available that year that it could take to find additional authority to issue debt .

the letter further stated that the sale of certain financial assets would not be a viable option to avoid increasing the debt limit .

on may 2 , 2011 , secretary geithner issued a third letter to congress reiterating that the debt limit would be reached no later than may 16 , 2011 , but that the use of extraordinary measures would extend treasury's ability to meet commitments through august 2 , 2011 .

the revision in the latter date was a result of stronger than expected tax receipts .

further , secretary geithner again stated that not raising the debt limit "would have catastrophic economic impact that would be felt by every american" and that federal payments would be affected .

in addition , the letter stated that on friday , may 6 , the issuance of state and local government series ( slgs ) treasury securities would be suspended until further notice .

on may 16 , 2011 , secretary geithner notified congress of a debt issuance suspension period and informed them of his intent to utilize extraordinary measures to create additional room under the debt ceiling to allow treasury to continue funding the operations of the government .

between may 16 , 2011 , and august 2 , 2011 , treasury prematurely redeemed securities of the civil service retirement and disability trust fund and did not invest receipts of the civil service retirement and disability trust fund and the postal service retiree health benefit fund .

treasury also suspended investments in the exchange stabilization fund and the government securities investment fund ( g - fund ) of the federal thrift savings plan .

because these funds are required by law to be made whole once the debt limit is increased , these specific actions did not affect federal retirees or employees once the debt limit was increased .

the debt limit was permanently increased on august 2 , 2011 ( budget control act of 2011 or bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) , from $14,294 billion to $14,694 billion .

the enactment of p.l .

112-25 provided for three separate debt limit increases .

the first , as discussed above , permanently increased the debt limit on august 2 , 2011 .

thereafter , the debt limit was permanently increased on september 21 , 2011 , from $14,694 billion to $15,194 billion and on january 27 , 2012 , from $15,194 billion to $16,394 billion .

secretary geithner has stated that the current debt limit would be reached on december 31 , 2012 , and the use of extraordinary measures would provide additional headroom under the debt limit until early 2013 .

views on the debt limit , prioritization , and default during the 2011 debt limit debate during the debate over the debt limit in 2011 , both the administration and congress maintained various views on this issue .

members of the obama administration stated that default cannot be avoided if the debt limit is not raised , and that the consequences of a federal default would be serious .

treasury secretary geithner's letter of january 6 , 2011 , provided treasury's views on the "consequences of default by the united states. .

the letter described , among other things , federal payments that would be "discontinued , limited , or adversely affected. .

the letter also said a short - term or limited default on legal obligations would cause "catastrophic damage to the economy. .

chairman of the white house council of economic advisers austan goolsbee elaborated , saying that a default would cause "a worse financial economic crisis than anything we saw in 2008. .

secretary geithner , in his letter to congress , added , "default would have prolonged and far - reaching negative consequences on the safe - haven status of treasuries and the dollar's dominant role in the international financial system , causing further increases in interest rates and reducing the willingness of investors here and around the world to invest in the united states. .

in a later online posting , treasury deputy secretary neal wolin wrote that proposals to prioritize payments on the national debt above other legal obligations would not prevent default and would bring the same economic consequences secretary geithner described .

looking forward , secretary geithner said in his letter that in addition to addressing the debt limit , president obama wanted to work with congress to address the federal government's fiscal position with particular attention to addressing "medium - and long - term fiscal challenges. .

other policymakers have expressed some contrasting perspectives focusing on the need to tie proposals to raise the debt limit to spending cuts , changes in the budget process , or instructions on how to deal with the payment of obligations if the debt limit is reached .

for example , senator jim demint wrote in an op - ed that a vote to raise the debt limit should be opposed "unless congress first passes a balanced - budget amendment that requires a two - thirds majority to raise taxes. .

legislative proposals related to the potential debt limit crisis began emerging in early 2011 .

for example , senator pat toomey and representative tom mcclintock introduced legislation that , in the event of a debt limit crisis , would require treasury to make payment of principal and interest on debt held by the public a higher priority than all other federal government obligations ( s. 163 / h.r .

421 , 112 th congress ) .

in a letter to secretary geithner , senator toomey said "this legislation is designed to maintain orderly financial markets by reassuring investors in u.s. treasury securities that their investments are perfectly safe even in the unlikely event that the debt limit is temporarily reached. .

similarly , senator david vitter and representative dean heller introduced legislation that would require priority be given to payment of all obligations on the debt held by the public and social security benefits in the event that the debt limit is reached ( s. 259 / h.r .

568 , 112 th congress ) .

representative marlin stutzman introduced legislation that would require priority be given to payment of all obligations on the debt held by the public , social security benefits , and specified military expenditures in the event that the debt limit is reached ( h.r .

728 , 112 th congress ) .

as noted earlier , congress passed and the president signed the budget control act , which addressed the debt limit and several aspects of fiscal policy .

social security trust fund cash and investment management practices by law , the social security trust funds must be invested in interest - bearing obligations of the united states or in obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the united states ( 42 u.s.c .

§401 ( d ) and 42 u.s.c .

§1320b - 15 ) .

the securities that treasury issues to the social security trust funds count toward the federal debt limit .

under normal procedures , social security revenues ( social security payroll taxes and individual income taxes ) are immediately credited to the social security trust funds in the form of short - term , non - marketable treasury securities called certificates of indebtedness ( cis ) .

under the terms of this exchange , when treasury credits payroll tax and other revenues to social security in the form of cis , the revenues themselves become available in the general fund for other government operations .

cis generally mature on the following june 30 .

each june 30 , any surplus for the year is converted from short - term treasury securities to long - term , non - marketable treasury securities called "special - issue obligations" or "specials. .

in addition , other special issues that have just matured and that are not needed to pay near - term benefits are reinvested in special - issue obligations .

interest income is credited to the trust funds semi - annually ( on june 30 and december 31 ) in the form of additional special - issue obligations .

social security benefits are paid by treasury from the general fund .

when treasury pays social security benefits , it redeems an equivalent amount of treasury securities held by the trust funds in order to reimburse the general fund .

the social security program is projected to run a cash deficit through the 75-year forecast period .

that is , social security's tax revenues are projected to be less than outlays for benefit payments and administration .

in a year when social security runs a cash flow deficit , treasury redeems some long - term government securities held by the trust funds .

however , social security will still need to invest in non - marketable , short - term government securities to manage short - term cash flows during the periods between receiving revenues and paying benefits ( 42 u.s.c .

§401 ( a ) , 42 u.s.c .

§401 ( d ) , and 42 u.s.c .

§1320b - 15 ) .

investing the trust funds' revenues for even very short periods ensures that the trust funds maximize their interest earnings .

social security will also need to invest in non - marketable , long - term government securities in june of each year , when short - term and certain long - term trust fund securities mature and amounts not needed to pay near - term benefits are rolled over into long - term government securities , and in june and december of each year , when semi - annual interest income is paid in the form of government securities .

in 2011 and 2012 , social security drew on general revenues as a result of the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 , as amended by p.l .

112-78 and p.l .

112-96 ) .

p.l .

111-312 provided a temporary 2 percentage point reduction in the social security payroll tax for employees and the self - employed in 2011 , resulting in a tax rate of 4.2% for employees and 10.4% for the self - employed .

to protect the trust funds , p.l .

111-312 appropriated to the social security trust funds amounts equal to the reduction in payroll tax revenues .

p.l .

111-312 specified that the appropriated amounts "shall be transferred from the general fund at such times and in such manner as to replicate to the extent possible the transfers which would have occurred to such trust fund had such amendments not been enacted. .

on december 23 , 2011 , congress passed h.r .

3765 and president obama signed the bill into law as p.l .

112-78 to extend the payroll tax reduction for workers and the general revenue transfers through february 2012 .

on february 17 , 2012 , the house and the senate agreed to the conference report on h.r .

3630 , which further extended the payroll tax reduction for workers and the general revenue transfers through the end of calendar year 2012 .

h.r .

3630 was signed into law by president obama on february 22 , 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ) .

depending on the extent and duration of any future debt limit crisis , and also on treasury prioritization decisions , social security trust fund investment management procedures and benefit payments potentially could be affected because of the requirement that treasury obligations cannot be issued to the social security trust funds if doing so would exceed the debt limit .

at the same time , as described above , p.l .

104-121 restricts the treasury secretary's ability to delay or otherwise underinvest incoming receipts to the social security and medicare trust funds .

delayed issuance of government obligations to the trust funds , or early redemption of some trust fund assets , could accelerate depletion of the trust funds and move up the expected insolvency date , absent congressional action to make the trust funds whole .

depending on the government's cash position in a given month , treasury may need to issue new public debt to raise the cash needed to pay benefits .

treasury may be unable to issue new public debt , however , if doing so would exceed the debt limit .

social security benefit payments may be delayed or jeopardized if treasury does not have enough cash on hand to pay benefits .

