the title i - a program of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , as amended by the no child left behind act ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) , is the largest source of federal funding for elementary and secondary education .

states that receive title i - a funding must comply with certain requirements related to measuring and evaluating student achievement .

specifically , states are required to develop academic standards and assessments and use the results of these assessments within an accountability system that determines whether schools and local educational agencies ( leas ) are making adequate gains in student achievement .

provisions regarding state standards and assessment systems were in place prior to the nclb ; they were enacted through the improving america's schools act of 1994 ( iasa ; p.l .

103-382 ) , which amended the esea .

the iasa required states to adopt standards and assessments in the subjects of reading / language arts ( hereafter referred to as reading ) and mathematics at three grade levels: at least once in each of the grade ranges of 3-5 , 6-9 , and 10-12 .

under the iasa , states were required to develop or adopt academic content standards , as well as content and performance standards and assessments tied to the content standards .

the full system of standards and assessment was required to be in place by the 2000-2001 school year .

the standards and assessment provisions within the nclb expanded upon provisions initially adopted in the iasa by increasing the number of grades and content areas that states are required to assess .

under the nclb , states are required to assess students in grades 3 through 8 and one grade in high school in the content areas of reading and mathematics ; states were required to administer these assessments by school year 2005-2006 .

in addition , states are required to assess students once in each of three grade bands ( 3-5 , 6-8 , and 10-12 ) in science ; states were required to administer these assessments by school year 2007-2008 .

to help states pay the costs of meeting the expanded title i - a requirements regarding standards and assessments , the nclb authorized a new annual grants for state assessments program ( section 6111 ) .

the grants for state assessments program is a formula grant program that is intended to pay the costs of the development of the required assessments and , if assessments are fully developed , to help pay the costs of administering the assessments .

in addition , the nclb authorized a new annual grants for enhanced assessment instruments ( section 6112 ) .

the grants for enhanced assessment instruments program is a competitive grant program that is intended to enable states to improve the quality , validity , and reliability of their assessments beyond the requirements of title i - a .

it is clear that state assessment expenditures have grown dramatically since the adoption of the nclb .

the extent to which these newly authorized grant programs have assisted states in meeting the assessment requirements of the nclb is unclear .

that is , it is unclear how much the federal grant programs are contributing to the overall cost of assessment activities under title i - a of the nclb .

the primary purpose of this report is to explore issues related to the cost of assessments and to provide an understanding of the factors that influence the overall cost of assessment systems .

this information is supplied to congress as it prepares for the reauthorization of the esea and for deliberations on the esea standards and assessment provisions .

as congress considers the reauthorization of the esea , it is likely that the standards and assessment provisions within title i - a will be reviewed and debated .

state assessments are currently the primary policy tool used to measure whether schools , leas , and states are meeting certain academic targets .

as such , the effectiveness of federal policy is dependent upon a valid state assessment system .

designing an assessment system requires states to consider certain tradeoffs in order to meet the requirements of the nclb while meeting state requirements and containing costs .

decisions made in the design of a state assessment system have direct implications for the validity of the nclb accountability system and direct consequences for schools .

this report aims to shed light on the current status of state assessment systems under the nclb and it provides analysis that allows policymakers to explore some of the potential implications of changing the requirements of state assessment systems .

the first section explicitly details the current assessment requirements of the nclb and provides an overview of the current status of state assessment systems .

the second section describes the assessment industry and how it responded to meet the expanded assessment requirements adopted in the nclb .

the third section provides a discussion of factors that influence the overall cost of student assessment within state assessment systems , which include assessment development , scoring and administration , policy choices , and implementation practices .

the final sections report data on the cost of current assessment systems under the nclb and explore some of the policies that may promote efficiency .

section 1111 ( b ) outlines the state assessment requirements of the nclb .

additional requirements for the assessment of students with disabilities are outlined in regulations .

the general assessment requirements for all students and alternate assessment requirements for students with disabilities are discussed below .

following a discussion of the requirements is a summary of the current status of state assessment systems .

with the adoption of the nclb , there was a dramatic change in the demand for new assessments , which required the assessment industry to increase its production of assessment products .

states began to require the assessment industry to develop new types of assessments that were reliable and valid for the purposes of their state accountability system .

this section explores changes in the number and type of assessments that states required and how the industry and states have responded to these changes .

the assessment industry is a collection of private companies that develop , administer , and score assessments for a variety of purposes .

some companies in the assessment industry , also called "assessment vendors," specialize in professional certifications , such as teacher certification or career and technical certifications .

others specialize in entry examinations for undergraduate or graduate programs .

a subset of assessment vendors specialize in educational assessment for students in elementary and secondary schools .

the assessment requirements of the last two reauthorizations of the esea ( i.e. , the iasa and the nclb ) have greatly increased the demand for assessment development and administration services in elementary and secondary schools .

prior to the iasa , decisions regarding student assessment were largely made at the school or lea level .

schools and leas typically purchased readily available , nationally normed tests of achievement , such as the iowa test of basic skills ( itbs ) or the stanford achievement test .

assessment vendors referred to these sales as "catalogue sales," and the vendors could control development and administration costs fairly easily by using the same test for a number of years and across a number of leas .

the requirements of the iasa and the nclb changed a fundamental element of assessment in elementary and secondary education — they required states to develop state academic content and performance standards and align state assessments to the state content and performance standards .

this requirement in legislation caused a shift from the administration of norm - referenced assessments to the administration of criterion - referenced assessments that were aligned with state content and performance standards .

moreover , this requirement no longer allowed states , leas , or schools to purchase assessments through "catalogue sales" because these assessments would not necessarily be aligned to the state content and performance standards .

the assessment requirements of the nclb created a new market and increased demand for elementary and secondary assessments .

specifically , because of the requirement that assessments be aligned with content and performance standards , the assessment industry was tasked by states to create new , customized criterion - referenced assessments that measured each state's unique content and performance standards .

the relatively sudden demand for 52 new assessments created competition among assessment vendors to vie for state assessment contracts ; in some cases , these state assessment contracts are worth hundreds of millions of dollars .

although there is competition for state assessment contracts , there are a limited number of assessment vendors who develop the types of assessments required by the nclb .

it has been reported that five assessment vendors account for over 90% of the statewide testing revenue .

there are several smaller , full - service assessment vendors and other niche companies that compete for state contracts as well .

there is insufficient research on factors that influence the cost of assessments required by the nclb to construct a complete model of overall cost .

much of the research on cost predates the nclb , and it may not provide accurate depictions of assessment practices today .

in lieu of existing information regarding cost , this section of the report presents a framework to guide discussion about the factors that influence the cost of student assessment .

it focuses on assessment development , scoring , policy choices , and implementation practices .

after these components of state assessment systems are introduced , the research that exists on costs associated with these components is discussed .

this is followed by an original analysis which , within limitations imposed by available data , tests the assumption that student population is a major factor affecting cost .

table 1 provides a cost structure that outlines low , mid - level , and high estimates for various assessment components .

for example , development accounts for approximately 18% to 25% of the total assessment cost , depending on a state's relative level of investment in this activity .

this cost structure can be used to assist states in balancing their assessment budget ; it is designed to help states understand the tradeoffs involved in creating an assessment system .

at the mid - level , all of the components sum to 100% .

if , however , a state chooses to spend a "high" proportion of the assessment budget on development ( moving from 22% to 25% ) , it would need to off - set that expense by choosing to spend a "low" proportion of the budget on a component like production and manufacturing .

any combination that sums to 100% would represent a balanced assessment budget .

across the low , mid - level , and high estimates , development is the most expensive assessment component , accounting for 18% to 25% of total assessment cost .

the least expensive assessment component in the cost structure is reporting , accounting for 2% to 5% of the total assessment cost .

all other components are relatively equal in terms of their proportional cost , ranging anywhere from 12% to 20% of the total assessment cost .

some of the components in this cost structure are relatively fixed costs that would be similar regardless of the type of assessment used ( eg , reporting ) ; however , other components are assessment design elements over which states can exert some control ( eg , development ; document preparation , scanning , editing , multiple choice scoring ; open - ended scoring ) .

the sections below discuss two of the major design elements that can influence costs: assessment development and scoring .

the final section discusses various policy choices and implementation practices that can also influence costs .

the previous section explored the cost structure of state assessments and how some of the factors of a state assessment system influence cost .

the current section turns to a discussion of how states report spending money on state assessment systems required by the nclb .

there are relatively little data available that reflect state expenditures on their state assessment activities required by the nclb .

one reason for the lack of data is the difficulty in accounting for assessment expenses across multiple , and sometimes overlapping , activities .

for example , states typically use assessment vendors to develop , administer , and score assessments .

these vendors , however , may perform other duties that are not directly related to assessment ( such as developing or maintaining standards ) or perform other assessment duties that are not directly related to assessments required by the nclb ( such as developing end - of - course assessments or developing assessments for additional grades or content areas that are required by the state but not the nclb ) .

in cases where assessment vendors conduct additional work within one contract , it is difficult for states to separately account for expenses directly related to assessment activities required by the nclb .

in addition to awarding contracts to assessment vendors , states also employ state - and local - level assessment directors or coordinators .

in some cases , states have full - time staff , including directors , coordinators , and measurement specialists , who are hired primarily to handle assessment activities .

in other cases , state - and local - level officials have overlapping duties and are not hired specifically to direct or coordinate assessments .

for example , some states or leas may have a director of title i programs , and one of the duties may be coordinating assessments and managing the contracts awarded to assessment vendors .

the assessment duties may actually be a small part of their job , and states may not be able to separately account for the portion of salaries spent on assessment versus other duties .

because of these accounting difficulties , reports of state expenditures on assessment activities required by the nclb are highly variable .

two recent reports have investigated states' reports of costs associated with complying with the nclb assessment requirements .

results of each investigation are discussed below along with a discussion of factors that may contribute to the variability reported across states .

moving forward , congress is likely to grapple with decisions regarding how much support to provide for state assessments , how to allocate funds , and whether any practices can be supported to encourage efficiency .

as has been noted , assessment practices and the assessment industry have changed dramatically following the passage of the nclb , and there is a dearth of current research on matters related to the cost of varied assessment practices .

based on the literature that is available , and insights garnered through discussions with assessment vendors , this section discusses options for containing costs and possible tradeoffs associated with them .

as congress considers the reauthorization of the esea , what will the federal government's role be in funding state assessments ? .

should federal funding aim to fund a certain proportion of state assessments required by federal law ? .

given the flexibility that states have to design their own assessment systems , it may be difficult for federal funding to meet a constantly moving target .

the federal government could , however , develop policies that promote quality and efficiency in state assessment systems .

federal policies that aim to promote efficiencies , however , may risk reducing the quality of assessments if the efficiencies are supported without full consideration of the consequences .

certain efficiencies may involve tradeoffs in terms of the type of assessments , number of assessments , and timeline imposed on states to report results .

efficiencies may also require balancing state independence with promoting state consortia in order to realize economies of scale .

the remainder of this report examines the potential advantages and consequences of these tradeoffs and compromises in the design of state assessment systems .

some educators have discussed dissatisfaction with the quality of state assessment systems and the over - reliance on multiple choice items .

one proposed alternative is to increase the use of performance - based assessment in state assessment systems .

a performance - based assessment is an authentic task that assesses what a student knows and can do .

it can take many forms , including conducting science assessments , writing persuasive essays , completing research projects , or applying mathematical problem solving to a real - world scenario .

a recent study analyzed the costs involved for states to move from primarily multiple choice assessments to a "high - quality assessment" ( hqa ) system , which would utilize more performance - based items .

the researchers found that the cost of a new hqa system would be approximately three times higher than a traditional multiple choice assessment .

implementing the hqa system with certain cost reduction strategies , however , led to a significant decrease in cost .

in a hypothetical scenario where all cost reduction strategies were used , the hqa system was projected to be less expensive than traditional multiple choice assessments .

the cost reduction strategies used in the aforementioned study are not unique to a specific type of assessment .

these strategies can be employed with both traditional and innovative assessment systems .

the implications of using certain cost reduction strategies to promote efficiency in assessment systems are discussed below .

as discussed earlier , most state assessment systems use multiple choice assessments or multiple choice assessments with limited constructed response items .

currently , it is most common for states to use automated scoring for multiple choice items and human scoring for constructed response items .

as part of their contract , assessment vendors are typically responsible for the human scoring of constructed response items , which represents one of the most costly and time - consuming activities in a state assessment system .

in order to move away from multiple choice assessments , states would need to find a way to reduce the cost of human scoring .

several options have been proposed to reduce scoring costs .

one option is the use of distributed scoring .

distributed scoring involves scorers working from home , accessing the assessment items through an online platform .

in this arrangement , the assessment vendor is not required to supply a facility or equipment for scorers .

in reality , it is likely that assessment vendors would use a mixture of onsite and distributed scoring .

when investigating cost strategies , researchers modeled the savings involved in using a 50-50 mix of onsite and distributed scoring .

the 50-50 mix resulted in an 11% reduction in the costs of scoring constructed response items .

another option that has been proposed to reduce scoring costs is using teachers to score assessments .

teachers evaluate student performance on a daily basis , and it may be a natural extension of their job to score state assessments .

furthermore , teachers would be able to score the full range of assessment types , including multiple choice , constructed response , and performance - based assessments .

teacher scoring could be implemented in several ways .

for example , teachers could score assessments as part of their expected duties or as a professional development activity .

alternatively , teachers could be paid a stipend for the extra time involved with training and scoring assessments .

a number of issues may arise , however , if teachers score assessments .

first , since teachers have a stake in the outcome of the nclb accountability system , the state would need procedures in place to ensure objective scoring .

in the nclb accountability system , states must hold schools and leas accountable for student performance ; therefore , it may not make sense to have teachers score assessments within their school or lea , given that they have a vested interest in the outcome .

it may be possible to require teachers to score assessments from other schools or other leas ; however , the potential travel involved may negate the cost saving potential of using teachers .

another option to consider in reducing scoring costs is the advent of artificial intelligence ( ai ) .

ai software has been developed to score some constructed response items .

some research finds that ai produces results that are relatively comparable to human scoring ; however , the cost for ai scoring is currently too high to realize any savings in a state assessment system .

there is speculation that the costs of ai scoring will come down considerably in the next several years , and it may serve as a cost reduction strategy in the future .

a related issue to consider is the time required to score assessments .

under the nclb , the state assessment is typically administered in the spring and results must be reported before the beginning of the next school year .

the timeline is driven by regulations that require notifying parents of their public school choice options under the nclb , which is dependent upon the results of state assessments .

regulations specify that an lea must notify parents of public school choice options made available to students who attend a school in need of improvement .

parental notification "must be made sufficiently in advance of , but no later than 14 calendar days before , the start of the school year so that parents have adequate time to exercise their choice option before the school year begins. .

since decisions regarding the determination of schools in need of improvement affect public school choice options , assessment results must be available no later than 14 calendar days before the start of the school year .

if multiple choice assessments were to be replaced by assessments with more constructed response items or performance items , there would be an increase in the amount of human scoring .

to accommodate the increase in human scoring , states may need an extended window of time to score assessments .

this extended window of time may require either ( 1 ) testing students earlier in the year , or ( 2 ) allowing results to be reported after the start of the next school year .

if students are tested earlier in the year , the results of the assessment may not accurately represent a full year of instruction , and the results may not reflect a valid measurement of grade - level academic content and performance standards .

on the other hand , if results were allowed to be reported later ( i.e. , after the start of the next school year ) , parents would not have the ability to exercise the public school choice option included in the nclb accountability system .

under the nclb , states were afforded the flexibility to develop their own state academic content and performance standards and to develop state assessments that measure student achievement against those standards .

this flexibility created the possibility that over 50 unique state assessment systems would emerge .

each assessment system had the potential to differ in terms of assessment type , assessment development , scoring procedures , administration procedures , timing of the assessment , and so forth .

because each state was focused on developing assessments that would measure specific state standards , there was limited interest in pooling resources across states to develop common assessments .

as discussed earlier , there is currently one state consortium that works to develop , maintain , and administer assessments that fulfill the requirements of the nclb .

due to the reported success of this consortium , interest in the use of state consortia has increased .

the use of state consortia may promote efficiency in state assessment systems by allowing states to share the development and overhead costs .

one study modeled the potential cost savings of state consortia comprised of 10 , 20 , and 30 states .

participating in a 10-state consortium was estimated to reduce average per pupil costs on assessments by 24% compared to the costs of a single state .

participation in a 20-state consortium reduced average per pupil costs by 27% compared to a single state , and participation in a 30-state consortium reduced average per pupil costs by 30% compared to a single state .

although states would continue to realize savings with larger consortia , the cost model indicates that the majority of the savings are realized in a 10-state consortium .

if states choose to enter a consortium in the future , they may consider the incremental savings of a larger consortium versus the ease of working with a smaller consortium .

ed has taken steps to promote the use of state consortia through its race to the top assessment program ( rttt assessment program ) .

the rttt assessment program is a $350 million program focused specifically on funding comprehensive assessment systems for state consortia .

the secretary announced the winners of the rttt assessment program on september 2 , 2010 .

two state consortia received awards under this program: ( 1 ) partnership for assessment of readiness of college and careers ( parcc ; 26 states ) , and ( 2 ) smarter balanced assessment consortium ( sbac ; 31 states ) .

across the two applications , 45 states are participating in at least one of the consortia .

both parcc and sbac proposed to develop assessments that measure student knowledge and skills across a common set of college - and career - ready standards in mathematics and english language arts for grades 3 through 8 and one grade in high school .

the assessments must assess all students , including english language learners and students with disabilities .

because the rttt assessment program grants were awarded relatively recently , it is unclear how they may affect state assessments used for accountability purposes .

ed's "expectation" is that states adopting assessment systems developed through this program will use them to meet the requirements for state assessment systems under title i of the nclb .

the rttt assessment program , however , is a one - time competition , and it is unclear whether any continued support for participating state consortia would be considered .

ultimately , decisions regarding the type of state assessments that meet the requirements of title i may be determined by congress during the next reauthorization of the esea .

as technology becomes less expensive , online delivery of state assessments may lower the cost of state assessment systems .

using online delivery may potentially reduce costs associated with production , manufacturing , and shipping assessments from the vendor to schools .

some states , such as oregon and virginia , have already moved away from paper - and - pencil tests to online delivery , and it is expected that other states may follow .

in one study , the cost of online delivery was about 12% less than paper - and - pencil tests ; however , the use of technology was combined with other cost reduction strategies , which confounds the actual savings of online delivery .

furthermore , the study did not include the additional cost of purchasing equipment in its estimate , since this cost is highly variable depending on the number of computers already available .

one of the major challenges of online testing is ensuring that all schools have the necessary equipment to allow for large - scale assessment in a relatively short period of time .

a school's readiness to implement online testing may be a reflection of the resources available at the school , which may inadvertently highlight the technology gap between schools .

furthermore , it is not known at this time how often schools would need to replace equipment in order to work with new software or online delivery mechanisms that are constantly changing .

federal , state , and local resources may need to provide ongoing support for the purchase of equipment if states are to develop and maintain online delivery systems for state assessments .

another concern with the use of online delivery of assessments is the potential for technological problems that may lead to delays in testing or scoring .

in the worst case scenario , results could be lost completely .

some technological glitches have already occurred in virginia .

in some cases , students could not complete their online test due to a glitch in the server maintained by the assessment vendor .

the students were required to retake the assessment on a different day , which raises some concern about the validity of the scores from the second administration .

if online delivery moves forward , states may need to ensure that schools have the infrastructure in place to carry out large - scale assessment and develop policies to deal with technological glitches in the administration or scoring of state assessments .

to assist states in complying with the new assessment requirements , the nclb authorized two programs that specifically provide funding for the development and administration of state assessments: grants for state assessments ( section 6111 ) and grants for enhanced assessment instruments ( section 6112 ) .

to carry out these programs , $490 million was authorized to be appropriated in fy2002 , and such sums as may be necessary were authorized for each of the five succeeding fiscal years .

in general , funds up to the "trigger amount" ( discussed below ) are distributed by formula grants under the grants for state assessments program and the remaining funds are distributed through a competitive process under the grants for enhanced assessment instruments .

the remainder of this section discusses the formula grant program grants for state assessments .

under the grants for state assessments program , statutory provisions specify that the secretary shall make grants to states for the following purposes: to pay the costs of the development of the additional state assessments and standards required by section 1111 ( b ) of the nclb , which may include the costs of working voluntary partnerships with other states , at the sole discretion of each state ; and if a state has developed the assessments and standards required by section 1111 ( b ) of the nclb , to administer assessments or carry out other activities related to ensuring that the state's schools and leas are held accountable for the results .

the assessment requirements under title i - a of the nclb are contingent upon the appropriation of minimum annual amounts for state assessment grants ; this minimum annual amount is referred to as the "trigger amount" in the formula allocation .

the "trigger amount" is defined in legislation as the amount made available to carry out sections 6111 and 6112 minus an amount specified in section 1111 ( b ) ( 3 ) ( d ) .

for each of fy2002-fy2008 , at least the minimum "trigger amounts" have been appropriated for these grants .

the authorization of appropriations for the assessment grant programs expired in fy2008 ; however , these programs have continued to receive an appropriation above the "trigger amount" specified for the most recent year of authorization ( i.e. , $400 million in fy2008 ) .

from the "trigger amount," grants for state assessments are allocated as follows: 1 .

the secretary shall reserve 0.5% of the total for the outlying areas and 0.5% of the total for the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) .

2 .

from the remainder of the total , the secretary shall allocate to each state an amount equal to $3 million .

3 .

from the remainder of the total , the secretary shall allocate funds among states in proportion to their number of children and youth aged 5-17 years .

all states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico receive funding under the grants for state assessments program .

table a - 1 shows state appropriations for the grants for state assessment program for fy2002-fy2011 ( estimate ) .

