crs has published a report , recently updated , on continuing appropriations that discusses at length and tracks the seven bills that have thus far funded federal government operations through fy2011 .

normally , a continuing appropriation permits government agencies to operate at the same rate as experienced in the most recent full - year appropriation — in this case fy2010 — for the duration of the appropriation .

the first of these bills , the continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( p.l .

111-242 ) , was enacted on september 30 , 2010 , and provided funding through december 3 , 2010 .

since then , six other bills have extended federal funding through march 4 , 2011 .

the original act , though , adjusted the amounts available to several appropriations accounts from their prorated fy2010 levels .

the most substantial adjustment to military construction accounts was the reduction of the brac 2005 account from the $8.0 billion needed near the height of brac construction in fy2010 to $2.4 billion .

nevertheless , the act also contained the following text: sec .

102 .

 ( a ) no appropriation or funds made available or authority granted pursuant to section 101 for the department of defense shall be used for ( 1 ) the new production of items not funded for production in fiscal year 2010 or prior years ; ( 2 ) the increase in production rates above those sustained with fiscal year 2010 funds ; or ( 3 ) the initiation , resumption , or continuation of any project , activity , operation , or organization ( defined as any project , subproject , activity , budget activity , program element , and subprogram within a program element , and for any investment items defined as a p - 1 line item in a budget activity within an appropriation account and an r - 1 line item that includes a program element and subprogram element within an appropriation account ) for which appropriations , funds , or other authority were not available during fiscal year 2010 .

although the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 ( p.l .

111-383 ) , enacted on january 7 , 2011 , authorized the expenditure of appropriations for a number of military construction projects , dod has taken this section to be a barrier to the initiation of any new fy2011 construction .

none of the subsequent enacted appropriations altered this language , and dod has reported that no new fy2011 construction has yet been undertaken .

the house passed h.r .

1 , a full - year continuing appropriation , on february 19 , 2011 .

the bill would have set new fy2011 full - year appropriations amounts for each of the military construction and family housing accounts , as indicated in table a - 1 and table a - 2 in the appendix .

nevertheless , the bill failed passage in the senate .

a second full - year continuing appropriation , including funding for military construction , was introduced to the house on april 11 as division b of h.r .

1473 , the department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 .

military construction appropriations levels in that bill are also included in this report's tables .

with the exception of new construction projects , dod may be assumed to be obligating funds in each account at a rate commensurate with its fy2010 appropriation .

when a final appropriation for fy2011 is enacted , the various defense agencies and military departments will have to adjust their spending rates to end the fiscal year without exceeding their newly enacted budget authority .

the president submitted his fy2012 appropriation request for military construction and family housing to congress on february 14 , 2011 .

the overall level of funding represents a 26.2% ( $5.2 billion ) reduction below the combined title i ( military construction ) and title iv ( overseas contingency operations construction ) amount requested for fy2011 .

the major portion of that reduction ( 40.2% ) comes from the $2.1 billion less in brac 2005 funding needed to support the first post - implementation year of that program .

the president's fy2012 request is less than one - quarter of the amount needed during the last year of brac construction and movement .

much of the rest of the reduction ( $1.6 billion ) can be found in the reduced request for active component military construction , primarily drawn from the navy and marine corps account ( $1.4 billion ) .

the president also requested no funds for the overseas contingency operations construction account .

this represented $1.3 billion in his fy2011 request .

even though the base budget request includes $80 million in construction for afghanistan , this would mark a substantial reduction in construction activity in the area of the most intense u.s. military operations .

as members of congress and the defense committees consider additional continuing appropriations for fy2011 and the president's request for fy2012 , a number of questions may suggest themselves: to what extent does the delay in a fiscal year appropriation disrupt executive branch planning and commitment of construction funds ? .

can dod or the military departments efficiently obligate construction funds under a continuing appropriation ? .

how , and to what extent , will limits on government debt impact both the timing and the number of military construction projects that can be undertaken ? .

what are the possible secondary effects of a government operations shutdown should the continuing appropriations expire ? .

does the prohibition on congressionally directed spending ( "earmarks" ) limit congress's ability to exercise its constitutional power to "raise and support armies" and "provide and maintain a navy," and if so , how and to what extent ? .

is it appropriate for dod to assist local jurisdictions in absorbing the demands on infrastructure and services created by significantly increased military community size ? .

if so , what legislation is required to create the necessary authority and / or additional funding ? .

