israel's energy sector is set to undergo significant changes that could transform the country into an exporter of natural gas .

development of three recently discovered natural gas fields — tamar , dalit , and leviathan ( see figure 1 ) — is projected to begin at the end of 2012 and be completed by the end of the decade .

the estimated supplies from these fields ( see table 1 ) would enable israel to decrease its natural gas and coal imports and possibly its oil imports .

coal imports would likely be most affected as coal is currently the primary fuel for electric generation , and can be displaced by natural gas .

israel's trade balance would likely improve and its carbon dioxide emissions would likely decline as a result .

the discovery of natural gas resources has also led israel to reevaluate the nation's energy tax policy .

israel's ministry of finance has recommended tax policy changes that would increase tax revenues , but decrease potential after - tax profits for developers .

regionally , israel's success thus far has sparked interest from its neighbors to explore their boundaries for energy resources and has raised concerns from lebanon about sovereignty over the discoveries .

israel is poised to became an energy producer and perhaps even a natural gas exporter provided its recent discoveries come to fruition .

at the end of last year , noble energy , a u.s. independent energy company , reconfirmed its estimates for its third and largest natural gas discovery off the northern coast of israel .

the leviathan field has an estimated resource base of 16 trillion cubic feet ( tcf ) of natural gas , but will require at least two more appraisal wells to be drilled before the size of the resource base is better defined .

noble energy's other natural gas discoveries ( tamar and dalit ) coupled with the success of other companies puts israel in a position to be self sufficient in natural gas and possibly become a natural gas exporter , thus improving the country's energy and economic security .

since january 2009 , noble energy has made three natural gas discoveries — tamar , dalit , and leviathan — with an estimated 25 tcf of resources .

israel's natural gas reserves — natural gas that has been discovered and can be expected to be economically produced — prior to the noble energy discoveries were estimated at 1.5 tcf or about 16 years worth at current production levels .

if only half the natural gas from the new discoveries is produced at today's production levels , israel would have well over a 100-year supply of natural gas .

it is too early to know the rate of natural gas recovery from the three new fields or if other discoveries will arise , but it is highly likely that israel's energy mix will move towards natural gas by the end of the decade .

tamar's first production is expected at the end of 2012 , with dalit one or two years after that , and leviathan between 2016 and 2018 .

according to noble energy , tamar alone is expected to reach a maximum capacity of one billion cubic feet per day ( bcf / d ) by 2013 or 2014 , or over three times the rate of israeli consumption in 2009 of 0.31 bcf / d .

until 2008 , israel's demand for natural gas was met by domestic production .

an import pipeline from egypt began deliveries in 2008 and despite public discontent against the sales in egypt , the pipeline remains operational today ( figure 2 illustrates israel's natural gas consumption and highlights the effect of egyptian imports ) .

natural gas from the new fields could displace the egyptian imports , which has benefits and disadvantages for both countries .

israel pays below market prices for the natural gas it imports from egypt .

continuing the imports and using additional production to begin exports , most likely to europe or jordan , could further improve israel's energy and economic security .

eliminating the imports could improve israel's trade balance and provide greater supply security .

for egypt , stopping the exports to israel would have political advantages as the natural gas sales to israel were unpopular with egyptians and were taken into court .

the impact of the current unrest in egypt on its natural gas exports to israel is unclear .

maintaining the exports to israel could help egypt's trade balance .

the u.s. government is not directly involved in israel's oil and gas policies .

however , in the near - term , consultations regarding the energy policy and regulations would be one area that government to government interaction might take place .

israel has never been a major energy producer and must balance its normal economic and security concerns with development of this new resource .

the united states has experience related to regulatory oversight , tax policy , and environmental concerns that could benefit israel .

the regional interest from other countries to develop energy resources creates an opportunity for discussions between israel and its neighbors , bilaterally or multilaterally and directly or indirectly .

additionally , resolving the maritime demarcation issue between israel and lebanon would alleviate industry uncertainty .

