the primary legislative function of standing committees in the house of representatives is to evaluate the thousands of bills and resolutions that members introduce during each two - year congress , which are normally referred upon introduction to the appropriate committee or committees .

this evaluation process typically begins with an initial screening in which the majority - party committee leaders and staff , perhaps in conjunction with majority - party leadership , identify the relatively small number of measures referred to a committee that may merit more consideration .

a committee or one of its subcommittees might conduct one or more days of public hearings to receive testimony on the policy issues in legislation selected for action and the merits of legislation proposed to address it .

hearings might also be a part of a committee's oversight and investigations .

the house depends on its committees to undertake oversight and investigations as another principal part of the legislative authority granted congress under the constitution , and to inform the house on the need and options for further legislative action .

if a committee wants to recommend that the house take action on legislation , hearings are followed by one or more markup meetings at which committee members propose and vote on amendments to a measure ( or the draft of a measure ) .

these meetings are called " markups " because committee members "mark up" the legislation before them as they debate and decide what amendments to recommend to the house .

finally , the committee votes to approve the bill or resolution with the amendments agreed to in the markup and to report the measure to the house for chamber consideration , with the recommended amendments .

this report examines in text and tables how committees implemented house rules in their individual committee rules for the 114 th congress .

the variety as well as consistency in committee rules is analyzed as these rules relate to legislative activities , principally hearings , oversight , and markups .

administrative provisions in house and committee rules are not analyzed in this report .

provisions of committee rules applicable to legislative activities are clustered by topic , rather than by house rule number .

the rules of the house of representatives are not consistently specific concerning the procedures that committees are to follow .

there is detail in house rules on questioning of witnesses at a committee hearing , for example , but there is little guidance in house rules on the conduct of a markup .

the house , however , requires its committees to adopt rules .

rule xi , clause 2 ( a ) ( 1 ) directs each standing committee to adopt "written rules governing its procedure. .

this paragraph continues: "such rules … ( b ) may not be inconsistent with the rules of the house or with those provisions of law having the force and effect of rules of the house…. .

rule xi , clause 1 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) in addition states: "the rules of the house are the rules of its committees and subcommittees so far as applicable. .

finally , rule xi , clause 1 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) subordinates subcommittees to the committee of which they are a part: "each subcommittee is a part of its committee and is subject to the authority and direction of that committee and to its rules , so far as applicable. .

as already noted , rule xi , clause 1 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) states: "each subcommittee is a part of its committee and is subject to the authority and direction of that committee and to its rules , so far as applicable. .

a number of committees repeat this provision or a variation on it in their own rules .

some provisions of rule xi and other rules governing committee activities apply specifically to subcommittees ( eg , subpoenas ) , although other provisions of these rules do not ( eg , committee reports ) .

subcommittees do not have the power to report legislation directly to the house without specific authority granted by the house to do so .

within the parameters of house rules , committees in their own rules may grant authority to or withhold it from their subcommittees .

some committees' rules and practices provide extensive guidance concerning the prerogatives of subcommittees , while other committees' rules do not .

some committees grant a degree of autonomy and authority to their subcommittees , but the committee on small business formally limits its subcommittees to the conduct of hearings .

a rule of the foreign affairs committee retains a number of legislative topics for the committee's consideration , but another rule of the committee disallows committee consideration of a matter in the absence of a subcommittee's recommendation , except in "extraordinary circumstances" to be determined by the chair in consultation with the ranking minority member .

a committee's rules do not likely reflect all practices in a committee or within the committee's subcommittees .

some committees' rules require measures referred to the committee to be referred to a subcommittee , although other committees' rules leave the decision to refer a measure to subcommittee to the committee chair's discretion ( see table 1 ) .

several committees' rules state explicitly that the subcommittee service of a measure's author may not be a factor in referring a measure to a specific subcommittee .

the rules of a number of committees restrict subcommittees' scheduling .

 ( see , below , " scheduling subcommittee hearings and meetings ," under " scheduling committees' meetings and hearings ." ) .

a few committees provide funding or staff to subcommittees , while most committees require subcommittees to obtain funding and staff from the committee chair or ranking minority member to carry out their responsibilities .

the small business committee in its rules states that separate staff is not assigned to subcommittees .

committees meet pursuant to house and individual committee rules regarding notice , the availability of documents , open - meeting requirements , and quorums ( see " quorum requirements " below ) .

rule xi , clause 2 ( i ) prohibits committees from meeting while the house and senate are in a joint session or during a recess when a joint meeting is in progress .

rule xi , clause 2 ( m ) ( 1 ) ( a ) authorizes committees to meet and hold hearings , whether the house is in session or has recessed or adjourned , providing the meeting is in the united states .

rule xi , clause 6 allows business to be carried over to a successive session of congress , normally to the second session from the first session .

committee quorum rules are most often expressed as a portion of a committee's ( or subcommittee's ) membership or as a specific number .

a point of order would lie in committee against a committee or subcommittee proceeding in the absence of a quorum .

a chair beginning or continuing a hearing , or , especially , a markup with a quorum but with a majority of minority members , could allow challenges to be mounted by the hearing's or markup's opponents .

the failure of a committee to have a majority present to report a measure or matter , as required by house rule , will likely necessitate the committee reassembling with the proper quorum to vote again on the motion to report .

committee rules , supplemented by committee practices and ad hoc unanimous consent agreements , typically allow and regulate opening statements — short , initial statements made orally or submitted in writing by committee members on the business for which a chair has called a meeting or hearing .

a committee's rules adopted at the beginning of a congress may preclude oral opening statements or restrict them , often to oral statements made only by the chair and ranking minority member of the committee or a subcommittee .

some committees' practices also allow the relevant subcommittee chair and ranking minority member to make oral opening statements at full - committee markups , and allow a full committee's chair and ranking minority member , who serve ex officio on some or all subcommittees , to make oral opening statements at subcommittee meetings .

rules , practices , or unanimous consent agreements normally require equivalency in treatment between the majority and minority in oral opening statements where a committee allows some discretion to a chair in permitting opening statements .

by committee rule or practice or by unanimous consent , other committee members are allowed to submit opening statements in writing for the record ; these statements are not read aloud .

committee rules or practices may restrict oral opening statements to five minutes .

committees that allow more members than the chair and ranking minority member to make oral opening statements may restrict opening statements to less time , for example , three minutes or one minute , as the rules of energy and commerce committee provide in certain circumstances .

committees as an alternative might also cap the total time for opening statements , as the rules of the financial services committee and the science , space , and technology committee do .

the science committee , nonetheless , makes five minutes available to the ex officio members of its subcommittees if such a member requests it .

the education and the workforce committee by rule disallows oral opening statements .

if , however , the chair wishes to make an oral statement , the ranking minority member is also entitled to make one .

a rule of the natural resources committee is similar , but extends the prerogative of an oral opening statement to the vice chair as well .

if the vice chair chooses to make an oral statement , the ranking minority member may designate a minority member to also speak .

a rule of the homeland security committee allows the chair with the concurrence of the ranking minority member to permit opening statements in addition to their own .

at the commencement of a hearing , a chair must announce the "subject" of a hearing ( rule xi , clause 2 ( k ) ( 1 ) ) .

chairs may incorporate this requirement into their own opening statements .

 ( see also , above , " notice and documents " under " scheduling committees' meetings and hearings ." ) .

a standing committee is authorized in house rules to "hold such hearings as it considers necessary. .

 ( rule xi , clause 2 ( m ) ( 1 ) ( a ) . ) .

at the commencement of a hearing , a chair must announce the "subject" of the hearing ( rule xi , clause 2 ( k ) ( 1 ) ) .

 ( see also , above , " notice and documents " under " scheduling committees' meetings and hearings ." ) .

pursuant to rule xi , clause 2 ( k ) ( 4 ) , a chair is charged with keeping order in a hearing , and empowered to punish "breaches of order and decorum. .

a chair's enforcement may be directed at the actions of anyone in the hearing room , including the "professional ethics" of a witness's counsel .

the chair may punish breaches of order and decorum by censure and by exclusion of the individual from the hearing .

the committee may cite an individual to the house for contempt .

 ( see also , above , " media coverage " under " scheduling committees' meetings and hearings ." ) .

pursuant to rule xi , clause 2 ( m ) ( 2 ) , the chair of a committee or a member designated by the chair may administer oaths to witnesses .

as explained above , rule xi , clause 2 ( h ) ( 2 ) requires a quorum of two members to receive testimony .

 ( see " hearings ," under " quorum requirements ." ) .

hearings rules specifically related to witnesses , including presenting testimony in executive session , are discussed below ( see " witnesses " ) .

additional discussion of conducting a hearing in executive session appears above ( see " open and closed meetings " under " scheduling committees' meetings and hearings ." ) .

see generally the discussion above of rules applicable to meetings and hearings ( " scheduling committees' meetings and hearings ." ) .

rule xi , clause 2 ( m ) ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) authorizes committees and subcommittees to issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents .

clause 2 ( m ) ( 3 ) requires authorization by a committee or subcommittee , "a majority being present. .

 ( see also " meetings " under " quorum requirements " , above. ) .

unless otherwise provided in their rules , a quorum of one - third is required to debate a subpoena , under rule xi , clause 2 ( h ) ( 3 ) .

rule xi , clause 2 ( m ) ( 3 ) also allows committees to adopt rules to delegate the authorization and issuance of subpoenas to a committee's chair "under such rules and under such limitations as the committee may prescribe. .

many committees in their rules have delegated authority to issue subpoenas to their chair , but have imposed requirements for consultation or notification on chairs that vary from committee to committee .

this same subparagraph requires subpoenas to be signed by the chair or a member designated by the committee .

rule xi , clause 2 ( m ) ( 3 ) ( b ) allows a committee or subcommittee to designate another return than at a meeting or hearing .

clause 2 ( m ) ( 3 ) ( c ) allows enforcement of a subpoena only as authorized or directed by the house .

if a committee meets to consider a subpoena , it meets in a markup session , and members may offer amendments and motions , make points of order , and engage the procedures and procedural strategy that could occur in a markup of legislation .

the house office of general counsel maintains standard forms related to subpoenas to assist committees , although some committees , such as oversight and government reform , have long experience with subpoenaing witnesses and documents from federal government officials and agencies and from outside of government .

committees have both legislative and oversight jurisdiction .

the former refers to the authority of a committee to report legislation on subject matter .

the latter refers to the authority to conduct oversight on subject matter .

although oversight jurisdiction may be the product of a specific legislative enactment , it also accrues where committees have responsibilities for broad subject areas .

hence , overlaps in oversight jurisdiction among committees are more likely to occur than overlaps in legislative jurisdiction .

house rules contain few rules on committee markups and do not state which of the chamber's rules are applicable to committees and their subcommittees in markups .

house rules contain different sets of procedures that the house uses under different circumstances to consider various bills and resolutions .

it would be not be possible for all of these procedures to be applicable to committees or applicable at the same time .

it would also not be possible for committees to adopt rules that avoid inconsistency with all house procedures .

the house parliamentarian , however , has provided important guidance relevant to committee markups in the parliamentarian's notes to section xxx of jefferson's manual: "the procedures applicable in the house as in the committee of the whole generally apply to proceedings in committees of the house of representatives.... " the phrase "house as in the committee of the whole" refers to a distinctive set of procedures that the house may , but rarely does , use to consider measures .

these procedures are not listed in the house's rules ; rather , they are a matter of well - established precedent .

for example , the motion for the previous question is available in the house and in the house as in the committee of the whole , although it is not available in the committee of the whole .

as the phrase suggests , the procedures applicable in the house as in the committee of the whole combine elements of the procedures that apply in the house and those that are followed in committee of the whole house on the state of the union ( the committee of the whole ) .

although no house rule specifically requires committees to follow these procedures in marking up legislation , committees typically do follow them — unless a committee agrees by unanimous consent to diverge from these procedures .

to the extent feasible or applicable , house rules and precedents on reading measures , amending , voting , and other aspects of legislative procedures , including the authority of the presiding officer , are employed in committee and subcommittee markups .

there are in addition some well - established procedures in committees that differ from the procedures of the house as in the committee of the whole .

for example , in the house as in the committee of the whole , a measure is considered as read and open to amendment at any point .

however , the same parliamentarian's notes that indicate that the procedures of the house as in committee of the whole "generally apply" in committee proceedings also state , "except that a measure considered in committee must be read ( by section ) for amendment…. .

based on the parliamentarian's guidance and house rules , the key procedures applicable to house committees in the markup process are then as follows: first reading .

a measure is first read in full .

pursuant to rule xi , clause 1 ( a ) ( 2 ) , this first reading may be waived by a privileged , nondebatable motion , if printed copies of the measure are available .

reading sections ( or paragraphs ) of a measure .

a section ( or paragraph ) of a measure must be read verbatim before committee members offer amendments to it .

this reading may be waived only by unanimous consent .

reading a measure for amendment .

a measure must be read for amendment one section ( or , if so organized , one paragraph ) at a time , unless the committee agrees by unanimous consent to another reading procedure .

members offer their amendments to each section of a measure after that section has been read and before the next section is read .

a committee may consider a measure as open for amendment in another way ( eg , by title or at any point or by use of an amendment roster ) only by unanimous consent .

reading amendments .

each amendment must be read before debate on it begins .

reading of an amendment may be waived only by unanimous consent .

debate .

all debate on amendments and the legislative vehicle is conducted under the five - minute rule .

the chair normally entertains parliamentary inquiries and debate on points of order at his or her discretion .

discussion under reservations of the right to object to a unanimous consent request is by practice normally brief , but is not limited by the five - minute rule .

motion to limit or close debate .

a committee member may move to limit or close debate on a pending section ( and all amendments thereto ) or on a pending amendment ( and all amendments thereto ) .

this motion may provide that debate end immediately , at a certain time , or after a specified number of minutes or hours .

a motion is not in order to close debate on an entire measure if any portion of the measure has not yet been read .

previous question .

a nondebatable motion to close debate does precisely that: it stops the debate .

it does not prevent committee members from offering additional amendments .

to end debate and preclude further amendments , a member may move the previous question on a pending amendment and all amendments thereto .

a member may also move the previous question on an entire measure ( and all amendments thereto ) only after the measure has been read in full .

vote to report .

after a committee disposes of the last amendment to a measure , it votes on a motion to report the measure , together with any amendments the committee has agreed to .

the committee does not vote on passing the measure , and amendments agreed to are not changes to the measure but recommendations to the house for change .

a majority of a committee must be "actually present" to vote to report a measure .

additional sections , above , of this report also explain the conduct of committee markups .

regarding scheduling , see " notice and documents " and " scheduling subcommittee hearings and meetings . .

concerning markups being conducted as open meetings , see " open and closed meetings " and " media coverage . .

regarding quorums , see " meetings " under " quorum requirements . .

see also , below , " reports .

three motions specific to committees are authorized in rule xi .

rule xi , clause 1 ( a ) ( 2 ) provides a privileged motion to recess , either recessing subject to a call of the chair within a 24-hour period or recessing day to day .

the motion to recess is not debatable .

pursuant to rule xi , clause 1 ( a ) ( 2 ) , the first reading of a measure may be waived at a markup by a privileged , nondebatable motion , if printed copies of the measure are available .

rule xi , clause 2 ( a ) ( 3 ) allows committees to adopt a rule to direct the committee's chair to offer a motion in the house under rule xxii , clause 1 whenever the chair considers it appropriate .

such a rule provides authority for a chair at his or her discretion to initiate a request for or to agree to conference with the senate in lieu of a specific committee authorization to a chair required by rule xxii , clause 1 .

otherwise , rule xxii , clause 1 allows the speaker to recognize the chair of the "primary committee" to make a motion to disagree to senate amendments to a house proposition and to request or agree to a conference or to make a motion to insist on house amendments to a senate proposition and to request or agree to conference .

numerous other motions and requests , based on house rules or precedents applicable to the house as in the committee of the whole , are available in committees .

a chair and individual members might also ask for unanimous consent to take procedural actions that violate a rule or precedent ; individual members might pose parliamentary inquiries to a chair ; and individual members might reserve or make points of order .

motions and requests can be used to facilitate committee action , to reach agreement , or to impede or delay committee action .

rule xi , clause 1 ( a ) ( 2 ) establishes a privileged motion to recess a committee ( or subcommittee ) subject to the call of the chair within a 24-hour period , or to recess day to day .

this motion is not debatable .

obtaining a record vote rule xx , clause 1 ( b ) states that a recorded vote in the house , when requested by a member , will be taken if one - fifth of a quorum supports the request .

there is not a specific house rule applicable to obtaining a vote in committee .

rule xi , clause 2 ( h ) ( 1 ) states , however , that committees may not report any measure or recommendation unless a majority of the committee is actually present .

as shown in table 5 , sixteen committees specify the procedures to obtain a recorded vote in their rules .

the ethics committee's rules address recorded votes .

four committees do not have a rule on obtaining a recorded vote: homeland security , judiciary , ways and means , and intelligence .

these committees may follow the house rule , requiring a quorum to be present and the support of one - fifth of the members to obtain a recorded vote ; may allow an individual member to call for a roll - call vote ; or may follow another practice .

the word "report" has several meanings in congress .

the chair of a committee or subcommittee or the presiding officer in the house or the committee of the whole might direct a clerk to report a measure or amendment .

depending on the parliamentary circumstances , the clerk is being directed to read the title or text of a measure or to read or designate an amendment .

at the conclusion of a committee markup , a committee member typically makes a motion to report the marked - up measure to the parent chamber .

assuming that a majority is "actually present" to vote on this motion , as required by rule xi , clause 2 ( h ) ( 1 ) , and that the motion is agreed to , the chair must promptly report the measure to the house by submitting it to the clerk of the house for printing and reference to the appropriate calendar .

 ( see the explanation of filing adverse reports and of filing reports on privileged legislation below , " filing ." ) .

"report" may also be a noun .

when a committee approves a motion to report , it normally writes a report explaining the measure and advocating its passage by the house with any amendment ( s ) recommended by the committee .

 ( what immediately follow are the requirements in house rules for the content of a house committee report. ) .

report is also used to designate a committee document submitted to the house on a committee investigation , study , or other activity .

rule x , clause 4 ( f ) requires each standing committee to submit to the budget committee its views and estimates six weeks after the president transmits the executive budget to congress .

this clause also requires the ways and means committee , after undertaking public hearings , to recommend in its submission an "appropriate level" of public debt to be included in the concurrent resolution on the budget .

a rule of the budget committee governs information the committee provides to the speaker in fulfillment of its duties under the congressional budget act to inform floor debate on measures with a budgetary effect .

this information is contained in the parliamentarian's status report and the section 302 status report .

another rule provides the committee chair with the opportunity to consult committee members on recommendations to the rules committee on waivers of budget act points of order .

modifications to the budget committee's reports and roles are regularly included as separate orders in the biennial rules packages .

rule x , clause 6 governs aspects of committee expense resolutions reported by the house administration committee .

rule xi , clause 1 ( b ) ( 1 ) allows committees to conduct "investigations and studies" subject to any expense resolution adopted pursuant to rule x , clause 6 .

