biomass energy , or bioenergy , may receive more attention from stakeholders as an alternative to fossil fuels because of its potential to minimize the environmental impacts of energy production , provide energy security , and promote economic development .

biomass is organic matter — woody biomass , agricultural biomass , animal wastes , and aquatic biomass — that can be converted to energy ( eg , heat , electricity , or liquid transportation fuels ) .

one form of bioenergy is biopower , electricity generated from biomass ( eg , paper mill residues ) .

as federal and state governments and others dedicate more resources to biopower , these same government agencies , along with environmentalists , biomass feedstock producers , and others , are paying more attention to the biopower carbon - neutrality issue .

the carbon - neutral designation typically is assigned to an energy - production activity that essentially produces no net increase in greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions on a life - cycle basis ( or one that absorbs the amount of carbon dioxide emitted during the power - production cycle ) .

where biopower stands among the other renewable energy sources with respect to ghg emissions may affect the level of future legislative support granted to it .

many views exist about whether biopower is carbon neutral and how its net carbon status is determined .

some biomass feedstock producers and biopower generators , among other stakeholders , contend that biopower is carbon neutral because the carbon released during bioenergy production comes from a feedstock that removed the carbon from the atmosphere as it was growing — biomass .

some environmentalists , among others , argue that biopower is not carbon neutral because the amount of ghg emissions released per unit of energy during simple biopower combustion may be higher for certain biomass fuels than for fossil fuels or because , even if the ghg emissions from certain biomass fuels are lower than those from fossil fuels , they are still not zero .

stakeholders often base their perspectives on differing assumptions , technologies , and time frames .

the debate concerning biopower's designation as carbon neutral may intensify , given possible congressional and administration decisions .

congress may consider legislation involving biopower ( eg , under renewable energy and clean energy assistance and energy efficiency ) .

additionally , biopower production may receive increased attention due to executive branch actions , such as the u.s. environmental protection agency's ( epa's ) clean power plan and epa's proposed framework to account for emissions of biogenic carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) from stationary sources .

this report discusses some factors taken into account when considering whether biopower is carbon neutral .

it does not discuss carbon accounting for other bioenergy pathways .

the carbon cycle encompasses the many pathways through which carbon is exchanged between the atmosphere and the land and water .

human activities ( also called anthropogenic activities ) contribute to the carbon cycle by emitting co 2 .

the human contribution of co 2 to the carbon cycle is relatively small compared to other contributions , but co 2 released to the atmosphere from human activities is taken up by soils , vegetation , and the ocean at a slower rate than the rate at which human activities are emitting co 2 .

if the excess carbon is not stored in land and ocean sinks , the atmospheric concentration of co 2 increases , potentially impacting the earth's climate .

one significant anthropogenic source of co 2 is energy production .

the net effect of an energy activity on the carbon cycle can be classified in one of three ways .

a carbon - positive activity releases co 2 into the atmosphere .

a carbon - negative activity removes more co 2 from the atmosphere than it emits .

a carbon - neutral activity is one in which the co 2 release and absorption are essentially in balance .

no commonly accepted definition for a carbon - neutral activity exists in the biopower arena .

those involved with bioenergy have put forth multiple assertions about carbon neutrality , including the following: biomass energy is carbon neutral because biomass is naturally carbon neutral .

the premise is that if biomass is carbon neutral , then any product resulting from its use is also carbon neutral .

biomass energy is carbon neutral if growing the biomass removes as much co 2 as is emitted into the atmosphere from its combustion .

biomass energy is carbon neutral only if the net life - cycle emissions are zero .

emissions include the emissions from the cultivation , harvest , and transportation of the biomass , as well as from its combustion .

biomass energy is carbon neutral if it achieves lower net increases in atmospheric ghgs when compared to alternative energy activities .

each assertion raises issues .

for instance , declaring that biomass energy is carbon neutral because biomass is naturally carbon neutral does not account for ghg emissions released due to management of crops grown for energy production ( eg , fertilizer ) .

in addition , there may need to be additional plantings of certain biomass feedstocks to remove the co 2 emitted from biomass cultivated for energy production .

the carbon cycles for a bioenergy system and a fossil fuel system differ in at least two ways: the carbon source ( finite versus renewable ) and the atmospheric carbon concentration ( potentially stable versus additional ; see figure 1 ) .

three main factors contribute to the amount of carbon emitted from biopower generation: feedstock production ( cultivation and harvest ) , feedstock transport , and the biopower technology type .

however , as noted by many sources , feedstock production also absorbs carbon during growth .

whether and how to conduct ghg emission accounting for biopower are issues that have been under consideration for the last few years .

ghg emission accounting can be used to compare the environmental footprint of a biopower operation with that of a conventional fossil fuel operation ( eg , electricity from coal or natural gas ) .

a life - cycle assessment ( lca ) is one method to calculate the environmental footprint .

the lca is an analytic method for identifying , evaluating , and comparing the environmental impacts of emissions and the resource depletion associated with a specific process .

an lca generally uses observed data and assumptions to model what ghgs are being released at each phase of the process .

ideally , an lca would encompass economic and social factors for a more comprehensive assessment ( eg , job growth , poverty ) .

however , most lcas focus exclusively on emissions and fossil fuel consumption .

an lca can be one element used in assessing a preferred energy approach , along with cost and performance data .

in some cases , even if lca results favor a particular approach , an lca alone might not be the deciding factor when choosing an energy process ; financial objectives , policy goals , and other factors may influence which approach is selected .

ghg accounting with an lca can be performed at each phase of the biopower pathway: biomass cultivation and harvest , biomass transport , electricity generation , electricity transmission and distribution , and electricity end use ( figure 2 ) .

the first three phases of the biopower pathway ( cultivation and harvest , transport , and electricity generation ) are where the bulk of ghg emissions occur .

ghg flux during the first three phases is site and operation specific and depends on many factors , including the biomass type , management strategies , and biopower generation technology .

published lcas for biopower are limited and , as noted above , may not be applicable to specific cases .

the lcas performed often are tailored to one feedstock and one biopower technology type , and lca results vary depending on assumptions such as the time frame of the assessment .

the lca time frame can be long ( eg , "cradle to grave" ) or relatively short ( eg , "cradle to gate" ) .

different lca time frames can lead to radically different , even contradictory , results .

the majority of biopower lcas were completed for two biopower technology types: combustion and gasification .

both technologies have strengths and weaknesses .

the technology to co - fire ( or combust ) biomass with coal is available at commercial scale and is in use today .

gasification technology is in the development and demonstration phase .

although biopower lcas are scarce compared to liquid transportation biofuel lcas , certain trends appear in existing assessments .

for instance , the national renewable energy laboratory ( nrel ) reviewed and analyzed 57 biopower lcas .

the nrel review shows that biopower reduces ghg emissions when compared with fossil - based generation of electricity .

elsewhere , some members of the academic community reviewed more than 25 lcas .

they determined that biopower is in the top tier of bioenergy pathways that avoid the most ghg emissions and replace the largest amounts of fossil energy .

approximately 15 of the lcas reviewed included electricity as an end product , of which at least 10 had an lca time frame of when the feedstock was extracted to when the biopower was produced ( eg , cradle to gate ) .

there is an ongoing discussion about the foundation and underlying assumptions of lcas , ghg modeling , and other methodologies used to evaluate the carbon impact of bioenergy .

some members of the academic community assert that the methodologies do not sufficiently address land use ( eg , land available to satisfy energy , food , and feed needs ) and incorrectly account for biomass ( eg , double counting biomass ) .

they contend that some biofuel systems and fossil fuel systems may not be compared easily using some of the methodologies that exist , among other concerns .

others maintain that some of these issues have been addressed , specifically that land - use concerns stem from multiple factors , not just bioenergy , that increased productivity ( eg , rising crop yields ) must be considered when discussing global food and feed requirements , and that crops used for bioenergy have the ability to naturally re - sequester carbon under certain circumstances .

certain actions have kept the biomass carbon - neutrality issue a concern for the bioenergy and environmental communities , among others .

most notable are epa's standards for greenhouse gas emissions from existing fossil - fueled power plants ( eg , the clean power plan ) , epa's 2014 framework for assessing biogenic co 2 emissions from stationary sources , and epa's permitting requirements under the clean air act ( caa ) .

there are some key points to consider about the regulation of biogenic co 2 sources .

first , epa is in the process of comprehensively assessing the ghg classification for biogenic co 2 sources ( which it is doing with the release of the second framework for assessing biogenic co 2 emissions ) .

stakeholders likely will contest in the courts any decision the agency makes regarding these sources , although there is little to no precedent for the courts to follow .

second , epa , thus far , has received no guidance from the courts ( or the sab ) about how to exempt biogenic co 2 sources from psd requirements .

the court stopped current practices without offering alternatives .

third , the legal and regulatory struggles over biogenic co 2 sources reflect a larger issue: congress's bioenergy policy typically has not included carbon accounting for bioenergy , with an exception for the renewable fuel standard .

thus , it is not clear if congress would treat biopower differently from other types of power generated from conventional energy and renewable energy sources .

if epa is to carry out the bioenergy legal requirements in a timely fashion , it may need better and more explicit direction from congress .

such direction might include providing epa with a predetermined amount of time — free of legal intrusions — to resolve issues with stakeholder and public input .

carbon neutrality for biopower is calculated most accurately based on the carbon flux ( i.e. , ghg emission or sequestration ) of several parameters over a specified time period .

these parameters include at least the following: ( 1 ) the feedstock type ; ( 2 ) the management and procurement of the energy source ( in the case of biomass , how the feedstock is managed and harvested ) ; ( 3 ) the feedstock transportation method ; ( 4 ) the energy generation technology ; and ( 5 ) the time frame to replenish the feedstock .

carbon flux attributed to the management and procurement of biomass feedstock deviates according to the type or mixture of feedstock used .

for instance , agricultural biomass entails a different nutrient management plan than woody biomass .

ghg emissions may be higher for agricultural biomass due to fertilizer treatments ( eg , emissions from the ghg nitrous oxide from biofuel - dedicated crops ) .

carbon flux also will vary given how the biomass feedstock is harvested .

for example , removal of woody biomass ( eg , thinnings ) in large quantities may reduce carbon , and some methane , emissions on a co 2 - equivalent basis that would have been released if the woody biomass remained in the forest to decompose .

biomass - feedstock transport emits differing amounts of ghgs depending on how far one transports the feedstock and on fossil fuel usage .

the carbon flux of the biopower generation technology will depend on the type of technology and any emission capture or sequestration .

in addition , the time frame ( eg , 40 years , 100 years ) assigned for biomass feedstock replenishment will determine co 2 sequestration rates to balance out the ghgs emitted during biomass combustion , particularly for woody biomass , as growth periods ( rotation ages for the trees ) are often measured in decades .

it could be argued that only an lca for each biopower operation can accurately determine whether biopower generation is carbon neutral .

such an lca would measure carbon flux for each phase of the biopower pathway and incorporate biomass feedstock replenishment .

a standard approach to performing a biopower lca could ensure uniformity in ghg accounting across the biopower sector .

however , multiple lcas can be expensive and time - consuming to complete .

biopower's carbon neutrality is a contentious aspect of the bioenergy debate .

one reason the topic is so controversial is concern about unsustainable harvests of biomass feedstocks .

some environmentalists , among others , contend that if biopower proceeds with no carbon balance restrictions , it could lead to , for example , large amounts of woody biomass removal for energy production .

another reason for controversy is concern about the air quality of areas surrounding biopower plants , especially if particulate matter and select compounds from a plant exceed certain limits .

these two concerns — sustainability and air quality — can be , and in some cases already are , addressed through other avenues ( eg , sustainability requirements , air - quality regulations ) at the federal and state levels .

congress may be prompted to further analyze the carbon status of biopower with congressional oversight or review due to recent and forthcoming developments ( eg , epa's decisions regarding "qualified biomass" for the cpp and the framework to account for emissions of biogenic co 2 from stationary sources ) .

biopower can be produced using multiple biomass feedstocks and technologies .

each feedstock and technology has its own environmental footprint .

the time frame to analyze carbon neutrality is relevant because such an analysis would incorporate feedstock replenishment , and thus co 2 removal rates , and consider technology developments .

congress could decide to use existing legislative authorities to address carbon accounting for biopower .

federal environmental regulatory controls exist for the three chief environmental concerns associated with a biopower plant — air quality , use of public land , and water discharges .

ghg emissions may be accounted for with federal regulations regarding air quality .

in addition , a biopower plant also has to meet state regulatory standards , which in some cases may be stricter than the federal regulatory controls .

to the extent carbon neutrality continues to be a legislative concern , congress could examine whether the current carbon - neutral assumption for biopower is adequate .

congress may consider if additional carbon accounting for biopower is warranted and what impact this accounting might have on renewable energy , agricultural , and environmental legislative goals .

a key contributor to this discussion may be whether decisions concerning biopower made by the executive branch contradict legislative goals set by congress .

a full carbon accounting for biopower could result in slowing the achievement of multiple renewable energy , agricultural , and environmental goals .

alternatively , the carbon - neutrality debate for biopower may lead to requests for carbon accounting of some or all energy ventures — renewable and conventional .

lastly , an ill - defined carbon accounting assessment for biopower may limit public and private investment , feedstock production , and more .

scientists , investors , biomass producers , and others may hesitate to expend time and money on expanding biopower efforts if they are not certain about the future contribution of biopower to u.s. energy and environmental goals .

if congress chooses to address energy security and ghg emission increases , some stakeholders have argued that these goals could be met through the creation of a national renewable electricity standard ( res ) or a clean electricity standard ( ces ) .

the mandate of a potential national res or ces may require substantial quantities of baseload power , which some policymakers and others see as being achieved by using biopower .

if biopower is a part of an res or ces , the carbon - neutrality designation of biopower may need to be considered in response to environmental and sustainability concerns .

