congress plays a major role in formulating and implementing u.s. trade policy through its constitutional role in regulating foreign commerce .

this role includes providing authority to the president to conclude trade agreements to eliminate and reduce tariff and non - tariff barriers to u.s. trade with other countries .

for members of congress , trade can be a difficult issue , because decisions that liberalize trade flows have mixed effects on u.s. domestic and foreign interests , both economic and political .

historically , congress has supported policies to open international markets to u.s. goods , services , and agriculture .

it also has weighed carefully the economic impact of trade agreements to asses their benefits and costs .

congress also has enacted targeted adjustment assistance programs to provide training and other assistance to help workers and firms that may be dislocated by greater market opening adjust to new economic opportunities .

anticipating congressional consideration of a free trade agreement between the united states and south korea ( korus fta ) , a number of groups offered estimates to quantify potential effects of the fta on u.s. employment .

this report discusses the models used to estimate the employment effects of the agreement and their various assumptions , necessary in order for the model to generate results .

invariably , these assumptions determine to some extent the results that are generated and , therefore , limit their representation of the real world economy .

the models also are highly sensitive to assumptions used to establish the parameters of the models and are hampered by a lack of data in some areas .

in general , the various economic models provide differing estimates of the magnitude of changes in u.s. employment that could arise from a trade agreement with south korea , reflecting different assumptions and conditions .

both advocates and opponents of the korus fta cite results of these studies to support their position .

each of these models has strengths and weaknesses and varies in the degree to which it reflects economic reality .

these models are discussed at greater length in the analyses that follow .

in addition , the potential job effects need to be viewed in terms of their relative share of u.s. employment .

estimates from the studies range from as many as 280,000 jobs potentially gained to 159,000 jobs potentially lost over the ten - year implementation period of the korus - fta .

middle - range estimates include one often cited by the obama administration , which suggests that the korus fta would support 70,000 export jobs .

at the other end of the spectrum , other estimates suggested that the united states could lose 345,017 jobs over ten years if the united states did not approve and implement the korus - fta but the european union ( eu ) and canada implemented their ftas with south korea .

none of these estimates , which represent gains or losses in employment over a ten - year period , account for more than 1.4% of total goods - producing employment , or 0.26% of total employment in the u.s. economy in 2009 .

none of these studies , however , draws a direct link between any expected changes in trade from a change in tariffs and subsequent changes in employment .

these estimates reflect different methodologies and assumptions , and a partial accounting of the total economic effects of such agreements .

for instance , the agreement includes provisions on trade in goods , services , and investment .

due to the complexities involved and a lack of data , nearly all estimates focus only on changes in goods - producing employment .

as a result , they do not serve well as an indicator of the overall impact of the agreement on the economy .

the estimates selected for analysis are the following .

u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) : u.s - korea free trade agreement potential economy - wide and selected sectoral effects the university of michigan: economic effects of a korea - u.s. free trade agreement u.s. - korea business council: failure to implement the u.s. - korea free tr ade agreement: the cost for american workers and companies economic policy institute ( epi ) : trade policy and job loss: u.s. trade deals with colombia and korea will be costl y in addition , two other estimates , derived by the usitc and released by the obama administration and the majority staff of the senate finance committee trade subcommittee , are reported .

congress has demonstrated an ongoing interest in concluding trade agreements to eliminate and reduce barriers to u.s. trade in goods , services , and agriculture , and it has assumed a direct role in assessing the impact of trade agreements on the u.s. economy .

this report provides background and context for the analyses of the various estimates .

it summarizes congressional interest in the issue and then examines the specific estimates — their findings , assumptions , methodologies , and the limitations of those methodologies .

finally , it explains the broader macroeconomic and microeconomic context in which the composition of employment within the economy is affected by a new trade agreement .

although discussions of trade agreements often focus on potential employment gains or losses , most economists argue that such employment estimates represent a partial accounting of the total economic effects of trade agreements and , therefore , do not perform well as an indicator of the overall impact of the agreement on the economy .

as this report attempts to explain , estimating such employment effects is imprecise and highly sensitive to the assumptions that are used .

in addition , while trade agreements generally are comprehensive in nature and cover goods , services , and investment , most employment estimates focus narrowly on the goods sector and do not adequately represent the total impact of the agreements .

it is difficult to estimate precisely the employment effects associated with liberalizing trade in services and reducing or eliminating barriers to investment flows .

trade in services , in particular , is characterized by a broad array of formal and informal barriers that challenge efforts to translate the barriers into tariff - equivalent values .

negotiations to reduce barriers to trade in services , however , potentially could have a very large and positive effect on the u.s. economy , since the united states is highly competitive in a number of services sectors and u.s. direct investment abroad often spurs exports .

finally , estimates of employment arising from ftas , by themselves , do not account for a broad range of benefits for the economy as a whole .

for example , ftas may provide individual consumers and firms with broader economic benefits and yield broad productivity and efficiency gains for the economy over the long run that may enhance employment .

while most economic trade models attempt to model consumer and corporate behavior associated with changes in income , the results of the models depend on a number of factors , including the way changes in prices are passed along to consumers .

most estimates generally assume that the changes in tariffs and , therefore , changes in the prices of goods , will be adopted at the time the agreement is signed and then the annual changes in traded goods are aggregated over ten years .

in fact , in the korus - fta , some tariffs will drop to zero immediately , while others will be implemented in tariff reduction stages over ten years , with the impact on prices accruing over time .

in the models , expected changes in the trade in services generally are treated as exogenous factors and must be specified outside the model itself .

a key assumption used in generating a number of the estimates of the impact of the korus - fta is the level of employment in the u.s. economy during the ten - year period required to phase in the agreement .

none of these estimates , however , generate precise estimates of the exact number of jobs to be gained or lost , but generate estimates that reflect the relative magnitude of changes in employment that could be expected over ten years , provided that all other things remain constant .

one approach assumes that the u.s. economy operates at a level of full employment over the next decade and holds the level of employment in the economy stable while wage rates are allowed to adjust .

a second approach , and one that has been used extensively to derive many of the estimates evaluated in this report , assumes that the economy is marked by a rate of unemployment that reflects current economic conditions , or an economy that is operating at less than full employment .

this assumption , more than any other , seems to be the most important factor generating estimates of employment effects under the korus - fta .

while the u.s. economy currently is operating at less than full employment , it seems reasonable to assume that over the next ten years the economy will return to its long - term trend that is closer to full employment as the economy recovers from the most severe economic recession in the post - world war ii period .

trade models of the type used in the analysis of free trade agreements are part of a class of economic models referred to as computable general equilibrium models ( cge ) that incorporate data on trade and a range of domestic economic variables on nearly 100 countries .

as a result of this large number of countries , and the vast amounts of data that are a part of the model , the models can provide important insights into the mechanisms by which changes in tariffs or other parameters can affect a range of countries .

for practical reasons , however , the data in the models must be limited , so the models necessarily must sacrifice some level of precision in their estimating abilities .

since such trade models originally were developed with the intent of analyzing the economic effects of multi - country trade agreements such as the uruguay round , this lack of precision was not considered to be an important drawback .

however , this lack of precision may be an issue when the models are used to estimate the effects of bilateral trade agreements where the overall amount of trade and , therefore , the impact of the agreement , is expected to be less than that of a comprehensive multilateral agreement .

in addition , such models do not account for changes in exchange rates , since such effects were considered to be neutral in a large multi - country trade agreement .

movements in exchange rates , however , could have an important impact on trade patterns that involve countries that are parties to a bilateral trade agreement .

with floating exchange rates , movements in those rates can have an important effect on the prices of internationally - traded goods .

figure 1 shows the movement of the internationally trade value of the won relative to the dollar and the euro and movements in the dollar - euro relationship , indexed to january 2005 .

in this presentation , a rise in the index indicates a depreciation in the value of the won relative to the dollar and the euro and the depreciation of the dollar relative to the euro between january 2006 and january 2011 .

between january 2008 and january 2009 , the won depreciated about 44% against the dollar and 30% against the euro largely due to a flight to the dollar during the financial crisis , a sharp drop in capital inflows to south korea , and the largest annual drop in south korean exports on record .

after recovering somewhat between january 2009 and mid - 2010 , the won experienced another bout of depreciation relative to the dollar and the euro as international markets became more cautious as a result of financial problems in greece , ireland and other european countries and concerns over political developments in neighboring north korea .

by february 2011 , the won remained 19% and 10% below its value in january 2008 relative to the dollar and the euro , respectively .

such changes in the value of the won relative to the dollar and the euro would have a significant impact on the prices of goods to and from south korea and possibly eclipse the relatively small changes in tariff rates included under the respective ftas .

since the korus fta was signed in 2007 , a number of estimates of the potential effects of the korus fta have been released that attempt to estimate the effect of the trade agreement on u.s. employment .

the estimates range from 280,000 jobs gained to a loss of 159,000 jobs if the united states does adopt the agreement .

two of the estimates are based on standard economic modeling , two others were developed by the usitc , and two represent estimates derived from unique approaches .

table 1 summarizes all six estimates .

these estimates will be discussed in greater detail below .

the two standard model estimates were undertaken by the usitc and the university of michigan .

neither of these efforts estimated the total number of u.s. jobs created or lost by the korus fta .

but focused instead on potential economy - wide trade effects and sectoral shares of those effects .

in contrast , two other approaches by the u.s. - korea business council and the economic policy institute , attempted to estimate employment effects of the korus fta indirectly .

in a dynamic economy such as the united states , jobs are constantly being created and replaced as some economic activities expand , while others contract , reflecting broad macroeconomic developments .

in this process , various industries and sectors evolve over time at different speeds , reflecting differences in technological advancement , productivity , and efficiency .

those sectors that are the most successful in developing or incorporating new technological advancements generate greater economic rewards and are capable of attracting greater amounts of capital and labor .

in contrast , those sectors or individual firms that lag behind are less capable of attracting capital and labor and confront ever - increasing competitive challenges .

indeed , depending on the overall state of the economy , some sectors may need to relinquish some capital and labor in order for others sectors to grow to avoid economic stagnation .

also , advances in communications and technology have facilitated a global transformation of economic production into sophisticated supply chains that span national borders and defy traditional concepts of trade that potentially could involve a greater share of the labor force in trade - related activities .

how firms respond to these challenges likely will determine their long - term viability in the market place .

at the plant level , job openings may come from new business openings or from expansions at existing facilities , including those that are used to support increased exports .

job losses may come from voluntary departures , involuntary discharges , or from business closures for any reason , including bankruptcy , personal choice , inability to compete in the domestic market , import competition , or production shifts .

the bureau of labor statistics , business employment dynamics ( bed ) report tracks gross jobs gained and lost in the economy as a whole and in specific sectors and reveals the dynamics underlying gross changes in employment .

as appendix a shows , 15% of total u.s. employment in 2010 was in the goods - producing industries , while the services - producing industries accounted for 68% of the employed population .

the remaining 17% of employment was in the government sector , with employment at the state and local government level accounting for 15% and the federal government sector accounting for 2 .

in the current highly globalized economy , international trade has come to represent a complex set of transactions .

nations not only trade goods and services , but they also trade a broad range of financial products .

in addition , liberalized capital flows and floating exchange rates have greatly expanded the amount of capital that flows between countries .

basically , trade represents an exchange of goods or services between two or more willing parties .

such trade allows nations to use their resources more efficiently in order to maximize the total amount of goods and services that are available to their citizens , a common definition of a nation's standard of living .

as a result of this maximization process , nations trade because it serves their national interests .

in the same way that individuals gain by specializing in activities that use their strongest skills and then trade with others , nations specialize in the production of certain goods and then trade with other nations for the goods they do not produce .

essentially , nations export in order to import goods and services they do not produce , or cannot produce efficiently .

in a joint project , the department of commerce ( doc ) , bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) , and the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) , estimated the average number of jobs supported by exports in the u.s. economy based on the dollar value of output relative to the average number of jobs required to produce that output for each industry .

as a result of this joint effort , the commerce department determined in its 2010 update that on average $166,000 in goods exports , $216,000 in services exports , or a weighted average of $180,000 , supported one job in each respective sector .

at times , some estimates of the employment effects of ftas have been derived from this doc report on employment in the economy supported by exports .

in some cases , the data have been used in reverse to argue that if a certain number of jobs were supported by a billion dollars of exports , then that same number could be used to argue that a certain number of jobs would be "lost" by a billion dollars of imports , so that any net increase in imports associated with a trade agreement would necessarily result in a loss of employment for the economy .

the composition of u.s. imports , however , is fundamentally different from u.s. exports .

while some imports and exports represent clearly substitutable items , other imports represent inputs to further processing , or are items that are not available in the economy .

the ita has issued various statements indicating that using the data in this manner is not appropriate .

as the ita has indicated , the employment estimate is not a multiplier and should not be used to estimate jobs that are associated with exports or imports in a multiplier fashion .

in addition , the ita estimates relate to the average number of jobs supported by exports across a broad section of the economy and should not be used in conjunction with trade agreements where the approach should more appropriately focus on estimating the change in the composition of employment that are associated with a change in trade as a result of a trade agreement .

the international trade administration ( ita ) argues , however , that the job estimates should not be used with projected changes in trade to estimate potential employment effects from trade agreements .

it says: averages derived from io [input - output] analysis should not be used as proxies for change .

they should not be used to estimate the net change in employment that might be supported by increases or decreases in total exports , in the exports of selected products , or in the exports to selected countries or regions .

 ( emphasis added. ) .

the averages are not proxies because the number of jobs supported by exports usually does not change at the same rate as export value .

the rate is not the same because other factors , such as prices , resource utilization , business practices , and productivity , do not usually change at the same rate .

in addition , the material and service inputs and the labor and capital inputs differ significantly across types of exports .

for example the labor requirements for an exported aircraft are significantly different from those of an exported agricultural product or an educational service .

ideally , estimates of trade changes from tariff reductions would be multiplied by figures which reflect actual changes in employment ( based on the mix of goods traded ) that would occur at the margin as a result of changes in the volume of goods traded .

according to the ita , though , such data do not exist .

the only data that are available reflect the estimated average number of jobs supported across the u.s. economy by a given level of exports .

according to the ita , " as a result , multiplying trade estimates from the computable general equilibrium ( cge ) models by employment averages would tend to overestimate the actual number of jobs potentially lost to trade changes. .

 ( emphasis added. ) .

the ita also indicated that in addition , estimates of the average number of jobs associated with exports cannot be adjusted for fluctuations in manufacturing capacity over the course of the business cycle .

as explained by the usitc , the more slack there is in the u.s. economy , the more potential there would be for job creation: during periods of slack business activity , increased output , such as exports , would tend to increase employment , to lower unemployment , and to increase labor force participation .

conversely , during periods of high business activity , when industry operates at or near full capacity and employment , increased output , including output for exports , tends to raise employment less — if at all — and instead mainly shifts employment to industries that pay higher wages .

the 112 th congress passed legislation implementing the korus fta .

part of the debate surrounding the agreement focused on the potential impact the agreement could have on u.s. employment , particularly employment in certain sectors of the economy .

given the current high rate of unemployment , it is not uncommon for communities or workers to raise concerns over the impact of a new fta .

indeed , for some communities that already are affected by high rates of unemployment or have experienced plant closings due to foreign competition , the korus fta could pose additional challenges .

an analysis of the available estimates of the potential effects of the korus fta on u.s. employment , however , raises a number of questions concerning the usefulness of the estimates .

economic modeling naturally incorporates various assumptions and entails differing methodologies that can have a profound effect on the estimates that are generated , even when the estimates are derived from the same economic model .

standard models incorporate standard assumptions and approaches that generally are well explained .

the mark of a good economic model often is one that uses assumptions and methodologies that seem reasonable and are not geared toward generating any particular result .

in contrast , some models use non - standard assumptions and approaches that may be difficult to justify and seem to have been chosen in order to generate pre - determined results .

given the current state of economic modeling and data availability , the most accurate models likely can provide only rough estimates of the magnitude of the potential changes in employment in certain sectors , but cannot offer estimates of the precise size of the shifts in employment .

as this reports indicates , the most important assumption involved in generating estimates of the impact of the korus - fta on employment appears to be the expected level of labor utilization in the u.s. economy over the ten - year phase - in period expected to be required to fully implement the korus - fta .

the existence of unutilized labor and capital make it possible for the models to generate long - term estimates of output and employment gains for the fully - implemented korus - fta and losses , in case the agreement had not been adopted .

it seems reasonable to assume , however , that the u.s. economy will return to its long - term trend approaching full employment during the ten years following the adoption of the korus - fta .

another major qualification for the estimates may be that they do not account for changes in exchange rates , which can have a wide - ranging effect on the prices of internationally traded goods and may overwhelm changes in prices of goods that arise from changes in tariff rates .

estimates of employment effects of new ftas often tend to be highly subjective and can be misleading , because they represent a partial accounting of the total economic effects of new ftas .

in most cases , ftas are comprehensive agreements that include provisions for goods , services , and investment .

with few exceptions , estimates of employment effects of the korus fta focus narrowly on employment effects in the goods sectors and neglect the potential effects in the services and investment areas .

in addition , the estimates neglect a broad range of benefits for the economy as a whole that potentially can provide consumers with large economic benefits and that can yield broad productivity and efficiency gains for the economy and may enhance employment .

as a result , estimates of the employment effects of new ftas may serve poorly as an indicator of the total impact of a new fta on the economy as a whole .

as policymakers considered the korus fta and consider other ftas , they likely will continue to weigh the results of a range of estimates of the employment effects of the ftas to gauge the impact of the agreements .

in this process , policymakers likely would be aided by estimates that clearly state the assumptions that are used and that inform policymakers about the broad implications of such agreements for the economy as a whole .

in addition , policymakers likely would benefit from more reliable data on the potential magnitude of such agreements on specific sectors that would allow policymakers to craft programs that could assist those most directly affected by the agreements .

as a result , policymakers may benefit from a number of initiatives to improve information and data on the impact of international trade on the economy .

these might include increased information and data on services in the economy , including the shifting of in - house services from the manufacturing sector to the services sector and the formal and informal barriers to u.s. services posed by major trading partners ; better data on worker dislocations including the reasons for those closings ; better understanding of the development of global supply chains and the role they are playing in the u.s. economy .

appendix a .

employment population and shares of the economy , by major industry and sector , 2010 appendix b .

standard assumptions of economic models in order to assess the validity of the various estimates of the employment effects of the korus fta , it is first necessary to understand how the economic models work and the assumptions that are made .

the standard approach to estimating the effects on u.s. employment associated with trade agreements follows a number of steps , although most of these steps are not included in the discussion of the estimates .

in general , these steps include the following: 1 .

estimating the impact a change in the tariff rate would have on a change in the prices of goods .

for instance , if tariff rates are lowered by 10% , would goods prices also fall by 10% ? .

are the changes in tariff rates accomplished at once , or are they reduced slowly , according to a set schedule ? .

if tariff rates are adjusted over time according to a set schedule how does that affect the rate at which goods prices adjust ? .

2 .

estimating the impact a change in goods prices would have on a change in sales of those goods .

this estimate attempts to quantify the responsiveness of consumers to changes in prices .

in markets with a number of close substitutes , the consumer response could be strong with consumers buying less of a particular product as its price rose relative to those of similar products .

for goods with few substitutes , consumers would be less responsive to changes in prices .

3 .

estimating the impact a change in sales would have on a change in output or a change in employment .

a change in employment associated with a change in sales would depend , at the very least , on the level of plant utilization , the level of productivity , and the availability of labor .

in attempting to estimate these intermediary steps , most models incorporate a number of assumptions to reduce the high level of variability that is intrinsic in such estimates .

often these additional assumptions are not well explained .

in general , these basic assumptions are: 1 .

changes in tariff rates will translate directly into price changes .

most models assume that any change in the tariff rate will be passed along completely to the change in the prices of traded goods .

in most cases , however , tariff rates are not adjusted completely at the time of implementation , but are adjusted over a set schedule that can encompass a decade or longer .

also , there is no guarantee that the prices of traded goods would adjust at exactly the same rate as tariff rates are adjusted .

they may be passed along at a differential rate or simply absorbed by the exporter .

2 .

exchange rates will remain as they are .

in most cases , the estimates do not make any assumptions concerning potential changes in the exchange rate of the dollar as a result of a trade agreement .

in addition , the exchange value of currencies of competitors could affect the expected change in exports or imports associated with a trade agreement .

3 .

consumer purchases will follow tariff reductions .

most of the estimates on changes in employment are based on the assumption that reductions in the prices of goods associated with a drop in the rate of tariffs would result in a complete substitution of goods toward the fta countries and away from other foreign suppliers .

in general , there may be some goods within the total basket of traded goods that consumers consider easily substitutable ( such as steel and fasteners ) , but consumer choices often are predicated on more than relative prices ( such as brand names and quality ) and , therefore , the rate of substitution overall may be quite low .

to the extent that consumers do not shift their purchases based on changes in prices , the change in employment would be blunted .

in addition , standard economic theory argues that trade agreements generally entail both trade diversion , or the substitution of lower - priced goods among the parties to the agreement for the now higher - priced goods from other suppliers , and trade creation .

trade agreements can create trade by increasing efficiency in production and by increasing the real incomes of consumers that , in turn , leads to a greater level of consumption of both domestic and imported goods .

to the extent that a trade agreement creates additional trade , it could have a positive effect on employment .

4 .

employment or wages will not change .

another assumption that often is made is whether employment or wages should be held constant .

such an assumption often is necessary in order to generate results from the economic models .

by holding employment constant , the model is attempting to estimate the change in the composition of employment that would be associated with a trade agreement .

this assumption would allow wages to change , although most models do not attempt to estimate changes in wages .

as a result , these models generally attempt to highlight the magnitude of the impact of an agreement on various sectors in the economy , rather than attempting to generate precise estimates of the actual number of jobs that may be gained or lost by individual sectors .

in contrast to these assumptions , models that hold wages constant allow employment to change in an effort to estimate changes in the number of jobs in various economic sectors .

since changes in wages often lead to changes in employment , this assumption is questionable .

in either case , the estimates usually attempt to aggregate the total cumulative effects over a number of years , often a decade , in order to derive an estimate of the overall change in employment .

while such an assumption is a necessary condition for generating results , the assumptions compromise the validity of the results , since the composition of employment in the economy over a decade can change quite noticeably , even in the complete absence of international trade , due to business cycle effects and the constant churning that occurs .

currently none of the estimates of the employment effects of trade agreements incorporate either business cycle or other transformational effects into the estimates .

key steps in converting changes in tariffs to changes in employment in general , there are a number of steps involved in converting changes in tariffs into changes in employment .

in most cases , these steps are not explicitly explained .

the chart below summarizes these three steps .

