federal regulations generally start with an act of congress and are the means by which statutes are implemented and specific requirements are established .

the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( hereafter , the "dodd - frank act," p.l .

111-203 , july 21 , 2010 ) is a particularly noteworthy example of congressional delegation of rulemaking authority to federal agencies .

a previous crs report identified 330 provisions in the dodd - frank act that require or permit the issuance of rules to implement the legislation .

nearly 80% of these 330 provisions assign rulemaking authorities or responsibilities to one of four agencies: the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( board of governors ) , the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) , and the newly created consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) .

the regulations that these and other agencies will issue pursuant to the dodd - frank act are expected to have a major effect on how the legislation is implemented .

as one observer put it , the rules would "turn reform into reality. .

shortly after the legislation was enacted , another observer said , "in most pieces of legislation like this , the real teeth is in the regulations. .

another said that the dodd - frank act "is complicated and contains substantial ambiguities , many of which will not be resolved until regulations are adopted. .

an article in the new york times stated that the legislation is basically a 2,000-page missive to federal agencies , instructing regulators to address subjects ranging from derivatives trading to document retention .

but it is notably short on specifics , giving regulators significant power to determine its impact — and giving partisans on both sides a second chance to influence the outcome .

the december 20 , 2010 , edition of the unified agenda listed 30 dodd - frank act - related actions in the "proposed rule stage" of rulemaking ( indicating that the agencies expected to issue proposed rules on the topics within the next 12 months , or for which the closing dates of the comment periods are the next step ) .

twenty - two of the 30 upcoming proposed rules were expected to be issued by the cftc .

four of the remaining eight proposed rules were to be issued by the department of the treasury's office of thrift supervision ( ots ) or the comptroller of the currency ( two rules each ) ; two rules were to be issued by the sec ; and the remaining rule was to be issued by the department of housing and urban development's ( hud ) office of housing .

although most of these unified agenda entries referred to specific upcoming proposed rules , one of the sec entries was more general .

entitled "proposed rules under the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act," the entry said the following: the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act was enacted on july 21 , 2010 .

the act includes a significant number of rulemaking provisions applicable to the commission .

the commission is in the process of considering the legislation and determining whether and how to consolidate some of the rulemakings .

it will add specific rules under the act to the regulatory flexibility act agenda as it proceeds .

therefore , it appears that the sec could ultimately issue multiple proposed rules related to the dodd - frank act pursuant to this unified agenda entry , or the sec could issue no proposed rules .

the december 20 , 2010 , edition of the unified agenda listed 12 dodd - frank act - related actions in the "final rule stage" of rulemaking ( indicating that the agency expected to issue final rules or take other final actions on the subjects within the next 12 months ) .

eight of the 12 agenda entries were from the sec ; two were from the federal trade commission ( ftc ) ; and two were from the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) within the department of labor .

however , it is possible that these entries will not result in 12 final rules .

as was the case for upcoming proposed rules under the dodd - frank act , one of the sec final rule entries in the unified agenda ( "final rules under the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act" ) was very general: the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act was enacted on july 21 , 2010 .

the act includes a significant number of rulemaking provisions applicable to the commission .

some of the provisions require final rulemakings .

the commission is in the process of considering the legislation and determining whether and how to consolidate some of the rulemakings .

it will add specific rules under the act to the regulatory flexibility act agenda as it proceeds .

although this unified agenda entry indicated that the upcoming action would be an interim final rule to be issued in september 2011 , the rule's legal authority was characterized as "not yet determined. .

therefore , it appears that the sec could ultimately issue multiple final rules related to the dodd - frank act pursuant to this unified agenda entry , or the sec could issue no final rules .

three other sec "final rule" entries ( two of which were entitled "references to ratings of nationally recognized statistical rating organizations," and one on "security ratings" ) were scheduled for action in july 2011 .

all three entries referenced prior notices of proposed rulemaking , with the agency indicating that it was considering how to proceed in light of the dodd - frank act .

therefore , these entries may result in a final rule , or may result in the agency concluding action without issuing a final rule .

another sec final rule entry was entitled "transitional registration as a municipal advisor," and references an interim final rule that was issued in september 2010 that is effective through december 2011 .

the agency did not indicate whether this interim final rule would be continued , or whether it would just be allowed to expire .

as noted earlier in this report , the unified agenda also identifies "long - term actions" — i.e. , regulatory actions that are under development in the agencies that the agencies do not expect to take action on in the next 12 months .

the december 20 , 2010 , edition of the unified agenda listed two long - term actions related to the dodd - frank act — one each by cftc and the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) .

in the cftc entry , the agency stated that the "commission is directed by the dodd - frank act of 2010 , to adopt an interim final rule ( ifr ) to establish a timeframe for reporting to a registered swap data repository swaps entered into prior to enactment of the dodd - frank act whose terms had not expired on the date of enactment. .

cftc published the interim final rule on october 14 , 2010 , and the agency indicated that the nature and timing of its next step was "to be determined. .

the fdic entry indicated that the dodd - frank act "requires federal agencies to review their regulations that ( 1 ) require an assessment of the credit - worthiness of a security or money market instrument and ( 2 ) contain references to or requirements regarding credit ratings .

in addition , the agencies are required to remove such requirements that refer to or rely upon credit ratings , and to substitute in their place uniform standards of credit - worthiness. .

fdic and three other agencies jointly published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking on august 25 , 2010 , seeking comment on alternative standards of credit - worthiness that may be used for risk - based capital requirements .

the agency said its next step was "undetermined. .

as noted earlier in this report , when federal agencies issue substantive regulations , they are carrying out legislative authority delegated to them by congress .

therefore , it is appropriate for congress to oversee the rules that agencies issue to ensure that they are consistent with congressional intent and the rulemaking requirements established in various statutes and executive orders .

in order for congress to oversee the rules being issued pursuant to the dodd - frank act , it must first know that they are being issued — ideally as early as possible .

the unified agenda is perhaps the best vehicle to provide that early information , describing not only what rules agencies are expected to issue , but also providing information regarding their significance and timing .

however , some of the entries in the december 20 , 2010 , edition of the unified agenda related to the dodd - frank act do not identify particular upcoming rules , and therefore are not as helpful as other entries .

for example , the sec included entries in both the proposed and final rule sections of the unified agenda stating that the dodd - frank act "includes a significant number of rulemaking provisions applicable to the commission," and that the agency was considering how to proceed .

therefore , the sec may issue a dozen or more proposed and final rules pursuant to this provision , or may issue no rules at all .

congress has a range of tools available to oversee the rules that federal agencies are expected to issue to implement the dodd - frank act , including oversight hearings and confirmation hearings for the heads of regulatory agencies .

individual members of congress may also participate in the rulemaking process by , among other things , meeting with agency officials and filing public comments .

congress , committees , and individual members can also request that the government accountability office ( gao ) evaluate the agencies' rulemaking activities .

however , the act itself contains more than 40 provisions requiring gao to conduct studies and write reports .

for example , see the following: section 412 of the act requires gao to examine compliance costs associated with sec rules regarding custody of funds or securities of clients by investment advisers , and any additional costs if a portion of a rule relating to operational independence is eliminated .

gao is required to submit a report on the results of the study to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs and the house committee on financial services not later than three years after the date of enactment ( i.e. , by july 21 , 2013 ) .

section 939e requires gao to study the feasibility and merits of creating an independent professional organization for rating analysts employed by nationally recognized statistical rating organizations .

gao is to submit a report on the results of the study to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs and the house committee on financial services not later than one year after the date of publication of the rules issued by the commission pursuant to section 936 of the act .

section 1421 requires gao to submit a report to congress within one year of the date of enactment ( i.e. , by july 21 , 2011 ) assessing the effects of the dodd - frank act on the availability and affordability of credit for consumers , small businesses , homebuyers , and mortgage lending .

another option is the congressional review act ( cra , 5 u.s.c .

§§801-808 ) , which was enacted in 1996 in an attempt to reestablish a measure of congressional authority over rulemaking "without at the same time requiring congress to become a super regulatory agency. .

the act generally requires federal agencies to submit all of their covered final rules to both houses of congress and gao before they can take effect .

it also established expedited legislative procedures ( primarily in the senate ) by which congress may disapprove agencies' final rules by enacting a joint resolution of disapproval .

the definition of a covered rule in the cra is quite broad , arguably including any type of document ( eg , legislative rules , policy statements , guidance , manuals , and memoranda ) that the agency wishes to make binding on the affected public .

after these rules are submitted , congress can use the expedited procedures specified in the cra to disapprove any of the rules .

cra resolutions of disapproval must be presented to the president for signature or veto .

for a variety of reasons , however , the cra has been used to disapprove only one rule in the 14 years since it was enacted .

perhaps most notably , it is likely that a president would veto a resolution of disapproval to protect rules developed under his own administration , and it may be difficult for congress to muster the two - thirds vote in both houses needed to overturn the veto .

congress can also use regular ( i.e. , non - cra ) legislative procedures to disapprove agencies' rules , but such legislation may prove even more difficult to enact than a cra resolution of disapproval ( primarily because of the lack of expedited procedures in the senate ) , and if enacted may also be vetoed by the president .

although the cra has been used only once to overturn an agency rule , congress has regularly included provisions in the text of agencies' appropriations bills directing or preventing the development of particular regulations .

such provisions include prohibitions on the finalization of particular proposed rules , restrictions on certain types of regulatory activity , and restrictions on implementation or enforcement of certain provisions .

appropriations provisions can also be used to prompt agencies to issue certain regulations , or to require that certain procedures be followed before or after their issuance .

the inclusion of regulatory provisions in appropriations legislation as a matter of legislative strategy appears to arise from two factors: ( 1 ) congress's ability via its "power of the purse" to control agency action , and ( 2 ) the fact that appropriations bills are considered "must pass" legislation .

congress's use of regulatory appropriations restrictions has fluctuated somewhat over time , and previous experience suggests that they may be somewhat less frequent when congress and the president are of the same party .

