broad efforts are underway to expand the use of renewable energy technologies to increase domestic energy production , improve u.s. energy security , create new industries and new jobs , and reduce greenhouse gas emissions .

according to the u.s. energy information administration , renewable energy technologies provided 3.6% of u.s. electricity generation in 2009 .

of the 144 million megawatt hours of electricity generated from renewable sources , wind provided 51.4% , wood and wood - derived fuels provided 24.8% , other forms of biomass provided 12.8% , geothermal accounted for 10.4% , and solar thermal / photovoltaic provided 0.6% .

although u.s. renewable electricity markets have grown in size and scope in recent years , the cost of renewable electricity generation continues to be typically higher than conventional generation sources ( eg , coal , natural gas , existing nuclear ) .

federal tax policy has served to reduce this cost gap by providing various tax incentives for renewable energy .

tax incentives , historically , have promoted investment in renewable electricity generation by rewarding either electricity production or investment in renewable generation capacity .

in recent years , the size of tax benefits available for renewable energy investors has sometimes exceeded the investor's tax liability .

investors may carry unused tax credits forward to offset future tax liability , or , alternatively , partner with a third - party tax - equity investor capable of providing cash in exchange for tax benefits .

in february of 2009 , congress passed new legislation that provides renewable energy projects with an alternative option for realizing the value of federal tax benefits: a grant in lieu of tax credits ( section 1603 of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) ) .

commonly known as "section 1603," this program affords the project the opportunity to receive a one - time cash grant instead of tax credits , thereby reducing the need for third - party tax - equity investors .

one key motivation for creating the section 1603 grant program was the perceived lack of tax equity capacity available for renewable electricity generation projects following the financial crisis in 2007 .

the section 1603 grant program was initially enacted on a temporary basis , and was scheduled to expire at the end of 2010 .

congress extended the program for one year , through 2011 , in the tax relief , unemployment reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) .

this report provides a comprehensive overview of the section 1603 grant program .

the first part of this report focuses on how different renewable energy market sectors have responded since the grant option was made available .

understanding how different renewable energy markets have responded to the grant option may provide some insight regarding the potential implications for the renewable energy market of letting the section 1603 grant program expire as scheduled at the end of 2011 .

the section 1603 grant program was established in response to weak tax - equity markets .

this report provides a detailed overview of tax - equity markets during the recent financial crisis , as well as information on the current status of tax - equity markets .

since weak tax - equity markets were a motivating factor in adopting the section 1603 grant program in 2009 , understanding trends in tax - equity markets may help congress evaluate whether the policy motivations that led to the adoption of the section 1603 grant program under arra remain relevant .

an economic perspective may also prove useful in evaluating a possible extension of the section 1603 grant program .

oftentimes , subsidies that encourage the use of renewable energy resources are not the most economically efficient means of achieving a policy objective .

compared to direct tax incentives , however , the section 1603 grant program may be an improvement in terms of economic efficiency .

the final sections of this report provide various policy options related to the section 1603 grant program .

as noted above , absent congressional action , the section 1603 grant program is scheduled to expire at the end of 2011 .

one option is to further extend the section 1603 grant program .

as another option , existing tax incentives could be modified to provide some of the added benefits associated with the section 1603 grant program .

section 1603 of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) provides grants for investments in certain energy production property in lieu of tax credits available under sections 45 and 48 of the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

table 1 summarizes the available incentives by eligible technologies .

prior to arra , investments in renewable energy technologies were generally eligible for the production tax credit ( ptc ( irc ยง45 ) ) or investment tax credit ( itc ( irc ยง48 ) ) , depending on technology type .

arra modified the incentives available for renewable energy investments in two ways: ( 1 ) ptc - eligible property was given the option to claim the itc at the itc rate , and ( 2 ) all eligible energy properties were allowed to elect to receive a one - time cash grant in lieu of tax credits .

the section 1603 grant program provides payments equal to 10% or 30% of the eligible cost basis for specified energy projects .

under arra , projects placed in service during the 2009 or 2010 tax years , or those that met certain start - of - construction requirements before the end of 2010 , were eligible for the grant option .

the tax relief , unemployment reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) extended the placed - in - service and construction start dates through the end of 2011 .

qualifying projects placed in service , as well as those that meet start - of - construction requirements during 2011 , and that are placed in service by the deadline noted in table 1 , may elect to receive a section 1603 grant .

participation in the section 1603 grant program includes several renewable energy technologies .

as of october 24 , 2011 , grant awards had been made to 3,801 recipients with a total grant award value of $9.2 billion .

recipients that installed solar electricity projects have received the largest number of grant awards , while wind projects have captured most of the grant dollars ( see figure 1 ) .

"other" projects awarded grants include all other itc - and ptc - eligible property .

market response and impact , along with motivations to apply for a section 1603 cash grant , differ among the technology types .

the following analysis evaluates these parameters for the wind , solar , and other technologies that have elected a cash grant in lieu of tax credits .

the section 1603 cash grant program was created as an alternative mechanism for renewable energy projects to realize federal tax incentives .

specifically , the program was created to address the limited availability of tax equity investor funds resulting from challenging u.s. economic conditions .

u.s. department of the treasury guidance for the section 1603 program states that "the section 1603 program will temporarily fill the gap created by the diminished investor demand for tax credits. .

in order to better understand the mechanics and function of tax equity investors , the following is a brief overview and analysis of the tax equity marketplace to include an assessment of available tax equity to support development of renewable energy projects .

analyzing the tax equity market is challenging since there is no official barometer or tracking mechanism available to assess the history and status of the tax equity marketplace .

a survey of multiple industry sources , including statements from tax equity market participants and experts , was used to assess the history and current state of the u.s. renewable energy tax equity market .

the following sections provide additional analysis of the impacts of the section 1603 grant program .

the section 1603 grant program has been popular with the renewable energy sector .

proponents of the program suggest that the added incentive is necessary to continue to promote renewable energy .

the section 1603 grant program , however , results in revenue losses that are greater than the revenue losses associated with the previously available tax incentives .

given the country's large budget deficits , there may be questions of whether further extensions of this program are worth the budgetary cost .

when the section 1603 grants were enacted under arra , the temporary grant program established a construction start deadline of december 31 , 2010 .

the tax relief , unemployment reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) provided a one - year extension , allowing projects placed in service during 2011 as well as those under construction by the end of the year to qualify for the grant option .

the grant option remains popular with renewables investors , and is likely to remain popular through 2011 .

given the financial benefits associated with the grant option , the renewable energy sector is likely to request an extension beyond 2011 .

in evaluating whether the grant should be further extended , congress may want to consider a number of factors .

first , if congress decides that subsidizing investment in renewables remains a policy objective , policymakers might evaluate whether the grant is the most economically efficient mechanism for providing subsidization .

second , congress may want to consider the policy rationale going forward .

the grant was initially enacted to address weakness in the tax equity market .

as the tax equity market recovers , should the grant program be retained ? .

in practice , the grant program may have increased the use of renewable energy , addressing carbon mitigation and greenhouse - gas reduction policies .

a question for congress is whether these benefits , and the benefits associated with increased investments in renewable energy and potential job creation and economic stimulus , are worth the budgetary cost and overall contribution to federal deficits .

there are a number of options available to congress regarding the section 1603 grant program .

the current construction start deadline of december 31 , 2011 , means that , without action , the grants effectively expire at the end of the year .

alternatively , congress may choose to extend the grants .

extending the grant program could involve extending the construction start date , extending the placed - in - service deadline , or other modifications .

finally , there have been a number of benefits associated with the section 1603 grants in lieu of tax credits that could be achieved through modifications to the existing ptc and itc .

these potential policy options are discussed in greater detail below .

given the approaching expiration of the ptc for wind , a proposed extension of the section 1603 grant program may be evaluated jointly with a ptc modification .

at the end of 2011 , congress may be asked to evaluate whether the benefits associated with the section 1603 grant program outweigh the budgetary costs and take appropriate legislative action .

this report highlighted the benefit to the renewable energy sector of the section 1603 grant program , specifically the additional subsidy provided by the grant relative to previously available tax incentives .

the added subsidy may lead to additional investments in renewable energy generation capacity , and help to enhance the national renewable energy portfolio .

as also noted in this report , however , the added subsidy has added budgetary costs .

additionally , this report assesses how the renewable energy market responded and performed since the section 1603 grant program became law in february 2009 .

as noted in the analysis , motivations and incentives to use the grant program differ among the technologies that qualify for section 1603 grants .

in some cases , some renewable energy sub - sectors have actually experienced market size declines .

this observation highlights the complexity of renewable energy markets and indicates that other factors , outside of the section 1603 cash grant program , can influence market growth .

if renewable energy expansion is a key policy objective , congress may want to consider policies that holistically address these other factors in addition to the availability of tax - based incentives .

furthermore , the section 1603 grant program was motivated by difficult economic conditions that resulted in less tax equity investment capacity available for renewable energy projects to realize the value of itc and ptc incentives .

as the economy recovers , congress might want to assess if section 1603 is needed to serve its original purpose or if the cash grant options provides the renewable energy sector with additional benefits that stimulate continued market growth .

finally , this report analyzed the section 1603 grant program from an economic perspective .

section 1603 grants may be a more economically efficient mechanism than tax credits for delivering benefits to the renewable energy sector .

however , subsidies to the renewable energy sector , whether grants or tax credits , are less economically efficient than pricing polluting energy alternatives .

like other tax incentives for renewable energy , there are inefficiencies associated with the section 1603 grant program to the extent there are inframarginal beneficiaries .

again , a question before congress is whether the benefits associated with the section 1603 grant option are worth the budgetary and potential economic costs .

