this report describes the ways that international terrorists and insurgents use the internet , strategically and tactically , in pursuit of their political agendas .

this discussion covers terrorist information operations in cyberspace but does not discuss similar activities in other domains .

the government response is also discussed in terms of information operations .

technical aspects of cybersecurity and network intrusion detection are outside the scope of this report .

information warfare can be defined as the use of information technology and content to affect the cognition of an adversary or target audience .

information operations is defined by the department of defense as "the integrated employment ... of information - related capabilities in concert with other lines of operations to influence , corrupt , disrupt or usurp the decision - making of adversaries and potential adversaries while protecting our own. .

one area where these operations can take place is cyberspace , defined by the department of defense as "a global domain within the information environment consisting of the interdependent network of information technology infrastructures , including the internet , telecommunications networks , computer systems , and embedded processes and controllers. .

3 this report focuses on one particular element of the information environment: the internet .

terrorists make use of the internet in a variety of ways , including what are often referred to as "jihadist websites. .

most al qaeda - produced ideological material reflects al qaeda supporters' shared view of jihad as an individual duty to fight on behalf of islam and muslims , and , in some cases , to offensively attack muslims or non - muslims who are deemed insufficiently pious or who oppose enforcement of islamic principles and religious law .

al qaeda and other violent islamist groups draw on the quran and other islamic religious texts and adapt historical events to current circumstances as a propaganda tactic .

this approach is prominently displayed in jihadists' use of the internet for recruiting and propaganda purposes .

the internet is used as a prime recruiting tool for insurgents .

extremists use chat rooms , dedicated servers and websites , and social networking tools as propaganda machines, as a means of recruitment and organization , for training grounds , and for significant fund - raising through cybercrime .

these websites and other internet services may be run by international terrorist groups , transnational cybercrime organizations , or individual extremists .

youtube channels and facebook pages of taliban and al qaeda supporters may radicalize western - based sympathizers , and also provide a means for communication between these "lone wolf" actors and larger organized networks of terrorists .

the decentralized nature of the internet as a medium and the associated difficulty in responding to emerging threats can match the franchised nature of terrorist organizations and operations .

it is unclear how great a role the internet plays in coordinating the efforts of a single group or strategy .

many arabic - language websites are said to contain coded plans for new attacks .

some reportedly give advice on how to build and operate weapons and how to pass through border checkpoints .

other news articles report that a younger generation of terrorists and extremists , such as those behind the july 2005 bombings in london , are learning new technical skills to help them avoid detection by various nations' law enforcement computer technology .

cybercrime has now surpassed international drug trafficking as a terrorist financing enterprise .

internet ponzi schemes , identity theft , counterfeiting , and other types of computer fraud have been shown to yield high profits under a shroud of anonymity .

according to press reports , indonesian police officials believe the 2002 terrorist bombings in bali were partially financed through online credit card fraud .

there may be some evidence that terrorist organizations seek the ability to use the internet itself as a weapon in an attack against critical infrastructures .

also , links between terrorist organizations and cybercriminals may show a desire to hone a resident offensive cyber capability in addition to serving as a means of procuring funds .

to some observers , the term "cyberterrorism" is inappropriate , because a widespread cyberattack may simply produce annoyances , not terror , as would a bomb , or other chemical , biological , radiological , or nuclear explosive ( cbrn ) weapon .

however , others believe that the effects of a widespread computer network attack would be unpredictable and might cause enough economic disruption , fear , and civilian deaths to qualify as terrorism .

at least two views exist for defining the term cyberterrorism as traditionally understood: effects - based .

cyberterrorism exists when computer attacks result in effects that are disruptive enough to generate fear comparable to a traditional act of terrorism , even if done by criminals other than terrorists .

intent - based .

cyberterrorism exists when unlawful , politically motivated computer attacks are done to intimidate or coerce a government or people to further a political objective , or to cause grave harm or severe economic damage .

a number of u.s. government organizations appear to monitor terrorist websites and conduct a variety of activities aimed at countering them .

given the sensitivity of federal government programs responsible for monitoring and infiltrating websites suspected of supporting terrorism - related activities , much of the information regarding the organizations and their specific activities is deemed classified or law enforcement - sensitive and is not publicly available .

the information listed below represents a sampling of what has been publicly discussed about some of the federal government organizations responsible for monitoring and infiltrating jihadist websites .

it should be noted that the actions associated with the organizations listed below could be conducted by employees of the federal government or by civilian contract personnel .

central intelligence agency ( cia ) : development , surveillance , and analysis of websites , commonly referred to as honey pots , for purposes of attracting existing and potential jihadists searching for forums to discuss terrorism - related activities .

national security agency ( nsa ) : surveillance of websites and rendering them inaccessible .

department of defense ( dod ) : surveillance of websites focused on discussions of perceived vulnerabilities of overseas u.s. military facilities or operational capabilities and disabling those that present a threat to operations .

department of justice ( doj ) : development of polices and guidelines for creating , interacting within , surveilling , and rendering inaccessible websites created by individuals wishing to use the internet as a forum for inciting or planning terrorism - related activities .

federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) : monitoring of websites and analysis of information for purposes of determining possible terrorist plans and threats to u.s. security interests .

department of homeland security ( dhs ) : monitoring of websites and analysis of information for purposes of determining possible threats to the homeland .

numerous other federal government organizations have cybersecurity responsibilities focused on policy development , public awareness campaigns , and intergovernmental and private sector coordination efforts .

information gleaned from the agencies noted above may at times be used to help inform and advise non - federal government entities responsible for safeguarding a geographic area or activity that has been discussed in an online jihadist forum .

although organizations , policies , and plans exist to counter violent extremists' use of the internet , implementation may be hampered by several factors .

laws may be interpreted by some agencies to prohibit certain activities , and in some cases agencies may have competing equities at stake .

legislative and policy authority may be given to organizations that lack the technical capability to fulfill a mission , while entities with the capacity to address cyber attacks may be legally constrained from doing so due to privacy or civil liberties concerns .

there may be tensions between the global internet freedom initiative as highlighted by secretary of state hillary clinton and overall counterterrorism objectives .

additionally , the lack of clarity in definitions related to information operations and terrorism may lead to institutional questions such as which agency has the lead for federal government coordination or independent oversight .

a number of hearings have been held to address the issue of violent extremism on the internet .

in a march 2 , 2010 , "dear colleague" letter , members of the house of representatives announced the formation of a new strategic communications and public diplomacy caucus , whose stated purpose is to "raise awareness of the challenges facing strategic communication and public diplomacy and provide multiple perspectives on proposed solutions. .

on july 13 , 2010 , the caucus's chairs , representatives mac thornberry and adam smith , introduced h.r .

5729 , the smith - mundt modernization act of 2010 .

this measure would amend the united states information and educational exchange act of 1948 to allow the secretary of state to create products designed to influence audiences abroad that could also be disseminated domestically , thereby removing the "firewall. .

another piece of legislation introduced in the 111 th congress was s. 3480 , the protection of cyberspace as a national asset act .

this bill , which may be reintroduced in some form in the current congress , has generated much discussion over what some describe as the "internet kill switch. .

recent events of social unrest and government internet control in the middle east highlight the question of whether the president has the authority to "turn off" the u.s. connection to the internet in times of similar crisis and whether such authority is needed .

critics consider such a communication disruption as an attack on the freedom of speech and the free flow of information .

others point to the economic damage that could result from the loss of networked communications .

regardless , blocking the flow of traffic into and out of u.s. information infrastructure would require the assistance of many private internet service providers ( isps ) , as there is no single , government - owned national network .

the bill's sponsors wrote that such authorities already exist for the president to compel private companies to suspend service , particularly in the communications act of 1934 , and the new legislation would actually limit presidential emergency powers over the internet .

a new proposal in the 112 th congress , s. 413 , the cybersecurity and internet freedom act of 2011 , contains a provision that would amend the communications act of 1934 so that , "[n]otwithstanding any provision of this act , an amendment made by this act , or section 706 of the communications act of 1934 ( 47 u.s.c .

606 ) , neither the president , the director of the national center for cybersecurity and communications , or any officer or employee of the united states government shall have the authority to shut down the internet. .

the communications decency act of 1996 ( cda ) , codified in title v of the telecommunications act of 1996 , was an effort to regulate both indecency and obscenity in cyberspace .

although much of it is targeted at lewd or pornographic material , particularly when shown to children under the age of 18 , the law's definition of obscenity and harassment could also be interpreted as applying to graphic , violent terrorist propaganda materials or incendiary language .

youtube's terms of use ( called "community guidelines" ) prohibit , among other things , "gratuitous and graphic violence" and "hate speech. .

to control its content , youtube employs a user - feedback system , where users flag potentially offensive videos that are then reviewed and removed by the site's administrators .

however , section 230 of the cda reads: "no provider or user of an interactive computer service shall be treated as the publisher or speaker of any information provided by another information content provider. .

this would absolve both isps and internet administrators from liability for the words or crimes committed by third - party users of their websites or online forums , even if the provider or administrator fails to take action after receiving notice of the harmful or offensive content .

in other words , although many isps and website administrators follow internal policies that restrict the type of material posted on their sites or trafficked through their networks , they may not have a legal responsibility to dismantle a site with offensive or violent content .

in september 2010 , general alexander told the house armed services committee that the white house was leading an effort to review the legal framework governing operations in cyberspace and the protection of telecommunications infrastructure .

the results of this review will be presented to congress , with legislative recommendations on what new statutes may be required and which should be revised or amended to facilitate effective operations in cyberspace .

the 2011 national military strategy also contains a point to that effect .

