the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who meet certain eligibility criteria .

these benefits and services include , among other things , hospital and medical care , disability compensation and pensions , education , vocational rehabilitation and employment services , assistance to homeless veterans , home loan guarantees , administration of life insurance as well as traumatic injury protection insurance for servicemembers , and death benefits that cover burial expenses .

the department carries out its programs nationwide through three administrations and the board of veterans appeals ( bva ) .

the veterans health administration ( vha ) is responsible for health care services and medical and prosthetic research programs .

the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) is responsible for , among other things , providing compensations , pensions , and education assistance .

the national cemetery administration ( nca ) is responsible for maintaining national veterans cemeteries ; providing grants to states for establishing , expanding , or improving state veterans cemeteries ; and providing headstones and markers for the graves of eligible persons , among other things .

the bva reviews all appeals made by veterans or their representatives for entitlement to veterans' benefits , including claims for service connection , increased disability ratings , pension , insurance benefits , and educational benefits , among other things .

this report provides a preliminary analysis of the president's budget request for fy2012 for the programs administered by the va .

the information provided in this report is based on the president's budget proposal provided to congress on february 14 , 2011 , and does not reflect amounts contained in the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) nor funding levels included in the full year continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( h.r .

1 as passed by the house of representatives on february 19 , 2011 ) .

this step has been taken to provide consistency when comparing funding levels across the fiscal years .

since the beginning of the fiscal year on october 1 , 2010 , va benefits and services ( except medical programs ) have been funded under a series of five continuing resolutions ( crs ) — p.l .

111-242 ; p.l .

111-290 ; p.l .

111-317 ; p.l .

111-322 ; and p.l .

112-4 .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) provided advance appropriations for medical programs for fy2011 .

the report begins with a brief introduction to the department's budget .

next , it provides funding levels requested by the president for fy2012 for va health related programs .

this is followed by a discussion of funding levels requested for mandatory programs and administration including programs such as construction of va facilities and information technology .

it should be noted that this not an exhaustive discussion of va's budget request for fy2012 .

to provide some context to the discussion that follows , this section provides a brief introduction to the various accounts that fund the department .

the va's budget is comprised of both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts .

mandatory funding supports disability compensation , pension benefits , education , vocational rehabilitation , life insurance , and burial benefits , among other benefits and services .

discretionary funding supports a broad array of benefits and services with a majority of funding going towards providing medical care to veterans .

according to the president's budget documents , in fy2010 the total va budget authority was approximately $127.2 billion .

the fy2012 budget request for the va is for approximately $132.1 billion in budget authority .

the va's health care program is funded through multiple appropriations accounts that are supplemented by other sources of revenue .

the appropriation accounts used to support va health care programs include ( 1 ) medical services , ( 2 ) medical administration ( currently known as medical support and compliance ) , ( 3 ) medical facilities , and ( 4 ) medical and prosthetic research .

in addition to direct appropriations accounts mentioned above , the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 ( p.l .

99-272 ) , enacted into law in 1986 , gave the va the authority to bill some veterans and most health care insurers for nonservice - connected care provided to veterans enrolled in the va health care system , to help defray the cost of delivering medical services to veterans .

the balanced budget act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-33 ) gave the va the authority to retain these funds in the medical care collections fund ( mccf ) .

the funds deposited into the mccf would be available for medical services for veterans .

these collected funds do not have to be spent in any particular fiscal year and are available until expended .

in 2009 , congress enacted the veterans health care budget reform and transparency act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-81 ) that authorized advance appropriations for three of the four accounts that comprise the vha: medical services , medical support and compliance , and medical facilities .

the medical and prosthetic research account is not funded as an advance appropriation , and is funded through the regular appropriations process .

the medical services account funds health care services provided to eligible veterans and beneficiaries in va's medical centers , outpatient clinic facilities , contract hospitals , state homes , and outpatient programs on a fee basis ; the medical support and compliance account funds management and administration of the va health care system , including financial management ; and the medical facilities account includes funds for the operation and maintenance of the va health care system's capital infrastructure ( excluding construction ) , such as costs associated with utilities , facility repair , laundry services , and groundskeeping .

 table 2 shows the va budget for mandatory benefit programs and administration , as reported by the office of management and budget ( omb ) , for fy2010 through fy2012 .

the amounts shown in the columns for the fy2010 actual and fy2011 continuing resolution are those reported by omb on february 14 , 2011 , and do not reflect appropriations legislation currently under consideration or passed by the house and senate appropriations committees .

the changes in certain accounts between fy2010 and fy2012 may reflect changes due to law , regulations , or other factors as discussed below .

the disability compensation category includes payments for a number of benefits including disability compensation ; dependency and indemnity compensation ( dic ) ; pension benefits for low - income disabled or elderly combat veterans and their survivors ; burial benefits ( allowances , flags , headstones , etc ) ; and a clothing allowance for certain disabled veterans .

caseloads for the benefits in this category are expected to increase between fy2010 and fy2012 , and increases in some benefits ( as a result of changes in law ) will take place in fy2012 .

overall , the appropriations for this category are expected to decline by 5.1% primarily due to the annual impact of regulation changes made in fy2010 .

during fy2010 , the va secretary exercised his legal authority and made ( by regulation ) additional conditions associated with agent orange exposure presumptive for disability compensation to veterans , and for dic to survivors of veterans with those conditions .

because of the range of effective dates for compensation due to conditions related to agent orange , appropriations for the first year ( fy2010 ) included payments for prior years of disability compensation in a number of cases .

therefore , the first year impact of the change in regulations was larger ( in fy2010 ) than the annual impact of the change ( in later years ) .

the readjustment benefits category reflects a number of benefits related to the transition of servicemembers from active duty status to veteran status , as well as disabled veterans including education benefits ; vocation rehabilitation ; financial assistance for adaptive automobiles and equipment ; and housing grants .

between fy2010 and fy2012 , there is an increase of 24.8% due to changes in law for benefits in this category .

educational and vocational rehabilitation benefits reflect an increase in the workload and average cost of the benefits ( due to inflation or educational cost adjustments ) .

in addition , p.l .

111-275 increased the maximum financial assistance for automobiles and adaptive equipment from $11,000 to $18,900 effective october 1 , 2011 .

the insurance ( mandatory ) category includes supplemental funding for national service life insurance ( nsli ) ; service - disabled veterans insurance ( s - dvi ) ; and veterans mortgage life insurance .

this category shows a large increase ( 78.1% ) between fy2010 and fy2012 , primarily due to a projected increase in s - dvi due to death claims .

the housing and other mandatory benefits category includes guaranteed and direct loan programs for veterans , native american housing loans ; and various proprietary receipts ( from the public ) .

part of the decrease between fy2010 and fy2012 is attributed to a projected decline in proprietary receipts , including those associated with the gi bill , the national service life insurance fund ; and housing .

the major construction category , which is for construction related projects for all va components where the total project cost is $10 million or more , reflects a 50.6% decline in the requested appropriation between fy2010 and fy2012 .

however , the vba has noted in supporting documents that it has identified $381.6 million in prior appropriations for major construction that is unobligated , of which $135.7 million will be used for fy2012 major construction projects .

the minor construction category , which is for construction related projects for all va components where the total project cost is less than $10 million , reflects a decline between fy2010 and fy2012 of 21.8% .

the general operating expenses category includes funding for the office of the secretary ; the board of veterans' appeals ( bva ) ; the offices of general counsel and acquisition , logistics , and construction ; and the assistant secretaries for management , human resources and administration , congressional and legislative affairs , policy and planning , security and preparedness , and public and intergovernmental affairs .

the increase between fy2010 and fy2012 of 18.2% reflects an increase of 562 full - time equivalent ( fte ) employees , and funds for initiatives including the acquisition improvement initiative .

the information technology category includes maintenance and improvements to the information technology of all va functions .

the small decrease between fy2010 and fy2012 reflects increases for new initiatives and completion or discontinuation of older initiatives .

the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) provided additional funds for grants to states for extended care facilities .

these funds were required to be obligated by the end of fy2010 ( september 30 , 2010 ) .

the arra funds were used by the va to advance projects planned for fy2010 and fy2011 .

the 15.0% decline between fy2010 and fy2012 reflects the impact of the additional arra funds in fy2010 .

