the united states has two centers that monitor , detect , and issue warnings for tsunamis .

the national oceanic and atmospheric administration's ( noaa's ) national weather service ( nws ) manages both centers .

the nws operates the pacific tsunami warning center ( ptwc ) at ford island , hawaii , and the national tsunami warning center ( ntwc ) at palmer , alaska .

 ( before october 1 , 2013 , the ntwc was known as the west coast and alaska tsunami warning center , or wc / atwc ) .

the ptwc monitors for tsunamis and issues warnings for the hawaiian islands , the u.s. pacific territories , and other u.s. and international interests in the pacific basin outside the ntwc area of responsibility .

following the 2004 indian ocean tsunami , the ptwc took on responsibility for monitoring the indian ocean , south china sea , caribbean sea , and , temporarily , the u.s. virgin islands and puerto rico ( until june 2007 , when responsibility was passed to what was then known as the wc / atwc ) .

the ptwc was established in 1949 after a strong earthquake and massive landslides off the coast of southwest alaska caused a disastrous tsunami that hit the hawaiian islands only hours later .

the ptwc issued tsunami warnings to alaska until 1967 , when the wc / atwc was established .

the wc / atwc ( now the ntwc ) was established in the aftermath of the magnitude 9.2 good friday earthquake that struck anchorage , alaska , in 1964 and caused major earthquake and localized tsunami damage .

the ntwc is responsible for issuing tsunami warnings to emergency management officials in alaska , british columbia ( canada ) , washington state , oregon , and california .

in 2005 , the ntwc expanded its scope to include the u.s. atlantic and gulf of mexico coasts , as well as the atlantic coast of canada .

in 2007 , the ntwc added puerto rico and the u.s. and british virgin islands to its scope .

figure 1 shows the areas of responsibility for the ptwc and the ntwc .

according to noaa , the national tsunami hazard mitigation program ( nthmp ) was formed in response to the recognition of a tsunami threat to oregon , washington state , and northern california from a large earthquake on the cascadia subduction zone , which lies off the northwest coast of the united states and is capable of generating earthquakes as large as magnitude 9 or greater .

among other activities , the nthmp assists states in emergency planning and in developing maps of potential coastal inundation for a tsunami of a given intensity .

the nthmp also operates tsunami disaster outreach and education programs in support of noaa's tsunamiready program .

noaa's primary goals for the nthmp are as follows: 1. raise awareness of the affected population ; 2. develop integrated tsunami maps and recognize models that can be used to develop improved warning guidance and evacuation maps ; 3. improve tsunami warning systems ; and 4. incorporate tsunami planning into state and federal multi - hazard programs .

the tsunami warning and education act , p.l .

109-424 , further focused the nthmp and charged noaa with addressing the nation's priorities in tsunami detection , warning , and mitigation .

as authorized by p.l .

109-424 , the nthmp assumed responsibility for planning and executing noaa's tsunami activities , namely detection , warning , forecasts , communication , outreach and education , and research .

the program coordinates activities among noaa organizational entities and outside partners .

maintenance and availability of the dart buoy network have been key issues for congress .

in its report accompanying the fy2015 commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations bill , the house appropriations committee admonished noaa for failing to maintain its network to its own 80% availability standard , despite receiving full funding in fy2014 .

in p.l .

109-424 , congress stated that "maintaining operational tsunami detection equipment is the highest priority within the program carried out under this act. .

this requirement also was included in a senate bill ( s. 2181 ) that would have reauthorized the tsunami program in the 113 th congress .

in the 114 th congress , bills introduced in the house ( h.r .

34 ) and senate ( s. 533 ) address dart buoy maintenance and availability as well as other issues regarding the nthmp .

the house passed h.r .

34 , the tsunami warning , education , and research act of 2015 , on january 7 , 2015 , by unanimous consent .

the senate passed its version of the legislation , as an amendment in the nature of a substitute for h.r .

34 , on october 6 , 2015 , by unanimous consent .

the following section provides a brief comparison of the bills .

for fy2015 , the senate appropriations committee instructed noaa to maintain funding at the fy2014 level for the nthmp .

the committee report rejected a proposal from noaa to terminate funding for tsunami preparedness within the program .

the house appropriations committee instructed noaa to allocate $27 million for the noaa tsunami program .

the house report noted that the funding amount fully supports planned maintenance for the dart buoy network ( discussed above ) and that the committee expects noaa to maintain availability at no fewer than 80% of the stations .

 ( currently , about 90% of the stations are operational , as noted above. ) .

in addition , the house report included instructions to include $6 million above noaa's request for fy2015 to restore administration - proposed reductions to nthmp grant funds .

during fy2015 , noaa reorganized portions of its budget and aligned costs for the tsunami activities into two accounts: dart buoys are funded out of observations programs , projects , and activities ( ppa ) , and all other tsunami activities are funded out of analyze , forecast , and support ppa .

for tsunami activities in fy2015 , noaa allocated $12.2 million under observations ppa and $19.2 million under analyze , forecast , and support ppa , for a total of $31.4 million .

the fy2016 budget request was $6 million less than the fy2015 enacted amount ( representing a $6 million reduction in the nthmp grant funds , similar to the administration's fy2015 request ) .

funding for the noaa tsunami program historically has supported three main categories of activities: ( 1 ) warning , such as the activities of the tsunami warning centers and dart network ; ( 2 ) mitigation , such as the activities of the nthmp ; and ( 3 ) research , including activities conducted by the pacific marine environmental laboratory and the national buoy data center .

in the noaa budget , these activities have been cross - cutting among different activities under the nws line item .

the government accountability office ( gao ) , which analyzed funding data for the three general categories in 2010 , noted that total funding for all these activities ranged from $5 million to $10 million annually between fy1997 and fy2004 but increased after the 2004 indian ocean tsunami from approximately $27 million in fy2005 to $42 million in fy2009 .

according to gao , the proportion of funding allocated to warning activities increased from about 40% of the total in fy2004 to approximately 70% of the funding in fy2009 .

the proportion allocated to mitigation decreased from approximately 50% of the total in fy2004 to about 30% in fy2009 , whereas the proportion for research remained steady between about 6% and 10% .

