almost 30 years ago , congress addressed increasing concerns regarding the management of the nation's growing stockpile of nuclear waste by calling for the federal collection of spent nuclear fuel ( snf ) and high - level nuclear waste ( hlw ) for safe , permanent disposal .

passed in 1982 , the nuclear waste policy act ( nwpa ) was an effort to establish an explicit statutory basis for the department of energy ( doe ) to dispose of the nation's most highly radioactive nuclear waste .

the nwpa requires doe to remove spent nuclear fuel from commercial nuclear power plants , in exchange for a fee , and transport it to a permanent geologic repository or an interim storage facility before permanent disposal .

defense - related high - level waste is to go into the same repository .

in order to achieve this goal , and in an effort to mitigate the political difficulties of imposing a federal nuclear waste facility on a single community , congress attempted to establish an objective , scientifically based multi - stage statutory process for selecting the eventual site of the nation's new permanent geologic repository .

although doe would be responsible for developing the eventual repository and carrying out the disposal program , individual nuclear power providers would fund a large portion of the program through significant annual contributions , or fees , to the newly established nuclear waste fund ( nwf ) .

the nwpa created a multi - stage statutory framework — requiring the participation of the president , congress , the secretary of energy , the department of energy ( doe ) , and the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) — that governs the establishment of a permanent geologic nuclear waste repository .

the various phases of the process include site recommendation , site characterization and study , site approval , and construction authorization .

at the site recommendation stage , the secretary of energy ( secretary ) was directed to nominate at least five potentially "suitable" sites for an eventual repository .

after identifying and conducting an initial study of these sites , the secretary was to recommend three sites to the president for characterization as "candidate sites. .

pursuant to these obligations , the secretary recommended deaf smith county , texas ; hanford , washington , and yucca mountain , nevada , to the president in 1986 .

the secretary's recommendations were met with significant opposition from the affected states ; however , and as a result , congress amended the nwpa's site selection process in 1987 and designated yucca mountain as the sole candidate site for the repository by terminating "all site specific activities ( other than reclamation activities ) at all candidate sites , other than the yucca mountain site. .

the 1987 amendments , did not , however , end the site characterization , approval , and construction authorization phases , which continued as outlined under the original terms of the nwpa .

in accordance with the characterization stage of the nwpa framework , yucca mountain was extensively inspected and studied in an effort to determine if the site was in compliance with suitability guidelines established by doe , and public health , safety , and environmental guidelines established by the environmental protection agency .

following significant litigation over the proper safety standards to be applied to the yucca mountain facility , and notwithstanding charges by the state of nevada that the site was unsafe , secretary of energy spencer abraham recommended that the president approve the yucca mountain site for the development of a repository in 2002 .

president george w. bush approved the yucca mountain site the next day , and , pursuant to the terms of the nwpa , recommended the site to congress .

the nwpa , however , provided the state in which the proposed repository would be located with the opportunity to object to the president's site recommendation by submitting a notice of disapproval to congress .

if a notice of disapproval were submitted , the nwpa stated that the site would be "disapproved" unless both houses of congress overrode the state's objection by passing a "resolution of siting approval. .

although nevada opposed the selection of yucca mountain and quickly submitted its notice of disapproval , congress passed , and the president signed , the necessary approval resolution to override nevada's objection .

thus , the approval stage of the nwpa process ended .

the fourth stage of the nwpa process commenced in june 2008 when doe submitted an application for authorization to construct the yucca mountain nuclear waste repository ( license application ) to the nrc .

under the nwpa , "if the president recommends to the congress the yucca mountain site … and the site designation is permitted to take effect … the secretary shall submit to the [nrc] an application for a construction authorization for a repository at such site. .

the statute further directed that following submission of the license application , the nrc "shall issue a final decision approving or disapproving the issuance of a construction authorization not later than the expiration of 3 years after the date of the submission of such application. .

the nrc was considering the 8,600 page license application when the new obama administration ushered in a change in policy with respect to the suitability of yucca mountain as the future site of the nation's permanent nuclear waste repository .

both president obama and secretary of energy steven chu have stated that yucca mountain does not represent a viable option for the permanent storage of nuclear waste .

during the 2008 presidential campaign , then - senator obama supported nevada's fight against the repository , asserting in an issue statement on energy policy that he did not believe yucca mountain was a "suitable site. .

in accordance with this view , during his first year in office the administration requested , and congress appropriated , only enough funds in fy2010 to continue the nrc license proceeding while halting any design or development progress on the actual repository .

during his second year in office , the president , in conjunction with doe , took three important steps directed toward terminating the yucca mountain facility .

first , the administration's fy2011 budget proposal eliminated all funding for the yucca mountain project .

second , the president and secretary chu established a blue ribbon commission to consider alternative solutions to the nation's nuclear waste challenge .

third , and most controversially , doe attempted to terminate the nrc's yucca mountain licensing proceeding by seeking to withdraw the license application for the yucca mountain facility .

congress has been relatively active in response to the obama administration's proposed termination of yucca mountain , doe's motion to withdraw the license application , and the nrc's decision to cease review of the license application .

congress has not , however , restored funding for the yucca mountain facility or the nrc's review of the yucca mountain license .

although no funds have been appropriated , the house of representatives has attempted to utilize appropriations to prevent the termination of the yucca mountain program .

for example , the house passed an appropriations bill on july 15 , 2011 , that would have restored funding for the yucca mountain repository by providing $25 million to doe to "carry out the purposes of the nuclear waste policy act" and $20 million to the nrc to "continue the yucca mountain license application. .

the bill would also have expressly prohibited appropriated funds from being used to "conduct closure of adjudicatory functions , technical review , or support activities associated with the yucca mountain geologic repository license application until the nuclear regulatory commission reverses [the board's decision] , or for actions that irrevocably remove the possibility that yucca mountain may be a repository option in the future. .

the senate , however , did not provide any funds for the program .

in conference , the funding was removed , but language was included in the joint explanatory statement of the conference report that directed doe to continue to work toward developing a solution for nuclear waste disposal .

to that end , the conference report directed doe to "develop a strategy for the management of spent nuclear fuel and other nuclear waste within 6 months" of the publication of the blue ribbon commission's final report .

additionally , the report stated that because "multiple geologic repositories will ultimately be required for the long - term disposition of the nation's spent fuel and nuclear waste," doe was directed to "focus , within available funds , $3,000,000 on development of models for potential partnerships to manage spent nuclear fuel and high level waste , and $7,000,000 on characterization of potential geologic repository media. .

the report also directed doe to "preserve all documentation relating to yucca mountain , including technical information , records , and other documents , as well as scientific data and physical materials. .

fy2013 appropriations appear to be unfolding in a similar manner .

the house appropriations committee has approved an appropriations bill that would provide $25 million to doe to proceed with the license application and direct the nrc to utilize "prior - year funds to complete the yucca mountain license application. .

the version approved by the senate appririations committee does not include similar funding , but rather directs doe to establish a pilot program to operate "at least one consolidated storage facility for spent nuclear fuel. .

the nrc's delay in coming to a final decision on doe's motion to withdraw the yucca mountain license application and the agency's decision to halt the license review have also generated a significant congressional response .

much of the criticism of the nrc has focused on chairman jaczko .

for example , the majority staff of the house oversight and government reform committee conducted an investigation into nrc decision making and found that "the chairman's interpretation of his authority evolved to closely resemble that of a single administrator — his management style and aggressive behavior simultaneously eroded the collegial structure and values inherent in the nrc. .

the then - ranking members of the house select committee on energy independence and global warming , house energy and commerce committee , house science and technology committee , and house natural resources committee expressed their concern over chairman jaczko's decision to "unilaterally" halt the nrc's review of the yucca mountain license in a public letter to the commission .

the letter called chairman jaczko's decision to base budget guidance on the fy2011 budget request rather than enacted fy2010 appropriations "suspect. .

the then - ranking member of the house appropriations committee as well as six members of the house appropriations subcommittee on energy and water development — the subcommittee that controls doe and nrc appropriations — told chairman jaczko that his actions "may seriously erode the nrc's relationship with this subcommittee. .

in a strongly worded letter , the members threatened increased oversight of the nrc , concluding with the warning: "if you continue to shut down the yucca mountain license application , which can only be seen as a partisan act , we will reconsider the flexibilities which the nrc has long enjoyed due to its reputation as an independent body. .

other members of congress asked the inspector general of the nrc to "convene a formal investigation into the chairman's recent actions to shut down the project. .

as noted previously , the nrc inspector general released his official report on june 6 , 2011 .

the scope of the investigation included a consideration of the chairman's decision to terminate all yucca mountain license review activities ; the delay in the nrc's review of the board's decision on doe's authority to withdraw the yucca mountain license application ; and the "impact the chairman's management style has on the collegial functioning of the nrc commission. .

the report did not find that the chairman had violated any laws or acted illegally in any way .

the report concluded that the chairman's direction to nrc staff to begin closure of the yucca mountain license review was within his authority and that the chairman has not improperly delayed a final nrc decision on the doe license withdrawal .

however , the report did make clear that the chairman had acted to "strategically" control information distribution to the both the other commissioners and the nrc staff .

the report noted that "because [the commissioner] acts as the gatekeeper to determine what is a policy matter versus an administrative manner , and manages and controls information available to the other commissioners , they are uncertain as to whether they are adequately informed of policy matters that should be brought to their attention. .

presumably as a result of the controversy surrounding chairman jaczko's leadership at the nrc , the consolidated appropriations act of 2012 contained an express statutory provision prohibiting the chairman of nrc from terminating "any program , project , or activity without the approval of a majority vote of the commissioners of the [nrc] approving such action. .

additionally , the 112 th congress has held a number of hearings that have focused on the current yucca mountain controversy .

for example , the senate committee on energy and natural resources and the house energy and commerce committee held hearings on the brc's final report .

additionally , the house oversight and government reform committee , the house energy and commerce subcommittee on environment and the economy and the subcommittee on energy and power , and the senate environment and public works committee have held a series of hearings on the yucca mountain program , the nrc's shutdown of the license review , the finding of the nrc inspector general report , or nrc staff perspectives on recent nrc actions .

these hearings , in conjunction with the findings of the nrc inspector general report , have generally portrayed an internal environment at the nrc in which some commissioners and staff have been frustrated by many of the actions taken by commissioner jaczko , and appear to be discouraged by the chairman's allegedly unilateral decision - making process .

although much of the resistance to the shutdown has come from the south carolina and washington delegations , a growing number of members have expressed their opposition to the obama administration's plans .

in july 2010 , 91 members of congress signed a letter to secretary chu asking that doe "halt all actions to dismantle operations at yucca mountain" until the nrc and the d.c .

circuit resolve the license dispute .

the letter made clear the members' position that doe had "overstepped its bounds" and "ignored congressional intent" in attempting to terminate the yucca mountain facility .

finally , resolutions have been introduced in the house that would express support for yucca mountain as the "nation's primary permanent nuclear waste storage site ; " express disapproval of the doe motion to withdraw the yucca mountain license application ; and condemn the nrc's decision to halt its review of the yucca mountain license application .

a resolution of inquiry has also been introduced that would ask the president and secretary of energy to provide the house of representatives with documents relating to the proposed termination of the yucca mountain program .

other bills have also been introduced that would limit doe's ability to collect nwf fees .

for a description of other legislative proposals pertaining to the yucca mountain project and the nwpa , see crs report rl33461 , civilian nuclear waste disposal , by [author name scrubbed] .

while the result of the ongoing dispute over the attempted termination of the yucca mountain program remains uncertain , continued opposition to the proposed termination in the house of representatives will likely have a significant impact on the ultimate fate of the program .

a number of leading house republicans have voiced strong opposition to abandoning the yucca mountain repository .

for example , the chairmen of a number of influential committees — including the house budget committee , house committee on appropriations , house committee on appropriations subcommittee on energy and water , house natural resources committee , and house committee on science , space , and technology — have all opposed the administration's attempts to terminate the yucca mountain project .

additionally , representative darrell issa , chairman of the house committee on oversight and government reform , opposes the administration's position on yucca mountain .

speaker of the house john boehner has also indicated his interest in reviving the yucca mountain program , arguing that "[w]e've invested tens of billions of dollars in a storage facility that's as safe as anything we're going to find. .

consequently , the yucca mountain dispute will not only unfold legally before the nrc and in the d.c .

circuit , but also politically in the form of likely appropriations disputes , investigations , and oversight hearings .

moreover , changes in the makeup of the nrc may also have a significant impact on the future of yucca mountain .

after a tumultuous three years as chairman , gregory jaczko submitted his resignation as chairman of the nrc on may 21 , 2012 , "effective upon the confirmation of my successor. .

president obama subsequently nominated allison macfarlane , former member of the blue ribbon commission and an associate professor of environmental science and policy at george mason university , to succeed jaczko as chairman .

macfarlane is known as a critic of the yucca mountain facility .

the senate is expected to hold a joint confirmation hearing on the nomination of macfarlane and the renomination of commissioner svinicki .

