national security letters ( nsls ) are roughly comparable to administrative subpoenas .

intelligence agencies issue them for intelligence gathering purposes to telephone companies , internet service providers , consumer credit reporting agencies , banks , and other financial institutions , directing the recipients to turn over certain customer records and similar information .

the 111 th congress saw a number of proposals to amend nsl authority .

none were enacted , but s. 193 , introduced early in the 112 th congress by senator leahy , would carry forward in large measure the provisions approved by the senate judiciary committee in the 111 th .

s. 193 would also have extended three usa patriot act - related amendments to the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) then scheduled to expire earlier this year .

the senate judiciary committee reported out an amended version of s. 193 on april 6 , 2011 .

thereafter , congress extended the fisa amendments separately .

senator leahy then reintroduced the reported version of s. 193 as s. 1125 , stripped of the fisa extension provisions .

representative conyers introduced companion legislation in the house ( h.r .

1805 ) .

senator paul offered several bills that address many of the same issues ( s. 1050 , s. 1070 , s. 1073 , s. 1075 ) .

s. 1125 and h.r .

1805 would repeal one of nsl's authorizing statutes , section 627 of the fair credit reporting act ( 15 u.s.c .

1681v ) ; return the others , as of december 31 , 2013 , to their pre - usa patriot act form ; amend the judicial review procedure to reflect judicial constructions ; and adjust the audit and reporting requirements .

s. 1073 would require the attorney general to issue minimization procedures for nsls .

s. 1075 would permit issuance of a nsl only upon the order of a fisa court judge .

s. 1050 and s. 1070 would combine the two proposals and require minimization procedures and fisa court orders for nsls .

prior to the usa patriot act , the nsl statutes were four .

one , 18 u.s.c .

2709 , obligated communications providers to supply certain customer information upon the written request of the director of the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) or a senior fbi headquarters official .

when customer identity , length of service , and toll records were sought , the letters had to certify ( 1 ) that the information was relevant to a foreign counterintelligence investigation and ( 2 ) that specific and articulable facts gave reason to believe the information pertained to a foreign power or its agents .

when only customer identity and length of service records ( but not toll records ) were sought , the letters had to certify ( 1 ) again that the information was relevant to a foreign counterintelligence investigation , but ( 2 ) that specific and articulable facts gave reason to believe that the customer information pertained to use of the provider's facilities to communicate with foreign powers , their agents , or those engaged in international terrorism or criminal clandestine intelligence activities .

in like manner a second statute , section 1114 ( a ) ( 5 ) of the right to financial privacy act , obligated financial institutions to provide the fbi with customers' financial records upon written certification of the fbi director or his designee ( 1 ) that the records were sought for foreign counterintelligence purposes and ( 2 ) that specific and articulable facts gave reason to believe that the records were those of a foreign power or its agents .

and so it was with a third , section 626 of the fair credit report act , which obligated consumer credit reporting agencies to provide customer identification , and the names and addresses of financial institutions at which a designated consumer maintained accounts .

here too , the obligation was triggered by written certification of the fbi director or his designee ( 1 ) that the information was necessary for a foreign counterintelligence investigation , and ( 2 ) that specific and articulable facts gave reason to believe that the consumer was either a foreign power , a foreign official , or the agent of a foreign power and was engaged in international terrorism or criminal clandestine intelligence activities .

the fourth , section 802 of the national security act , was a bit different .

it reached a wider range of potential recipients at the demand of a large group of federal officials , but for a more limited purpose .

it rested the obligation to provide consumer reports , together with financial information and records , upon consumer reporting agencies , financial agencies , and financial institutions , or holding companies .

the requirement was triggered by the certification of senior officials of law enforcement and intelligence agencies , but confined to information pertaining to federal employees with access to classified information and being sought for clearance purposes and inquiries into past or potential security leaks .

* * * ( a ) .... ( 5 ) ( a ) financial institutions , and officers , employees , and agents thereof , shall comply with a request for a customer's or entity's financial records made pursuant to this subsection by the federal bureau of investigation when the director of the federal bureau of investigation ( or the director's designee ) certifies in writing to the financial institution that such records are sought for foreign counter intelligence purposes and that there are specific and articulable facts giving reason to believe that the customer or entity whose records are sought is a foreign power or the agents of a foreign power as defined in section 1801 of title 50 .

 ( b ) the federal bureau of investigation may disseminate information obtained pursuant to this paragraph only as provided in guidelines approved by the attorney general for foreign intelligence collection and foreign counterintelligence investigations conducted by the federal bureau of investigation , and , with respect to dissemination to an agency of the united states , only if such information is clearly relevant to the authorized responsibilities of such agency .

 ( c ) on a semiannual basis the attorney general shall fully inform the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the select committee on intelligence of the senate concerning all requests made pursuant to this paragraph .

 ( d ) no financial institution , or officer , employee , or agent of such institution , shall disclose to any person that the federal bureau of investigation has sought or obtained access to a customer's or entity's financial records under this paragraph .

* * * ( a ) ... ( 5 ) ( a ) financial institutions , and officers , employees , and agents thereof , shall comply with a request for a customer's or entity's financial records made pursuant to this subsection by the federal bureau of investigation when the director of the federal bureau of investigation ( or the director's designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director at bureau headquarters or a special agent in charge in a bureau field office designated by the director ) certifies in writing to the financial institution that such records are sought for foreign counter intelligence purposes to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities , provided that such an investigation of a united states person is not conducted solely upon the basis of activities protected by the first amendment to the constitution of the united states .

 ( b ) the federal bureau of investigation may disseminate information obtained pursuant to this paragraph only as provided in guidelines approved by the attorney general for foreign intelligence collection and foreign counterintelligence investigations conducted by the federal bureau of investigation , and , with respect to dissemination to an agency of the united states , only if such information is clearly relevant to the authorized responsibilities of such agency .

 ( c ) on the dates provided in section 415b of title 50 , the attorney general shall fully inform the congressional intelligence committees ( as defined in section 401a of title 50 ) concerning all requests made pursuant to this paragraph .

 ( d ) prohibition of certain disclosure. — ( i ) if the director of the federal bureau of investigation , or his designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director at bureau headquarters or a special agent in charge in a bureau field office designated by the director , certifies that otherwise there may result a danger to the national security of the united states , interference with a criminal , counterterrorism , or counterintelligence investigation , interference with diplomatic relations , or danger to the life or physical safety of any person , no financial institution , or officer , employee , or agent of such institution , shall disclose to any person ( other than those to whom such disclosure is necessary to comply with the request or an attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request ) that the federal bureau of investigation has sought or obtained access to a customer's or entity's financial records under subparagraph ( a ) .

 ( ii ) the request shall notify the person or entity to whom the request is directed of the nondisclosure requirement under clause ( i ) .

 ( iii ) any recipient disclosing to those persons necessary to comply with the request or to an attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request shall inform such persons of any applicable nondisclosure requirement .

any person who receives a disclosure under this subsection shall be subject to the same prohibitions on disclosure under clause ( i ) .

 ( iv ) at the request of the director of the federal bureau of investigation or the designee of the director , any person making or intending to make a disclosure under this section shall identify to the director or such designee the person to whom such disclosure will be made or to whom such disclosure was made prior to the request , except that nothing in this section shall require a person to inform the director or such designee of the identity of an attorney to whom disclosure was made or will be made to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request for financial records under subparagraph ( a ) .

 ( a ) identity of financial institutions notwithstanding section 1681b of this title or any other provision of this subchapter , a consumer reporting agency shall furnish to the federal bureau of investigation the names and addresses of all financial institutions ( as that term is defined in section 3401 of title 12 ) at which a consumer maintains or has maintained an account , to the extent that information is in the files of the agency , when presented with a written request for that information , signed by the director of the federal bureau of investigation , or the director's designee , which certifies compliance with this section .

the director or the director's designee may make such a certification only if the director or the director's designee has determined in writing that — ( 1 ) such information is necessary for the conduct of an authorized foreign counterintelligence investigation ; and ( 2 ) there are specific and articulable facts giving reason to believe that the consumer — ( a ) is a foreign power ( as defined in section 1801 of title 50 ) or a person who is not a united states person ( as defined in such section 1801 of title 50 ) and is an official of a foreign power ; or ( b ) is an agent of a foreign power and is engaging or has engaged in an act of international terrorism ( as that term is defined in section 1801 ( c ) of title 50 ) or clandestine intelligence activities that involve or may involve a violation of criminal statutes of the united states .

 ( b ) identifying information notwithstanding the provisions of section 1681b of this title or any other provision of this subchapter , a consumer reporting agency shall furnish identifying information respecting a consumer , limited to name , address , former addresses , places of employment , or former places of employment , to the federal bureau of investigation when presented with a written request , signed by the director or the director's designee , which certifies compliance with this subsection .

the director or the director's designee may make such a certification only if the director or the director's designee has determined in writing that — ( 1 ) such information is necessary to the conduct of an authorized counterintelligence investigation ; and ( 2 ) there is information giving reason to believe that the consumer has been , or is about to be , in contact with a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power ( as defined in section 1801 of title 50 ) .

* * .

 ( a ) identity of financial institutions notwithstanding section 1681b of this title or any other provision of this subchapter , a consumer reporting agency shall furnish to the federal bureau of investigation the names and addresses of all financial institutions ( as that term is defined in section 3401 of title 12 ) at which a consumer maintains or has maintained an account , to the extent that information is in the files of the agency , when presented with a written request for that information , signed by the director of the federal bureau of investigation , or the director's designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director at bureau headquarters or a special agent in charge of a bureau field office designated by the director , which certifies compliance with this section .

the director or the director's designee may make such a certification only if the director or the director's designee has determined in writing , that such information is sought for the conduct of an authorized investigation to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities , provided that such an investigation of a united states person is not conducted solely upon the basis of activities protected by the first amendment to the constitution of the united states .

 ( b ) identifying information notwithstanding the provisions of section 1681b of this title or any other provision of this subchapter , a consumer reporting agency shall furnish identifying information respecting a consumer , limited to name , address , former addresses , places of employment , or former places of employment , to the federal bureau of investigation when presented with a written request , signed by the director or the director's designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director at bureau headquarters or a special agent in charge of a bureau field office designated by the director , which certifies compliance with this subsection .

the director or the director's designee may make such a certification only if the director or the director's designee has determined in writing that such information is sought for the conduct of an authorized investigation to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities , provided that such an investigation of a united states person is not conducted solely upon the basis of activities protected by the first amendment to the constitution of the united states .

* * .

 ( a ) duty to provide. — a wire or electronic communication service provider shall comply with a request for subscriber information and toll billing records information , or electronic communication transactional records in its custody or possession made by the director of the federal bureau of investigation under subsection ( b ) of this section .

 ( b ) required certification. — the director of the federal bureau of investigation , or his designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director , may — ( 1 ) request the name , address , length of service , and local and long distance toll billing records of a person or entity if the director ( or his designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director ) certifies in writing to the wire or electronic communication service provider to which the request is made that — ( a ) the name , address , length of service , and toll billing records sought are relevant to an authorized investigation to foreign counterintelligence investigation ; and ( b ) there are specific and facts giving reason to believe that the person or entity to whom the information sought pertains is a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power as defined in section 101 of the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 ( 50 u.s.c .

1801 ) ; and ( 2 ) request the name , address , and length of service of a person or entity if the director ( or his designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director ) certifies in writing to the wire or electronic communication service provider to which the request is made that — ( a ) the information sought is relevant to an authorized foreign counterintelligence investigation ; and ( b ) there are specific and articulable facts giving reason to believe that communication facilities registered in the name of the person or entity have been used , through the services of such provider , in communications with — ( i ) an individual who is engaging or has engaged in international terrorism as defined in section 101 ( c ) of the foreign intelligence surveillance act or clandestine intelligence activities that involve or may involve a violation of the criminal statutes of the united states ; or ( ii ) a foreign power or agent of a foreign power under circumstances giving reason to believe that the communication concerned international terrorism as defined in section 101 ( c ) of the foreign intelligence surveillance act or clandestine intelligence activities that involve or may involve a violation of the criminal statutes of the united states .

 ( c ) prohibition of certain disclosure. — no wire or electronic communication service provider , or officer , employee , or agent thereof , shall disclose to any person that the federal bureau of investigation has sought or obtained access to information or records under this section .

 ( d ) dissemination by bureau. — the federal bureau of investigation may disseminate information and records obtained under this section only as provided in guidelines approved by the attorney general for foreign intelligence collection and foreign counterintelligence investigations conducted by the federal bureau of investigation , and , with respect to dissemination to an agency of the united states , only if such information is clearly relevant to the authorized responsibilities of such agency .

 ( e ) requirement that certain congressional bodies be informed. — on a semiannual basis the director of the federal bureau of investigation shall fully inform the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the select committee on intelligence of the senate , and the committee on the judiciary of the house of representatives and the committee on the judiciary of the senate , concerning all requests made under subsection ( b ) of this section .

 ( a ) duty to provide. — a wire or electronic communication service provider shall comply with a request for subscriber information and toll billing records information , or electronic communication transactional records in its custody or possession made by the director of the federal bureau of investigation under subsection ( b ) of this section .

 ( b ) required certification. — the director of the federal bureau of investigation , or his designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director at bureau headquarters or a special agent in charge in a bureau field office designated by the director , may — ( 1 ) request the name , address , length of service , and local and long distance toll billing records of a person or entity if the director ( or his designee ) certifies in writing to the wire or electronic communication service provider to which the request is made that the name , address , length of service , and toll billing records sought are relevant to an authorized investigation to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities , provided that such an investigation of a united states person is not conducted solely on the basis of activities protected by the first amendment to the constitution of the united states .

 ; and ( 2 ) request the name , address , and length of service of a person or entity if the director ( or his designee ) certifies in writing to the wire or electronic communication service provider to which the request is made that the information sought is relevant to an authorized investigation to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities , provided that such an investigation of a united states person is not conducted solely upon the basis of activities protected by the first amendment to the constitution of the united states .

 ( c ) prohibition of certain disclosure. — ( 1 ) if the director of the federal bureau of investigation , or his designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director at bureau headquarters or a special agent in charge in a bureau field office designated by the director , certifies that otherwise there may result a danger to the national security of the united states , interference with a criminal , counterterrorism , or counterintelligence investigation , interference with diplomatic relations , or danger to the life or physical safety of any person , no wire or electronic communications service provider , or officer , employee , or agent thereof , shall disclose to any person ( other than those to whom such disclosure is necessary to comply with the request or an attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request ) that the federal bureau of investigation has sought or obtained access to information or records under this section .

 ( 2 ) the request shall notify the person or entity to whom the request is directed of the nondisclosure requirement under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 3 ) any recipient disclosing to those persons necessary to comply with the request or to an attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request shall inform such person of any applicable nondisclosure requirement .

any person who receives a disclosure under this subsection shall be subject to the same prohibitions on disclosure under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 4 ) at the request of the director of the federal bureau of investigation or the designee of the director , any person making or intending to make a disclosure under this section shall identify to the director or such designee the person to whom such disclosure will be made or to whom such disclosure was made prior to the request , except that nothing in this section shall require a person to inform the director or such designee of the identity of an attorney to whom disclosure was made or will be made to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request under subsection ( a ) .

 ( d ) dissemination by bureau. — the federal bureau of investigation may disseminate information and records obtained under this section only as provided in guidelines approved by the attorney general for foreign intelligence collection and foreign counterintelligence investigations conducted by the federal bureau of investigation , and , with respect to dissemination to an agency of the united states , only if such information is clearly relevant to the authorized responsibilities of such agency .

 ( e ) requirement that certain congressional bodies be informed. — on a semiannual basis the director of the federal bureau of investigation shall fully inform the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the select committee on intelligence of the senate , and the committee on the judiciary of the house of representatives and the committee on the judiciary of the senate , concerning all requests made under subsection ( b ) of this section .

 ( f ) libraries. — a library ( as that term is defined in section 213 ( 1 ) of the library services and technology act ( 20 u.s.c .

9122 ( 1 ) ) , the services of which include access to the internet , books , journals , magazines , newspapers , or other similar forms of communication in print or digitally by patrons for their use , review , examination , or circulation , is not a wire or electronic communication service provider for purposes of this section , unless the library is providing the services defined in section 2510 ( 15 ) ( "electronic communication service" ) of this title .

none .

this section was created by the usa patriot act , effective october 26 , 2001 .

 ( a ) disclosure notwithstanding section 1681b of this title or any other provision of this subchapter , a consumer reporting agency shall furnish a consumer report of a consumer and all other information in a consumer's file to a government agency authorized to conduct investigations of , or intelligence or counterintelligence activities or analysis related to , international terrorism when presented with a written certification by such government agency that such information is necessary for the agency's conduct or such investigation , activity or analysis .

 ( b ) form of certification the certification described in subsection ( a ) of this section shall be signed by a supervisory official designated by the head of a federal agency or an officer of a federal agency whose appointment to office is required to be made by the president , by and with the advice and consent of the senate .

 ( c ) confidentiality ( 1 ) if the head of a government agency authorized to conduct investigations of intelligence or counterintelligence activities or analysis related to international terrorism , or his designee , certifies that otherwise there may result a danger to the national security of the united states , interference with a criminal , counterterrorism , or counterintelligence investigation , interference with diplomatic relations , or danger to the life or physical safety of any person , no consumer reporting agency or officer , employee , or agent of such consumer reporting agency , shall disclose to any person ( other than those to whom such disclosure is necessary to comply with the request or an attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request ) , or specify in any consumer report , that a government agency has sought or obtained access to information under subsection ( a ) of this section .

 ( 2 ) the request shall notify the person or entity to whom the request is directed of the nondisclosure requirement under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 3 ) any recipient disclosing to those persons necessary to comply with the request or to any attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request shall inform such persons of any applicable nondisclosure requirement .

any person who receives a disclosure under this subsection shall be subject to the same prohibitions on disclosure under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 4 ) at the request of the authorized government agency , any person making or intending to make a disclosure under this section shall identify to the requesting official of the authorized government agency the person to whom such disclosure will be made or to whom such disclosure was made prior to the request , except that nothing in this section shall require a person to inform the requesting official of the identity of an attorney to whom disclosure was made or will be made to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request for information under subsection ( a ) of this section .

 ( d ) rule of construction nothing in section 1681u of this title shall be construed to limit the authority of the director of the federal bureau of investigation under this section .

 ( e ) safe harbor notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter , any consumer reporting agency or agent or employee thereof making disclosure of consumer reports or other information pursuant to this section in good - faith reliance upon a certification of a government agency pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not be liable to any person for such disclosure under this subchapter , the constitution of any state , or any law or regulation of any state or any political subdivision of any state .

 ( f ) reports to congress ( 1 ) on a semi - annual basis , the attorney general shall fully inform the committee on the judiciary , the committee on financial services , and the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the committee on the judiciary , the committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , and the select committee on intelligence of the senate concerning all requests made pursuant to subsection ( a ) of this section .

 ( 2 ) in the case of the semiannual reports required to be submitted under paragraph ( 1 ) to the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the select committee on intelligence of the senate , the submittal dates for such reports shall be as provided in section 415b of title 50 .

 ( a ) generally ( 1 ) any authorized investigative agency may request from any financial agency , financial institution , or holding company , or from any consumer reporting agency , such financial records , other financial information , and consumer reports as may be necessary in order to conduct any authorized law enforcement investigation , counterintelligence inquiry , or security determination .

any authorized investigative agency may also request records maintained by any commercial entity within the united states pertaining to travel by an employee in the executive branch of government outside the united states .

 ( 2 ) requests may be made under this section where — ( a ) the records sought pertain to a person who is or was an employee in the executive branch of government required by the president in an executive order or regulation , as a condition of access to classified information , to provide consent , during a background investigation and for such time as access to the information is maintained , and for a period of not more than three years thereafter , permitting access to financial records , other financial information , consumer reports , and travel records ; and ( b ) ( i ) there are reasonable grounds to believe , based on credible information , that the person is , or may be , disclosing classified information in an unauthorized manner to a foreign power or agent of a foreign power ; ( ii ) information the employing agency deems credible indicates the person has incurred excessive indebtedness or has acquired a level of affluence which cannot be explained by other information known to the agency ; or ( iii ) circumstances indicate the person had the capability and opportunity to disclose classified information which is known to have been lost or compromised to a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power .

 ( 3 ) each such request — ( a ) shall be accompanied by a written certification signed by the department or agency head or deputy department or agency head concerned , or by a senior official designated for this purpose by the department or agency head concerned ( whose rank shall be no lower than assistant secretary or assistant director ) , and shall certify that — ( i ) the person concerned is or was an employee within the meaning of paragraph ( 2 ) ( a ) ; ( ii ) the request is being made pursuant to an authorized inquiry or investigation and is authorized under this section ; and ( iii ) the records or information to be reviewed are records or information which the employee has previously agreed to make available to the authorized investigative agency for review ; ( b ) shall contain a copy of the agreement referred to in subparagraph ( a ) ( iii ) ; ( c ) shall identify specifically or by category the records or information to be reviewed ; and ( d ) shall inform the recipient of the request of the prohibition described in subsection ( b ) of this section .

 ( b ) disclosure of requests notwithstanding any other provision of law , no governmental or private entity , or officer , employee , or agent of such entity , may disclose to any person that such entity has received or satisfied a request made by an authorized investigative agency under this section .

* * .

 ( a ) generally ( 1 ) any authorized investigative agency may request from any financial agency , financial institution , or holding company , or from any consumer reporting agency , such financial records , other financial information , and consumer reports as may be necessary in order to conduct any authorized law enforcement investigation , counterintelligence inquiry , or security determination .

any authorized investigative agency may also request records maintained by any commercial entity within the united states pertaining to travel by an employee in the executive branch of government outside the united states .

 ( 2 ) requests may be made under this section where — ( a ) the records sought pertain to a person who is or was an employee in the executive branch of government required by the president in an executive order or regulation , as a condition of access to classified information , to provide consent , during a background investigation and for such time as access to the information is maintained , and for a period of not more than three years thereafter , permitting access to financial records , other financial information , consumer reports , and travel records ; and ( b ) ( i ) there are reasonable grounds to believe , based on credible information , that the person is , or may be , disclosing classified information in an unauthorized manner to a foreign power or agent of a foreign power ; ( ii ) information the employing agency deems credible indicates the person has incurred excessive indebtedness or has acquired a level of affluence which cannot be explained by other information known to the agency ; or ( iii ) circumstances indicate the person had the capability and opportunity to disclose classified information which is known to have been lost or compromised to a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power .

 ( 3 ) each such request — ( a ) shall be accompanied by a written certification signed by the department or agency head or deputy department or agency head concerned , or by a senior official designated for this purpose by the department or agency head concerned ( whose rank shall be no lower than assistant secretary or assistant director ) , and shall certify that — ( i ) the person concerned is or was an employee within the meaning of paragraph ( 2 ) ( a ) ; ( ii ) the request is being made pursuant to an authorized inquiry or investigation and is authorized under this section ; and ( iii ) the records or information to be reviewed are records or information which the employee has previously agreed to make available to the authorized investigative agency for review ; ( b ) shall contain a copy of the agreement referred to in subparagraph ( a ) ( iii ) ; ( c ) shall identify specifically or by category the records or information to be reviewed ; and ( d ) shall inform the recipient of the request of the prohibition described in subsection ( b ) of this section .

 ( b ) prohibition of certain disclosure ( 1 ) if an authorized investigative agency described in subsection ( a ) of this section certifies that otherwise there may result a danger to the national security of the united states , interference with a criminal , counterterrorism , or counterintelligence investigation , interference with diplomatic relations , or danger to the life or physical safety of any person , no governmental or private entity , or officer , employee , or agent of such entity , may disclose to any person ( other than those to whom such disclosure is necessary to comply with the request or an attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request ) that such entity has received or satisfied a request made by an authorized investigative agency under this section .

 ( 2 ) the request shall notify the person or entity to whom the request is directed of the nondisclosure requirement under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 3 ) any recipient disclosing to those persons necessary to comply with the request or to an attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request shall inform such persons of any applicable nondisclosure requirement .

any person who receives a disclosure under this subsection shall be subject to the same prohibitions on disclosure under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 4 ) at the request of the authorized investigative agency , any person making or intending to make a disclosure under this section shall identify to the requesting official of the authorized investigative agency the person to whom such disclosure will be made or to whom such disclosure was made prior to the request , except that nothing in this section shall require a person to inform the requesting official of the identity of an attorney to whom disclosure was made or will be made to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request under subsection ( a ) of this section .

* * .

