since congress approved an equestrian statue to george washington in 1783 , more than 100 other memorials have been authorized in the district of columbia .

prior to 1986 , however , statutory criteria for authorizing commemorative works , including memorials , did not exist .

not only did congress authorize commemorative works , but it also established how the sponsoring organizations would choose site locations and approve memorial designs .

in some cases , special memorial commissions were established and given authority to select a location for the memorial .

the lincoln memorial commission and the jefferson memorial commission , for instance , were provided with such authority .

congress also authorized private organizations to select a site , sometimes with the approval of the president , as in the case of the washington monument .

although a general practice for the commemorative work creation process existed by the mid - 20 th century , impetus for a statutory commemorative work creation program was not realized until the 1980s .

in 1986 , congress debated and passed the commemorative works act to guide the memorial creation process in the district of columbia .

this report examines the evolving process by which memorials have been proposed , approved , and constructed in the district of columbia .

it begins with a discussion of the creation of the district and its unique place as the center of the u.s. government and the location of numerous memorials to individuals and historic events .

the report then discusses the creation and operation of the commemorative works act that was enacted to guide the process for creating a commemorative work in the district of columbia .

it concludes with four appendixes: a summary of the original commemorative works act legislation ; the 24-step process recommended for creating a memorial in the district of columbia ; a map showing various areas eligible for memorial construction in the district of columbia ; and a list of government agencies that might be involved in the memorial creation process .

this report does not address memorials outside the district of columbia .

on july 16 , 1790 , president george washington signed a bill authorizing him to designate "a district of territory , not exceeding ten miles square , to be located as hereafter directed on the river potomac , at some place between the mouths of the eastern branch and connogochegue , be , and the same is hereby accepted for the permanent seat of government of the united states. .

pursuant to the residency act , the president had a choice between two areas on the potomac river — land where the eastern branch ( now the anacostia river ) met the potomac river and the area around the village of georgetown .

after ordering surveys of both areas , washington chose the confluence of the potomac river and anacostia rivers as the capital site .

subsequently , he chose major pierre charles l'enfant , who had just completed a successful refurbishment of federal hall in new york city , as the city's architect and commissioned major andrew ellicott to survey the 10-square - mile district .

in 1986 , the commemorative works act ( cwa ) was enacted to guide the creation of memorials in the district of columbia .

congress created the act in an effort ( 1 ) to preserve the integrity of the comprehensive design of the l'enfant and mcmillan plans for the nation's capital ; ( 2 ) to ensure the continued public use and enjoyment of open space in the district of columbia and its environs , and to encourage the location of commemorative works within the urban fabric of the district of columbia ; ( 3 ) to preserve , protect , and maintain the limited amount of open space available to residents of , and visitors to , the nation's capital ; and ( 4 ) to ensure that future commemorative works in areas administered by the national park service and the administrator of general services in the district of columbia and its environs are…appropriately designed , constructed , and located ; and…reflect a consensus of lasting national significance of the subjects involved .

the act further defined a commemorative work as "any statue , monument , sculpture , memorial , plaque , inscription , or other structure of landscape feature , including a garden or memorial grove , designed to perpetuate in a permanent manner the memory of an individual , group , event or other significant element of american history , except that the term does not include any such item which is located within the interior of a structure or a structure which is primarily used for other purposes. .

the cwa does not apply to military properties , such as the pentagon , arlington national cemetery , or fort mcnair , nor does the act apply to land under the jurisdiction of the smithsonian or the architect of the capitol .

the standards for consideration and placement of commemorative works in areas administered by the national park service ( nps ) and the general services administration ( gsa ) in the district of columbia and its environs are contained in the commemorative works act ( cwa ) of 1986 , as amended .

the following sections examine how commemorative works are established and maintained .

pursuant to the cwa , the national park service ( nps ) has developed a 24-step outline to guide groups interested in creating a commemorative work in the district of columbia .

the nps outline guides initiation , legislation , site election and approval , design approval , fundraising , construction , and dedication of commemorative works .

in addition , groups have asked for , and been granted , extensions to their initial authorization to allow additional time to complete the memorial creation process .

the full guidelines from ncpc can be found in appendix b .

since the passage of the cwa in 1986 , congress has authorized 33 memorials to be constructed on federal lands in the district of columbia or its environs .

of these works , 18 have been dedicated and completed — 15 under the auspices of the cwa and 3 outside the cwa process — 11 are in - progress , and 4 have lapsed authorizations .

table 1 provides the number of memorials authorized per congress , pursuant to the cwa , since the 99 th congress ( 1985-1987 ) .

memorials authorized by congress since the passage of cwa have focused on a variety of individuals , groups , and events .

among the individuals recognized have been francis scott key , george mason , and dr. martin luther king jr. groups commemorated have included black revolutionary war patriots , victims of communism , and ukrainian famine - genocide victims .

still others have sought to memorialize events including the korean war , world war ii , and dr. martin luther king jr.'s "i have a dream speech. .

table 2 lists memorials authorized by congress since 1986 .

appendix a .

summary of original commemorative works act provisions the commemorative works act ( cwa ) , as enacted , contained 10 sections covering the purposes of the bill , definitions , congressional authorization for memorials , creation of the national capital memorial commission , conditions for memorial placement in different parts of the district of columbia , site design and approval , issuance of construction permits , creation of a temporary memorial site , and other administrative provisions .

table a - 1 provides a summary of the original provisions contained in the cwa for each section of the bill .

appendix b .

steps for establishing a memorial in the nation's capital in 1987 , the national park service created a 24-step outline of the commemorative works process .

in 2001 , the national capital planning commission published the outline for establishing a monument or memorial in the district of columbia as part of the museums and memorials master plan .

the 24-steps , reprinted verbatim below , are designed to guide interested groups and help ensure appropriate legislation , site selection , design approval , fundraising , and construction .

1 .

memorial sponsor seeks national capital memorial advisory commission ( ncmac ) assistance to review the requirements and process established by the commemorative works act ( cwa ) and its applicability to the proposed memorial .

2 .

memorial sponsor seeks a senator or representative who is willing to draft and introduce a bill to authorize establishment of the memorial .

3 .

staffs of ncmac , member of congress who will introduce the bill , and authorizing committees draft a bill that conforms to the provisions of the cwa .

4 .

congressman and / or senator introduce bill authorizing the memorial and designating the sponsor as the entity responsible for its erection at no cost to the federal government .

5 .

ncmac considers proposed authorizing legislation to establish its view pursuant to cwa .

6 .

chairmen of house and senate authorizing subcommittees on national parks solicit views of ncmac , may hold hearings on proposed authorizing legislation , and take action on a bill before sending it to the full house and senate for a vote on the bill .

7 .

congress passes bill , president signs bill into law , providing memorial sponsor 7 years in which to begin construction of memorial in area ii .

8 .

memorial sponsor organizes the structure of the entity that will establish the memorial and beings planning .

9 .

the memorial sponsor may submit to the secretary a request to be authorized to consider sites in area i .

the secretary seeks the advice of ncmac to determine whether the memorial warrants placement in area i .

based on the advice of ncmac , the secretary notifies congress of a determination that the subject is of preeminent and lasting historical significance so that congress can consider passage of legislation authorizing an area i location for enactment by the president .

10 .

memorial sponsor works with nps staff to identify potential area ii sites ( may include area i if authorized ) and prepare alternative site study and accompany preliminary environmental analysis .

11 .

memorial sponsor , for sites within area ii , or area i if authorized , submits alternative site study and accompanying preliminary environmental analysis to nps for approval of preferred site and consultation with ncmac .

12 .

nps submits recommended site and environmental document to the national capital planning commission ( ncpc ) and the commission of fine arts ( cfa ) for approval .

nps initiates section 106 consultation on its recommendation of site with the state historic preservation officer ( shpo ) .

13 .

after site approval by ncpc and cfa and in consultation with the shpo , the design process begins in accordance with any approved design guidelines .

14 .

memorial sponsors select a designer or initiate a design competition .

15 .

memorial sponsor selects preferred design concept and meets with nps to discuss issues that design may present .

after possible refinements , sponsor submits the design concept and draft environmental assessment to the nps .

16 .

nps reviews design concept and , upon concurrence , submits to ncpc and cfa with appropriate environmental document for approval .

17 .

memorial sponsor , in close coordination with nps , refines preliminary design concept on the basis of ncpc , cfa , and shpo comments and submits preliminary design to nps who , upon approval , submits it to ncpc and cfa for approval .

18 .

memorial sponsor , in close coordination with nps , refines preliminary design on the basis of comments and submits final design to nps , who upon approval , submits it to ncpc and cfa for approval .

19 .

memorial design team completes final drawings and specifications in close coordination with nps .

20 .

memorial sponsor completes fund - raising .

21 .

memorial sponsor submits final drawing and specifications , cost estimate and evidence of funds on hand plus 10 percent cash payment of design and construction costs for maintenance to nps .

22 .

nps issues a construction permit on behalf of the secretary of the interior which constitutes final approval by the secretary and the start of construction .

23 .

memorial sponsor begins construction and preparation of operation , maintenance , and preservation plans for the memorial .

24 .

memorial is dedicated and transferred to nps for management with accompanying as - built operation , maintenance , and preservation plans .

appendix c. district of columbia map with area designations appendix d. entities responsible for memorials in the district of columbia the process established by the commemorative works act ( cwa ) to create a commemorative work in the district of columbia involves the national capital memorial advisory commission , the u.s. commission of fine arts , the national capital planning commission , the district of columbia historic preservation office , and sometimes the american battle monuments commission .

each entity is highlighted below .

national capital memorial advisory commission the national capital memorial advisory commission was created in 2001 to "advise the secretary of the interior and the administrator of general services ( as appropriate ) on policy and procedures for establishment of , and proposals to establish , commemorative works in the district of columbia and its environs and on other matters concerning commemorative works in the nation's capital as the commission considers appropriate. .

the commission is comprised of eight members and meets at least two times a year to "examine … each memorial proposal for conformance to the commemorative works act , and make … recommendations to the secretary and the administrator and to members and committees of congress .

the commission also serves as a source of information for persons seeking to establish memorials in washington , dc and its environs. .

u.s. commission of fine arts in 1910 , representative samuel mccall introduced a bill , h.r .

19962 , to create a commission on fine arts .

reported by the committee on the library , the house debated the bill on february 9 .

during the debate , representative mccall explained why a permanent entity was needed to govern art within the district of columbia .

we have had a very haphazard development of art in the city of washington .

we have had our streets and our squares filled up by art objects that are not always art .

we have had commissions appointed — temporary , sporadic commissions — one commission to operate upon one statue and another commission to operate upon another , and the result is that we have had no uniform or well thought out development .

speaking against the creation of the commission , representative james tawney argued that creation of a commission of fine arts amounted to an abdication of power over matters in the district of columbia .

i believe that the congress of the united states should reserve some of its legislative functions , some of its legislative power , and not delegate it to commissions or to any other body .

we are responsible to the people for legislation , and can not escape that responsibility by the appointment of commissions .

…we have control by virtue of the law over the district of columbia .

when congress authorizes the construction of a public building and fixes the location of that building and requires its erections within the authority and the appropriation made therefore , or the limit of cost , i do not believe that there is any body of men , or any man , or any executive officer , i care not how high in authority he maybe , who should have the power , or unlawfully exercise executive power , to defeat the will of congress as express in the law it enacts .

following debate , h.r .

19962 passed the house and was referred to the senate .

the senate debated the bill on may 2 and 3 , 1910 .

during debate , the senate amended the bill to give the commission the authority to "advise generally upon questions of art when required to do so by the president , or by any committee of either house of congress" and specified commission staffing .

the senate passed the bill , as amended on may 3 , and the house disagreed with the senate amendments and requested a conference .

the conference committee issued its report on may 9 , congress approved the bill , and president william howard taft signed the bill on may 17 , 1910 .

pursuant to the act , the commission of fine arts was initially charged with providing "advise upon the location of statues , fountains , and monuments in the public squares , streets , and parks in the district of columbia , and upon the selection of models for statues , fountains , and monuments erected under the authority of the united states and upon the selection of artists for the execution of the same. .

comprised of seven "well - qualified judges of the fine arts , appointed by the president," the commission's duties have subsequently been expanded to include "the selection of models for statues , fountains , and monuments erected under the authority of the federal government ; the selection of artists to carry out [the creation of statues , fountains , and monuments] ; and questions of art generally when required to do so by the president or a committee of congress. .

the commission does not have authority over capitol or library of congress buildings .

national capital planning commission in 1924 , congress established the national capital park and planning commission to implement the mcmillan plan for the district of columbia ( see figure 2 ) .

pursuant to the act of june 6 , 1924 , the commission was to "preserve the flow of water in rock creek , to prevent pollution of rock creek and the potomac and anacostia rivers , to preserve forests and natural scenery in and about washington , and to provide for the comprehensive systematic , and continuous development of the park , parkway , and playground system of the national capital. .

in 1952 , congress , in the national capital planning act , changed the commission's name to the national capital planning commission .

the act also expanded the commission's geographic boundaries and recognized the creation of the national capital region in maryland and virginia .

in the house report accompanying the bill , the committee on the district of columbia emphasized the new regional mission of the commission .

the bill denominates and authorizes the commission to be the central planning agency for the federal and district governments within the national capital region ( the district and its environs ) and to be the official representative of the aforesaid governments for collaboration with the regional planning council.… the bill includes additional subjects , such as viaducts , subways , major thoroughfares , monuments and memorials , public reservations , or property such as airports , parking areas , institutions , open spaces , public utilities and surveys for transportation , redevelopment of obsolescent , blighted or slum areas , and specifically adds the all - important subject of density or distribution of population [emphasis added] .

currently , the commission consists of 12 members .

three members are appointed by the president , including the chair .

two of the three members appointed by the president must reside in virginia and maryland , respectively .

the mayor of the district of columbia appoints two members who must be residents of the district .

in addition , a number of regional officials serve as ex - officio members .

these include the mayor of washington , dc , the chair the council of the district of columbia ; heads of executive branch agencies with significant land holdings in the district ; and leaders of the u.s. house and senate committees with district oversight responsibilities .

in addition to providing guidance and approval at multiple steps of the monument and memorial creation process in the district of columbia , the ncpc also operates under the authority of other laws for planning within the national capital region .

these include the national capital planning act , height of buildings act of 1910 , district of columbia zoning act , foreign missions act , international center act , national historic preservation act , national environmental policy act , district of columbia home rule act , and the capper - crampton act .

state historic preservation office for the district of columbia created pursuant to the national historic preservation act of 1966 , state historic preservation officers "administer the national historic preservation program at the state level , review national register of historic places nominations , maintain data on historic properties that have been identified but not yet nominated , and consult with federal agencies. .

while not a statutory part of the memorial process , the national capital planning commission recommends consultation with the state historic preservation office for the district of columbia as part of the design approval process .

american battle monuments commission the american battle monuments commission was originally created in 1923 to "prepare plans and estimates for the erection of suitable memorials to mark and commemorate the services of the american forces in europe and erect memorials therein at such places as the commission shall determine , including works of architecture and art in the american cemeteries in europe. .

generally , the commission has statutory authority to design , construct , operate and maintain permanent american cemeteries in foreign countries ; establish and maintain u.s. military memorials , monuments and markers where american armed forces have served overseas since april 6 , 1917 ; and control "the design and construction of permanent u.s. military monuments and markers by other u.s. citizens and organizations , both public and private , and encouraging their maintenance. .

in limited circumstances , the commission has also been tasked with creating memorials within the united states .

for example , the commission was statutorily authorized to create the world war ii memorial in the district of columbia .

