medical malpractice has attracted congressional attention numerous times over the past few decades , particularly in the midst of three "crisis" periods for medical malpractice liability insurance in the mid - 1970s , the mid - 1980s , and the early 2000s .

these periods were marked by sharp increases in medical liability insurance premiums , difficulties in finding any liability insurance in some regions and among some specialties as insurers withdrew from providing coverage , reports of providers leaving areas or retiring following insurance difficulties , and a variety of public policy measures at both the state and federal levels to address the market disruptions .

in each case , attention receded to some degree after a few years as premium increases moderated and market conditions calmed .

the overall medical liability insurance market is not currently exhibiting the same level of crisis as in previous time periods .

nonetheless , problems with the affordability and availability of malpractice insurance persist , especially in particular regions and physician specialties ( eg , obstetricians ) .

in addition , concern about claims for medical malpractice may affect individual provider decisions particularly through increased use of tests and procedures to protect against future lawsuits ( "defensive medicine" ) , which may affect health care costs .

the malpractice system also experiences issues with equity and access .

for example , some observers have criticized the current system's performance with respect to compensating patients who have been harmed by malpractice , deterring substandard medical care , and promoting patient safety .

public policy measures that have been effective in addressing the successive insurance market disruptions , and those that may be effective in the future , have been a matter of debate .

some proposals , such as the current help efficient , accessible , low - cost , timely healthcare ( health ) act ( h.r .

5 , s. 218 , and s. 1099 ) , have addressed the tort system , particularly limits on claims brought in medical liability cases ; others have addressed the insurance system , particularly increased direct regulation of insurance companies , or removal of the existing partial exemption from federal antitrust laws for the "business of insurance. .

medical malpractice insurance premiums add little to the direct cost of health care relative to total health care spending , but medical malpractice tort reform may still result in savings over time by reducing indirect costs to the system .

medical malpractice insurance premiums written in 2009 totaled approximately $10.2 billion , whereas health expenditures were $2.6 trillion in 2010 as reported by the national health expenditure accounts ( nhea ) .

indirect costs , particularly increased use of tests and procedures by providers to protect against future lawsuits ( "defensive medicine" ) , have been estimated to be higher than direct costs , and particularly , medical malpractice insurance premiums .

these conclusions have been controversial , in part because some synthesis studies have found that national estimates of the cost of defensive medicine are unreliable .

a recent analysis on the subject estimated that the total cost of defensive medicine in 2008 was $45.6 billion .

prior to the passage of the health care reform law , cbo conducted its own analysis , as well as synthesized and analyzed previous studies on the relationship between medical malpractice and health care costs .

the recent cbo analyses of h.r .

5 estimated that federal tort reforms would reduce national health care spending by 0.4% - 0.5% ( equivalent to approximately $9 billion to $11 billion in 2010 ) depending on the exact provisions included .

this estimate represents the cumulative impact of federal tort reform on lowering medical malpractice insurance premiums and reducing use of health care services .

in addition , it takes into account the fact that many states have already implemented tort reforms , and therefore , some proportion of potential cost savings already has been realized .

other earlier studies estimated the reduction in health care spending attributable to state tort reforms .

these studies compared pre - and post - reform spending within each state that implemented such reforms , and found varying impact .

one set of studies found a 4% - 9% reduction in hospital spending for medicare patients with heart disease in states that implemented tort reforms , whereas another study found that state tort reforms reduced personal health care expenditures by 3% - 4% .

cbo also estimated the effect of federal tort reform on the federal budget .

in its analyses of h.r .

5 , cbo estimated that such reforms would reduce spending under medicare , medicaid , the state children's health insurance program , and the federal employees health benefits program by approximately $34 billion to $48 billion from 2011 to 2021 .

in addition , the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) estimated that such reforms would lead to an increase in federal revenues of $6 billion to almost $10 billion over the same 10-year period .

by combining the impact of federal tort reform on mandatory health spending and tax revenues , cbo estimated that such reform could reduce the federal budget deficit by approximately $40 billion to $57 billion over 10 years .

addressing problems in medical malpractice can be challenging , particularly due to the interactions of three different relevant systems , each of which is complex in its own right: health care , tort , and insurance .

recent experience in the medical malpractice insurance market , within the states with respect to the number of malpractice law suits and their average settlement amounts , and among providers that have embarked on quality improvement efforts that reduce malpractice exposure and premiums , can be described as encouraging .

it is not yet clear whether these trends are long term or whether they reflect the trough of another cycle in the medical liability insurance marketplace , and their link , if any , to state or federal policies is also unclear .

the cyclical experience of medical malpractice insurers is reflected in aggregate data about the industry compiled and analyzed by the naic ( see figure 1 ) .

from 1992 to 1998 , direct incurred losses were relatively stable , varying from a low of $3.18 billion in 1994 to a high of $4.46 billion in 1998 .

however , from 1998 to 2003 , losses grew steadily year after year , to a high of $8.46 billion in that last year , coinciding with the last crisis period .

from 2003 to 2010 , losses fell every year to a low of $3.52 billion with the 2011 losses of $3.66 billion only slightly higher than 2010 .

 ( the loss data are in nominal dollar amounts. ) .

\s malpractice insurance premiums roughly followed losses as those amounts increased .

however , premiums have not fallen nearly as much as losses in recent years as the trend reversed .

the loss ratio , which compares losses to premiums , reflects this uneven trend ( see figure 2 ) .

a high ratio generally implies lower profits for insurers on the insurance portion of their operations .

the loss ratio for the industry rose steadily from 78.41% in 1997 to 126.83% in 2001 , tracking closely with the losses trend .

since 2001 , the loss ratio has rapidly decreased .

in 2010 , the loss ratio of 51.13% was the lowest one in nearly two decades , and the 2008 , 2011 , and 2009 ratios were the second , third , and fourth lowest at 54.62% , 54.66% , and 55.66% , respectively .

this means that over the past four years , the industry experienced its highest profit margin on direct premiums earned in the calendar years analyzed .

insurers , who are regulated by state insurance regulators , may also profit , or lose , from their investments .

in general , with such low loss ratios , theory would suggest increasing competition as other insurers enter the market in search of profits .

this , however , may not be happening as quickly as expected in medical malpractice if prospective insurers are wary due to past variations in medical malpractice losses , or if prospective insurers' capital has been depleted due to losses incurred during the recent financial crisis .

\ .

in 2009 , there were 10,739 paid medical malpractice claims in the united states — 27.6% fewer than in 2003 .

some of these claims were paid without a trial .

paid claims represent only a part of total claims , and a majority of claims were either dropped or settled through litigation in which the defendant provider was not found liable .

at least one study found that in roughly 80% of the cases that went to trial , the alleged wrongdoer in a medical malpractice case has been exonerated .

table 1 shows the percentage change in the number of paid medical malpractice claims between 2003 and 2009 .

only two states , massachusetts and new mexico , experienced an increase in the number of paid claims over this time period .

six states ( connecticut , delaware , indiana , kentucky , ohio , and texas ) and the district of columbia experienced a 50% or greater percentage decline in the number of paid claims .

the average claim paid in the united states in 2009 was $323,273 .

although the 2009 figure is up from $289,891 in 2003 , the rate of increase over this time period mirrors that found in medical inflation generally .

these averages , however , mask considerable variance across states .

for instance , in kansas the average claim paid in 2009 was roughly $155,622 ( 72 cases ) whereas in wisconsin it was almost $761,000 ( 65 cases ) .

figure 3 shows the change in the average total dollars in medical malpractice claims paid from 2003 through 2009 .

sixteen states saw a decline in their average medical malpractice claims paid , ranging from roughly 5% to 50% .

an additional 17 states saw their average total dollars in medical malpractice claims paid from 2003 through 2009 rise more slowly than medical inflation .

eighteen states saw their average total dollars in medical malpractice claims paid from 2003 through 2009 rise faster than medical inflation .

these statistics , while illustrative , still lend themselves to different interpretations .

averages may not fully reflect circumstances in particular states or among particular high - risk specialties .

some states appear to have sticky premiums , that is , premiums that have not fallen despite a reduction in the number of claims .

in addition , some specialties experienced premium increases over the past decade well in excess of medical inflation .

providers , both physicians and institutional , appear to have been increasingly successful at identifying the causes of medical injuries and reducing them through quality improvement efforts .

this appears to have reduced the number of medical malpractice law suits and to have lowered medical malpractice premiums .

for instance , the american society of anesthesiologists ( asa ) reports that the number of anesthesiology deaths has declined from 1 in 5,000 to less than 1 in 200,000 , and real medical malpractice insurance premiums for anesthesiologists have declined by more than 40% in real terms since 1985 .

evidence of connections between quality improvement , improved patient safety , lower medical malpractice insurance premiums , and fewer law suits extends beyond anesthesiology .

a recent rand corporation study found that "improvements in patient safety reduce malpractice claims. .

specifically , the study , conducted at the county level in california , found that a county that "saw a decrease of 10 adverse events ( achieved through improvements in the quality of care provided ) in a given year would also see a decrease of 3.7 malpractice claims. .

similarly , in 2010 , virginia mason medical center , in seattle , wa , was named hospital of the decade by the leapfrog group , along with the university of maryland medical center , for "major achievements in reducing medical errors and other innovations in patient safety and quality. .

virginia mason reports that , with improving quality of care and preventing errors , we have seen a decline in our medical malpractice premiums .

we have seen decreases in medical malpractice premiums every year since 2005 .

as of 2011 , our premiums have dropped by 52% since 2005 , saving us literally millions of dollars .

although other medical systems have also achieved similar outcomes while pursuing efforts to improve quality and reduce or prevent medical errors , some argue that enough is not being done to ensure that hospitals and other providers fully internalize the costs of their errors such that they have a solid business case for improving quality and reducing errors .

