a healthy agricultural industry and a healthy environment are both important to the nation .

however , agricultural production can have varying impacts on the environment .

the use of both natural resources ( eg , soil and water ) and synthetic inputs ( eg , fertilizers and pesticides ) in agricultural production can sometimes create a negative impact on the surrounding ecosystem .

for example , soil erosion , farm chemical runoff , and overgrazing can affect water and air resources .

converting grassland prairies and wetlands to crop production can impact wildlife populations .

the magnitude of these environmental impacts varies widely across the country and changes over time .

traditionally , farm and ranch operations have been exempt or excluded from many federal environmental statutes and regulations , and some point out that the relative number of environmental regulations affecting agriculture is small compared to other industries .

historically , environmental policies have focused on large industrial sources such as factories and power plants , because attempting to regulate numerous individual crop and livestock operations can be a challenge for government regulators .

therefore , the current federal farm policy addressing environmental concerns is in large part voluntary ; that is , it seeks to encourage agricultural producers to adopt conservation practices through economic incentives .

because natural resources are a major input into most agricultural production , many in agriculture cite the health of the surrounding environment as being important for long - term productivity .

however , given the agricultural sector's size in the landscape and its potential to affect its surrounding environment , there is interest in both managing potential impacts of agricultural actions on the environment and also maintaining an economically viable agricultural industry .

the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) is the primary federal authority for administering environmental protection policies , while the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) is the primary federal authority for incentivizing agricultural production .

most environmental regulation , in terms of permitting , inspection , and enforcement , is done by state and local governments , typically based on policies administered by the epa .

usda provides both educational outreach and technical and financial assistance opportunities for producers to implement environmentally sustainable practices .

while many of these voluntary programs and policies have been in place for decades and have had considerable success , some question whether a strictly voluntary approach to agricultural conservation generates sufficient environmental gains .

epa , on the other hand , has recently received criticism from some lawmakers and industry leaders for appearing to focus some of its recent regulatory efforts on agriculture .

some claim epa has overreached its regulatory authority .

in general , agricultural industry groups , among others , have been vocal in their displeasure with recent epa regulatory proposals and the costs associated with protecting public health and the environment .

others , such as environmental groups , have supported some of the regulatory actions and in some instances voiced concerns that the federal actions may not go far enough in protecting public health and the environment , prompting some lawmakers offer statements supporting various epa regulatory efforts .

criticisms of the regulatory actions are reflected in recent legislative proposals that would restrict or prohibit certain actions .

beyond the criticism of individual regulations of epa and other agencies , there also are calls for broad regulatory reforms , for example , to reinforce the role of economic considerations in agency decision making or to increase congress's role in approving or disapproving regulatory decisions .

congress will likely continue to give attention to epa's and other federal agencies' roles in regulating environmental protection .

both the senate and house committees on agriculture have shown particular interest in epa's actions and conducted oversight hearings on regulatory impacts on agriculture during the 112 th congress .

agricultural production practices from both livestock and crop operations generate a variety of substances that enter the atmosphere , potentially creating health and environmental issues .

agriculture's effect on air quality rose to national importance in the 1930s , when the conversion of native grasslands to cropland caused severe dust storms known as the dust bowl .

the federal response to this phenomenon created many of the conservation outreach and education programs that remain in place today .

while dust storms of this proportion are rare in the united states today , issues associated with soil erosion , particulates and farm chemical emissions , and livestock odor are still of concern .

the following section covers five federal regulations relating to air , including mandatory reporting of greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) ; ghg emissions tailoring rule and the "cow tax" ; reductions of emissions from gasoline / diesel powered stationary engines ; national ambient air quality standards ( particulate matter and ozone ) ; and emergency planning and community right - to - know act ( epcra ) and comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) reporting requirements .

the release of sediment , nutrients , pathogens , and pesticides from agricultural production can degrade the quality of water resources .

while it is widely believed that agriculture can have a significant impact on water quality , there is no comprehensive national study of agriculture's effect on water quality .

several water quality assessments document degradation from agriculture practices ; however , the extent and magnitude is difficult to measure because of its nonpoint nature .

federal environmental laws , such as the clean water act ( cwa ) , largely do not regulate agricultural actors , in many cases giving the regulatory responsibilities to the states .

constraints on agricultural production to reduce pollution discharges typically arise at the state level in response to local concerns .

the following section covers five regulations relating to water , including implementation of existing clean water act permit requirements for cafos ; chesapeake bay protection and restoration ; florida nutrient water quality standards ; defining "waters of the united states" for cwa regulatory purposes ; and spill prevention control and countermeasure ( spcc ) plans .

the agricultural industry is sensitive to fluctuations in energy sources and cost .

the use of fossil fuel - based fertilizers , diesel fuel , and , more recently , corn - based ethanol all have a significant impact on both crop and livestock operations .

since the 1970s , federal policies have offered a variety of incentives , regulations , and programs to encourage growth in the bioenergy industry as a sustainable alternative to fossil fuels .

the increased emphasis on agriculture - based biofuels has received mixed reviews within the agricultural community .

while some continue to push for greater federal involvement , critics of the federal intervention also have emerged .

the following section covers several federal regulations relating to energy , including renewable fuels standard ( rfs2 ) rule ; and e15 waiver petition .

agricultural "pests," which includes certain insects , plant pathogens , weeds , and vertebrates , can interfere with the production of crops and livestock used for food and fiber .

pesticides are used in agriculture to prevent , kill , repel or mitigate pests that might harm crop yields , but their use may pose risks to human health and the environment .

in order to prevent unreasonable risks from pesticide use , pesticides are primarily regulated at the federal level by the federal insecticide , fungicide , and rodenticide act ( fifra ) .

fifra directs the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to regulate the sale and use of pesticide products through registration ( that is , licensing ) based on risk assessments .

the federal regulation of pesticides also requires routine re - evaluations of risks in order for any necessary restrictions to reflect the latest scientific understanding .

for more information about pesticide laws , see crs report rl31921 , pesticide law: a summary of the statutes .

the following section covers four selected issues concerning federal regulations relating to pesticides , including clean water act permits for pesticide application ; pesticide spray drift ; atrazine ; and pesticide registration and the endangered species act ( esa ) .

for the more than 30 years since congress enacted the clean water act ( cwa ) and the federal insecticide , fungicide , and rodenticide act ( fifra ) , little apparent direct conflict existed between the two laws .

epa's operating principle during that time was that pesticides used according to the requirements of fifra do not require regulatory consideration under the cwa .

epa had never required cwa permits for use of fifra - approved materials , and epa rules did not specifically address the issue .

epa's interpretation and operating practice were challenged in several court cases .

at issue has been how fifra - approved pesticides that are sprayed over or into waters are regulated and , specifically , whether the fifra regulatory regime is sufficient alone to ensure protection of water quality or whether such pesticide application requires approval under a cwa permit .

the issue arose initially over challenges to some routine practices in the west ( weed control in irrigation ditches and spraying for silvicultural pest control on u.s. forest service lands ) .

it drew more attention in connection with efforts by public health officials to combat mosquito - borne illnesses such as west nile virus .

the litigation created uncertainty over whether application of pesticides and herbicides to waterbodies requires a cwa water discharge permit .

epa tried to promulgate policy to clarify the relationship of the two laws and to address conflicts resulting from several judicial rulings , ultimately in a regulation issued in 2006 that attempted to specify circumstances in which pesticides applied to u.s. waters do not require cwa permits .

that rule was challenged by multiple parties , and in january 2009 , a federal appellate court vacated the rule .

as a result , persons who spray pesticides on or near water are now required to obtain a cwa permit .

the federal court's ruling appeared to leave little room for epa to fashion a new rule consistent with the agency's long - standing view that fifra - compliant applications do not require cwa permits .

industry groups subsequently petitioned the supreme court to review the case , but the court denied the petition .

to meet the court's mandate , epa issued a pesticide general permit , or pgp , on october 31 , 2011 .

epa estimates that the universe of affected activities that for the first time will be subject to cwa permits is approximately 5.6 million applications annually , which are performed by 365,000 applicators covering four use patterns: ( 1 ) mosquito and other flying insect pest control ; ( 2 ) aquatic weed and algae control ; ( 3 ) aquatic nuisance animal control ; and ( 4 ) forest canopy pest control .

the permit covers about 500 different pesticide active ingredients that are contained in approximately 3,700 product labels .

the permit applies to a variety of entities , including agricultural interests involved in crop and timber tract production , forest nurseries , and operating irrigation systems ; pesticide and agricultural chemical manufacturing ; mosquito or other vector control districts and commercial applicators that service them ; utilities ( eg , electric power , natural gas , water supply , and wastewater ) ; and government agencies and departments engaged in air and water resource management and conservation .

it requires all operators to minimize pesticide discharges to waters by practices such as using the lowest effective amount of pesticide product that is optimal for controlling the target pest .

it also requires operators to prepare pesticide discharge management plans to document their pest management practices .

permittees must monitor for observable adverse effects in the treatment area and where the pesticides are discharged to u.s. waters .

the permit does not cover agricultural stormwater runoff or irrigation return flow , as these discharges are statutorily exempt from cwa permitting , and it also does not cover terrestrial application to control pests on agricultural crops or forest floors .

thus , because pesticide applications to land that do not result in point source discharges of pesticides to u.s. waters do not require permit coverage , epa says that many farms are not affected by the court's decision and do not need cwa permits .

the epa general permit applies in states and areas where epa is the national pollutant discharge elimination system ( npdes ) permitting authority , but has been used as a model for other states to develop their own general permits .

general permits issued by the other states must meet cwa guidelines and also may be more stringent than epa's requirements .

most entities subject to the epa general permit were automatically covered , while some pesticide applicators with more significant discharges must submit a notice of intent ( noi ) to be covered by the pgp .

for example , any federal or state agency that conducts pest management as an integral part of its operation , and special - purpose districts with a specific responsibility to control pests , must submit a noi .

the permit took effect in january 2012 .

in an effort to halt epa's regulatory activity , the house passed legislation in the 112 th congress ( h.r .

872 ) intended to overturn the court's 2009 ruling by exempting aerial pesticide application activities from clean water permit requirements .

also in the 112 th congress , the text of h.r .

872 was included as a provision of the 2012 farm bill approved by the house agriculture committee , but this bill was not enacted .

in the 113 th congress , legislation to exempt certain authorized pesticide uses from any permit requirements has been introduced again ( s. 175 , s. 802 , h.r .

935 ) .

the text of h.r .

935 was introduced in the house - passed farm bill ( h.r .

2642 ) , but it was not included in the enacted 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) .

general permits cover categories of point sources that have common elements and that discharge the same types of wastes .

they allow the permitting authority to allocate resources efficiently , especially when there is a large number of potential permittees .

permitting procedures are streamlined and simplified , compared with cwa individual permits .

still , many agricultural industry groups are fearful that the court's ruling and epa's general permit will lead to more burdensome and potentially costly requirements that affect their operation and activities .

[author name scrubbed] , specialist in resources and environmental policy , [phone number scrubbed] , [email address scrubbed] .

pesticide spray drift describes the movement of pesticide during or soon after its application through the air .

such drift can potentially move away from the intended target to unintended locations .

various stakeholders , including many in the agricultural community , have expressed their concerns to states and epa regarding potential risk associated with exposure to spray drift .

these include potential risks to the health of applicators and by - standers , and potential effects on non - target animals and plants .

many of these stakeholders remain cautious about the level and extent of restrictions epa may require to prevent unreasonable adverse effects from spray drift .

pesticide spray drift has also been the subject of several citizen petitions and lawsuits filed against epa by environmental advocacy groups .

when considering whether to register a pesticide under fifra , epa currently incorporates an assessment of the potential risks from spray drift as part of an overall risk assessment of a pesticide .

epa may require an applicant of a pesticide registration to conduct specific tests if the applicant proposes application methods that could potentially result in spray drift .

results from these tests may be used by the agency in determining whether precautionary labeling or certain other restrictions are needed as a condition for registration .

accordingly , epa's current regulation of pesticide spray drift primarily affects pesticide manufacturers .

pesticide applicators may be subject to enforcement by states or epa if pesticides are not applied in accordance with label restrictions .

epa has taken several actions to address risks from spray drift .

in 2009 , epa proposed guidance for pesticide registration applicants and registrants to revise label statements intended to reduce spray drift .

this guidance was not formally adopted .

epa also initiated a voluntary drift reduction technology program to encourage development and verification of new pesticide application technologies that may reduce spray drift .

epa is currently evaluating a drift reduction technology verification protocol , prior to its adoption for verifying the effectiveness of various spray drift reduction technology .

additionally , epa has worked with pesticide applicators and the agricultural community to encourage the use of best management practices .

in january 2014 , epa proposed guidance regarding the agency's process in evaluating risks from pesticide spray drift as part of its overall process for conducting pesticide risk assessments .

the agency sought comments regarding refinements to models that are currently used by the agency to estimate spray drift and indirect exposure of such drift to children .

pesticide manufacturers and applicators are concerned that the proposed risk assessment methodologies regarding spray drift may result in epa requiring overly restrictive measures regarding how and when certain pesticides are used .

they contend that refinements to models proposed by epa do not take into account technological advances in pesticide application that reduce spray drift .

conversely , environmental advocacy groups contend that epa's proposal would not lead to sufficiently protective measures taken by the agency to ensure that off - target spray drift is minimized .

potential impacts of spray drift from conventional agricultural operations on neighboring organic farm operations have also been an area of some concern .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in environmental policy , [phone number scrubbed] , [email address scrubbed] .

the herbicide atrazine is one of the most widely used agricultural pesticides in the united states today .

widespread use of atrazine , reports of its presence and persistence in surface and drinking water in nearby areas where the herbicide is applied , and scientific studies suggesting that exposure to atrazine might disrupt the normal action of hormones in animals have prompted epa to review the herbicide extensively .

epa has conducted a number of risk assessments of atrazine during the past 20 years as new information has become available to ensure that the existing registration still adequately prevents "unreasonable adverse effects on the environment" under fifra .

in 2006 , epa issued a re - registration eligibility decision for atrazine after the agency completed a cumulative exposure assessment of atrazine and another triazine herbicide , simazine .

the agency determined in its decision that products containing atrazine were eligible for continued registration only if registrants took certain risk mitigation measures including ecological monitoring of watersheds and specific label modifications .

in 2009 , epa requested its fifra scientific advisory panel ( sap ) to assist in reviewing the agency's approach for evaluating new information about atrazine from human epidemiological studies as well as studies of laboratory animals and wildlife .

from 2009 to 2012 , the agency held six sap meetings to consider the then newly available information about atrazine .

though no decisions resulted from these meetings , the agency indicated that the information from such meetings would be taken into account as part of the registration review process , which is described below .

in 2011 , epa received a citizen petition requesting "a federal ban on the use and production of atrazine. .

the agency denied the petition in august 2013 for not "demonstrat[ing] that immediate regulatory action is either necessary or appropriate. .

in june 2013 , epa initiated its periodic review of the registration for atrazine .

such periodic reviews are required under fifra .

epa anticipates making a registration review decision in 2016 .

as part of this periodic review , the agency plans to conduct separate assessments on ecological , human health , and other risks using currently available information .

the agency determined that registrants of atrazine were not required to develop new information .

the public will have opportunity to comment on draft risk assessments and the proposed registration review decision upon their publication in the federal register .

on the basis of its review , epa will decide whether further regulatory restrictions are necessary to prevent unreasonable adverse effects on human health or the environment .

additionally , a "special review" of the potential risks posed by atrazine and related triazine pesticides that was initiated by the agency in 1994 remains ongoing during the registration review process .

pesticide manufacturers , distributors , and agricultural users of atrazine have expressed concerns that frequent reviews by epa may lead to new restrictions or cancellation of uses .

these stakeholders contend that further restriction could potentially limit the availability of atrazine as a cost - effective measure that helps growers increase crop yields .

conversely , public health and environmental advocates maintain that new restrictions on atrazine uses should be considered and may be warranted if the current measures associated with its registration are no longer adequate to ensure that the distribution , sale , and use of atrazine will not present risk of unreasonable adverse effects on human health or the environment .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in environmental policy , [phone number scrubbed] , [email address scrubbed] .

the endangered species act ( esa ) seeks to protect species identified as endangered or threatened with extinction and to protect the habitat on which they depend .

it is administered primarily by the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) .

for certain marine and anadromous species , it is administered by the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) .

dwindling species are listed as either endangered or threatened according to assessments of the risk of their extinction .

once a species is listed , legal tools are available to aid its recovery and to protect its habitat .

for activities on privately owned land such as farms and ranches , the primary direct impact of the esa is through the law's prohibitions on taking of listed species .

the word take means "to harass , harm , pursue , hunt , shoot , wound , kill , trap , capture , or collect , or to attempt to engage in any such conduct. .

thus , such activities as applying pesticides to kill insects eaten frequently by an endangered bat species , or cutting down a tree that contains the nestlings of an endangered bird , would constitute a taking .

if federal actions ( or actions of non - federal parties that require a federal approval , permit , or funding ) might adversely affect a listed species as determined by fws ( or nmfs , depending on the species ) , the federal action agencies must complete a biological assessment .

the assessment is used to determine whether formal consultation is necessary .

through consultation with either fws or nmfs , federal agencies must ensure , based on "the best scientific and commercial data available," that their actions are "not likely to jeopardize the continued existence" of any endangered or threatened species , nor to adversely modify critical habitat .

this is referred to as a section 7 consultation .

"action" includes any activity authorized , funded , or carried out by a federal agency , including permits and licenses .

actions of some federal agencies may affect a variety of agricultural practices over a very wide area or a region and have the potential to affect many listed species .

perhaps the most widely known of such agency actions is the registration and use of pesticides .

under esa , epa is required to consult with fws and / or nmfs on whether the use of a pesticide might jeopardize the continued existence of a listed species or adversely modify critical habitat .

to mitigate harm , epa might need to include restrictions on a pesticide label regarding its use ( such as limiting total area , weather conditions , distance from a particular habitat type , etc. ) .

consultation , or lack of consultation , between agencies in such cases has sometimes been contentious and has led to citizen lawsuits to enforce the esa .

on several occasions , epa has been sued for failing to comply with esa requirements on some of its pesticide regulation decisions .

in 2013 , epa announced the availability of a final paper "describing enhanced opportunities for stakeholder input during its review of pesticide registrations ... and associated consultations under the endangered species act ( esa ) . .

this paper was jointly prepared by epa , usda , nmfs , and fws , and outlined changes to epa's registration review process that are intended to facilitate esa consultations across the participating federal agencies , including a greater role for usda .

the practical effect of this paper appears to be earlier and more wide - ranging consultation among the agencies while conducting pesticide risk assessments .

epa's statutory obligation under esa to consult with fws and / or nmfs on its actions and to avoid jeopardy remained unchanged .

also , in 2013 , the national research council ( nrc ) of the national academies , as requested by epa , usda , nmfs , and fws , published a report containing recommendations relevant to scientific and technical issues in assessing risks to species listed under the esa from potential exposures to pesticides that are registered under fifra .

the nrc recommended a common approach for epa , nmfs , and fws to conduct risk assessments that take into account exposure modeling , data on observable health effects , and uncertainties in current scientific understanding .

since nrc published its report , epa , usda , nmfs , and fws have reported progress in implementing these recommendations including the development of interim approaches to be applied in the periodic review of pesticide registration reviews beginning in 2014 .

section 10013 of the agriculture act of 2014 ( 2014 farm bill , p.l .

113-79 ) directs epa , usda , nmfs , and fws to submit two reports ( in 2014 and 2015 ) on the implementation of the nrc recommendations .

as epa , usda , nmfs , and fws continue to implement the nrc recommendations , the agencies' approach may affect how pesticides are assessed in terms of risk to listed species .

such assessments are used to inform the potential need for risk mitigation measures .

these measures could include imposing restrictions on the application of certain pesticides , possibly affecting pesticide applications , including those in agricultural areas .

as federal agencies work toward a revised approach for integrating esa requirements as part of the pesticide registration process , various stakeholders , including pesticide registrants and the environmental community , continue to voice their concerns on how these activities are conducted .

the environmental community remains active in litigation against epa that seeks to compel the agency to implement requirements to protect listed species under esa from the use of pesticides registered under fifra .

lynne corn , specialist in natural resources policy , [phone number scrubbed] , [email address scrubbed] , or [author name scrubbed] , analyst in environmental policy , [phone number scrubbed] , [email address scrubbed] .

