in the united states , 50.7 million people , or 16.7% of the u.s. population , had no health insurance for at least some of 2009 .

this is the highest rate of uninsurance over the past decade .

in fact , during the past decade , the aggregate uninsurance rate was never less than 13.4% .

uninsured individuals are , on average , more likely to forgo needed health care than insured individuals , including services for preventable or chronic conditions .

in addition , the uninsured are less likely to have a "usual source of care," or a provider to oversee individual health care .

for these and other reasons , the uninsured often have worse health outcomes than the insured .

among the most likely to be uninsured in 2009 were adults between 19 and 25 , hispanics , those living in families with incomes below 200% of the federal poverty guidelines , and those in families with relatively weak attachments to the labor force .

this report characterizes the health insurance status of individuals in 2009 .

following a brief discussion of the data , the report examines the relationship between types of health insurance ( including employment - sponsored , other private , and medicaid ) and individual characteristics ( including age , other demographic characteristics , and ties to the labor market ) .

next , the report demonstrates the different conclusions that might be drawn from different analyses of the uninsurance data .

the report then compares the likelihood that various individuals with different demographic characteristics were uninsured .

the report concludes with a discussion of trends in uninsurance since 1999 .

this report uses data from the 2010 current population survey ( cps ) conducted by the census bureau of the u.s. department of commerce .

the cps is a monthly survey of non - institutionalized civilian households primarily used to collect employment data .

the annual social and economic supplement ( asec ) to the cps collects information on individual health insurance status , income , and poverty .

the asec is also known as the march supplement , because most of the surveys are completed in march , with many questions covering the prior year .

about 100,000 addresses comprise the sample households to be interviewed .

statistical techniques adjust the data to represent all households in the nation .

the key variable in this report is whether each person was uninsured in 2009 .

more specifically , the uninsurance variable measures whether an individual lacked health insurance on any one representative day in 2009 .

this report , therefore , uses the term "uninsured" to mean at a point in 2009 , and not necessarily over the entire year .

the march supplement to the cps is one of several popular sources used to estimate the levels of uninsurance in the united states .

additional prominent data sources include the american community survey ( acs ) , the medical expenditure panel survey ( meps ) , and the survey of income and program participation ( sipp ) .

each dataset gives broadly similar results , and crs analyzes the data from the two largest data sets , the acs and the cps .

this section covers the relationships between health insurance and an individual's demographic and employment characteristics .

an individual's age and many other demographic characteristics cannot be changed by policy .

public policies , however , can affect income and labor force attachments .

this section demonstrates that , in evaluating groups of uninsured individuals , it is important to decide on an appropriate comparison group .

although citizenship status is used as an example , the issues covered in this section are applicable to other traits as well .

the conclusion is that different representations of the same data can lead to different conclusions if care is not taken when evaluating the data .

figure 1 looks at the total number of uninsured individuals and displays the percentage of uninsured individuals by citizenship status .

from this picture alone , it appears that the greatest number of individuals in need of policy support are those who are native - born citizens .

this is because almost 75% of the total pool of the uninsured are native - born citizens , while about 20% of the total pool of the uninsured are not citizens , with the remaining 5% being naturalized citizens .

in this example , it is important to remember that all comparisons are relative to the total number of uninsured .

the remaining figures , however , demonstrate that different conclusions might be drawn if the analysis compares the percentage of uninsured individuals within each group's citizenship status .

these comparisons are illustrated in figure 2 , figure 3 , and figure 4 for native - born citizens , noncitizens , and naturalized citizens .

figure 2 demonstrates that far more native - born citizens are insured ( about 84% ) than are uninsured ( about 16% ) .

even though figure 1 demonstrates that native - born citizens are the largest group of uninsured citizens , figure 2 demonstrate that , of all native born citizens , 16% are uninsured .

the comparison across the two measurements of noncitizens is also instructive .

figure 1 demonstrates that noncitizens comprise the smallest citizenship group of the uninsured .

on the other hand , figure 3 demonstrates that almost one half of noncitizens are uninsured .

similar disparities can be found when comparing the relative importance of uninsured naturalized citizens in figure 1 and figure 4 .

uninsured naturalized citizens comprise 5.8% of the pool of the uninsured but 16.1% of all naturalized citizens .

this apparent paradox — that the group least likely to be uninsured makes up the largest portion of the uninsured — exists when looking at other characteristics .

it comes about because the group that represents the largest share of the relevant population ( i.e. , native - born citizens ) does not have to have the largest uninsurance rate ( i.e. , not citizens ) .

in fact , as the data in table 2 demonstrate , the total number of naturalized citizens and non - citizens ( 33.0 million ) is less than the number of uninsured citizens ( 37.4 million ) the difference between calculations in percentages and calculations in numbers raises difficult issues for policy makers considering policy options to reduce the number of uninsured .

for example , proposals that may affect the greatest number of citizens ( who comprise almost three - quarters of the pool of uninsured ) may not affect the greatest number of noncitizens ( of whom almost half are uninsured ) .

an individual's probability of being uninsured can be measured in two ways .

table 2 shows differences in the probability of being uninsured for various broad demographic groups .

for example , among those under 65 , blacks were 22.5% likely to be uninsured , whereas whites were 14.0% likely to be uninsured .

in other words , blacks were 8.5 percentage points more likely to be uninsured than whites .

this comparison across groups is the first way to measure the probability of uninsurance .

race is only one of many factors by which individuals differ .

it is possible to compare individuals who are largely identical ( at least in the variables collected in the survey data ) , but differ along one variable of interest .

this section first compares the likelihood of not having health insurance for representative individuals who are largely identical but differ by race .

the section then , for each race , compares representative individuals who are largely identical but differ by age .

figure 5 compares the likelihood across races that the representative individual is uninsured .

all individuals compared were assumed to be 40-year - old , native - born citizens living with a spouse and children in the northeast .

the individuals differed by race , and therefore had different probabilities of uninsurance ( even though they shared other characteristics ) .

for example , this individual faced a 10.8% likelihood of uninsurance if black , and a 8.1% likelihood of uninsurance if white .

when comparing two largely identical individuals ( defined as 40 years old , with children , northeasterners , and native - born citizens ) , blacks are 2.7 percentage points more likely to be uninsured than whites .

neither of these two measures of the likelihood of uninsurance is the "better" measure .

rather , the two measures answer different questions .

when comparing all black individuals and all white individuals ( see table 2 ) , blacks are 8.5 percentage points more likely to be uninsured than whites .

when comparing individuals who already share basic demographic characteristics ( see figure 5 ) , blacks are 2.7 percentage points more likely to be uninsured than whites .

figure 6 depicts the likelihood of representative white , black , and hispanic individuals being uninsured in 2009 at every age between birth and age 64 .

once again , these individuals were native - born citizens who lived with a spouse ( or at least one parent ) and children ( if an adult ) in the northeast .

the three uninsurance profiles have the same general shape .

the individuals were least likely to be uninsured at birth but then faced an increased likelihood of uninsurance .

this increasing likelihood of uninsurance became stronger beginning at about age 12 and increased throughout the individuals' teens and twenties .

once individuals reached their early thirties , however , their likelihood of being uninsured began to fall .

the likelihood of uninsurance continued to fall , on average , until about age 59 .

were this graph to extend beyond age 65 , however , the uninsurance rate would approach zero because almost everyone would be covered by medicare .

the percentage of people without health insurance has not been constant over time .

figure 7 displays the aggregate uninsurance rate for individuals of all ages .

the data reported in this section of the report are from published cps documents .

data prior to 1999 are not consistent with more recent data .

the shadowed areas represent times of economic recessions .

it is not possible to predict whether the percent uninsured will increase or decrease during a recession .

individuals may lose their jobs , and thus their employment - based insurance .

these employment effects would lead to an increase in the uninsurance rate because not all those who lose their employment - based coverage would extend their insurance through cobra or purchase insurance in the individual market .

on the other hand , the economic downturn may cause children and adults to become eligible for the need - based entitlement programs of medicaid and chip .

if the newly eligible do indeed enroll , the uninsurance rate may decrease .

because the unemployment rate is slow to recover after a recession , the effects of unemployment on uninsurance may linger past the end of the recession .

turning to the data , the uninsurance rate increased during and after the relatively short recession of the early 2000s , and during the relatively longer recession of the late 2000s .

in fact , the aggregate uninsurance rate of 16.7% in 2009 was the highest reported insurance rate over the interval .

