the 111 th congress passed major health reform legislation , the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 ) , which was substantially amended by the health provisions in the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( hcera ; p.l .

111-152 ) .

several other laws that were subsequently enacted made more targeted changes to specific aca provisions .

all references to aca in this report refer to the law as amended .

the report provides a brief summary of major aca provisions , implementation and oversight activities , and current legal challenges .

for more detailed information on aca's provisions , crs has produced a series of more comprehensive reports , which are available at http: / / www.crs.gov .

the information provided in these reports ranges from broad overviews of aca provisions , such as the law's medicare provisions , to more narrowly focused topics , such as dependent coverage for children under age 26 .

the primary goal of aca is to increase access to affordable health insurance for the millions of americans without coverage and make health insurance more affordable for those already covered .

in addition , aca makes numerous changes in the way health care is financed , organized , and delivered .

among its many provisions , aca restructures the private health insurance market , sets minimum standards for health coverage , creates a mandate for most u.s. residents to obtain health insurance coverage , and provides for the establishment by 2014 of state - based insurance exchanges for the purchase of private health insurance .

certain individuals and families will be able to receive federal subsidies to reduce the cost of purchasing coverage through the exchanges .

the new law also expands eligibility for medicaid ; amends the medicare program in ways that are intended to reduce the growth in medicare spending ; imposes an excise tax on insurance plans found to have high premiums ; and makes numerous other changes to the tax code , medicare , medicaid , the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , and many other federal programs .

aca is projected to have a significant impact on federal spending and revenues .

the law includes spending to subsidize the purchase of health insurance coverage through the exchanges , as well as increased outlays for the expansion of the medicaid program .

aca also includes numerous mandatory appropriations to fund temporary programs to increase access and funding for targeted groups , provide funding to states to plan and establish exchanges , and support many other research and demonstration programs and activities .

the costs of expanding public and private health insurance coverage and other spending are offset by revenues from new taxes and fees , and by savings from payment and health care delivery system reforms designed to reduce spending on medicare and other federal health care programs .

while most of the major provisions of the law do not take effect until 2014 , some provisions are already in place , with others to be phased in over the next few years .

implementation of aca , which began upon the law's enactment in 2010 and will continue to unfold over the next few years , involves all the major health care stakeholders , including the federal and state governments , as well as employers , insurers , and health care providers .

the hhs secretary is tasked with implementation and oversight of many of aca's key provisions .

other federal agencies , notably the internal revenue service ( irs ) , also have substantial regulatory and administrative responsibilities under the new law .

for many of aca's most significant reform provisions , the hhs secretary and other federal officials are required to take certain actions , such as issuing regulations or interim final rules , by a specific date .

as already noted , many of the key components of market reform and coverage expansion do not take effect until 2014 .

implementing some parts of the law will entail extensive rulemaking and other actions by federal agencies ; other changes will be largely self - executing , pursuant to the new statutory requirements .

aca also creates a variety of new commissions and advisory bodies , some with substantial decision - making authority ( eg , ipab ) .

under aca , states are required to expand medicaid coverage — though some may now elect not to do so without risk of losing federal matching funds for their existing medicaid program — and are expected to take the lead in establishing the exchanges , even as many of them struggle with budget shortfalls and weak economies .

employers , too , have a key role to play in aca implementation .

the law made changes to the employer - based system under which more than half of all americans get health insurance coverage .

many small employers will face decisions on whether to use the new incentives to provide coverage to their employees , while larger employers must weigh the benefits and costs of continuing to offer coverage or paying the penalties for not doing so .

the federal subsidies and outlays for expanding insurance coverage represent mandatory spending under the new law .

in addition , aca included numerous mandatory appropriations ( and transfers from the medicare trust funds ) that provide billions of dollars over the coming years to support new and existing grant programs and other activities authorized under the law .

for example , funding is provided for states to plan and establish exchanges ( once established , exchanges must become self - sustaining ) , and for cmmi to test innovative payment and service delivery models .

aca funded three multi - billion dollar trust funds to support health centers and health workforce programs , comparative effectiveness research , and public health programs .

it also established the health insurance reform implementation fund ( hirif ) and appropriated $1 billion to the fund to cover federal regulatory and other administrative costs associated with aca's implementation .

the hirif funds , which have largely been used by hhs and the irs , will all have been obligated by the end of fy2012 .

consequently , the president's fy2013 budget requested more than $1 billion in new discretionary funding for hhs and the irs to pay aca - related administrative costs .

it remains unclear , however , whether congressional appropriators will provide some or all of those funds .

finally , the law established many new grant programs and provided for each an authorization of appropriations , and reauthorized funding for numerous existing programs whose authorization of appropriations had expired .

obtaining funding for all these discretionary programs requires action by the congressional appropriators .

following enactment of aca , state attorneys general and others brought a number of lawsuits challenging provisions of the act on constitutional grounds .

while some of these cases were dismissed for procedural reasons , others moved forward , eventually reaching the u.s. supreme court .

during the last week of march 2012 , the court heard arguments in hhs v. florida , a case in which attorneys general and governors in 26 states as well as others brought an action against the administration , seeking to invalidate the individual mandate and other provisions of aca .

on june 28 , 2012 , the united states supreme court issued its decision in national federation of independent business v. sebelius , finding that the individual mandate in aca is a constitutional exercise of congress's authority to levy taxes .

however , the court held that it was not a valid exercise of congress's power under the commerce clause or the necessary and proper clause .

with regard to the medicaid expansion provision , the court , in an opinion written by chief justice roberts , accepted an argument that the scope of the changes imposed by the medicaid expansion transformed the aca requirements into a "new" medicaid benefit program .

as this "new" program was to be enforced by the threat of withholding of existing federal medicaid matching funds , the court found that the states were being "coerced" in violation of the tenth amendment into administering this new program .

chief justice roberts' opinion , however , went on to note that the medicaid requirement in question was subject to other statutory language providing for severance of unconstitutional provisions .

since it was only the withholding of existing federal medicaid matching funds that was unconstitutional , the chief justice held that severance under the statute could be limited to termination of those funds .

thus the federal government would still be allowed , under the statute and the tenth amendment , to provide federal matching funds associated with the expansion .

in other words , states can now decline to participate in the medicaid expansion without financial penalty , but , if they wish to participate , must comply with the new requirements in order to receive the expansion - related funds .

it is unclear how many states may now decide not to participate in the medicaid expansion .

in so doing , they would forgo a substantial amount of federal funding .

as already noted , the federal government will provide 100% of the costs of the expansion for the first three years , phasing down to 90% in the years thereafter .

moreover , if a state were to decide not to implement the medicaid expansion , low - income adults below the poverty line ( i.e. , 100% fpl ) who were not covered by , or eligible for , the state's existing medicaid program would in general be ineligible for the exchange subsidies .

