the federal sentencing guidelines greatly influence the sentences imposed for federal crimes .

once binding on federal courts , the guidelines are now the starting point for federal sentencing in most cases .

they provide the principal standard against which the reasonableness of any sentence imposed is judged .

in the last quarter of fy2014 , over 75% of the sentences imposed by federal courts fell within the sentence ranges recommended by the guidelines or within those ranges but reduced by prosecution endorsed departures recommended in the guidelines .

the goal of the guidelines is nation - wide federal sentencing consistency ; to ensure that defendants with similar criminal records , convicted of similar crimes , receive similar sentences and that the dissimilar do not .

between the statutory maximum and any statutory minimum established for noncapital federal felonies , the guidelines calibrate a series of sentencing ranges , according to the nature of the offense and the defendant's criminal record .

the guidelines are the work of the u.s .

sentencing commission .

congress created the commission and authorized the guidelines in the sentencing reform act of 1984 .

the first guidelines were promulgated with an effective date of november 1 , 1987 .

the commission may promulgate amendments which become effective 180 days after they are presented to congress , absent congressional action .

the supreme court has upheld the constitutionality of the guidelines as a valid delegation of congressional authority , but held unconstitutional the provision in the sentencing reform act which made them binding on federal courts , rather than advisory .

sentencing under the guidelines is essentially a score - keeping exercise , not unlike the procedure for filling out a federal income tax return .

the process involves assigning "offense levels" for a particular offense based on the nature of the offense and the circumstances under which it was committed .

under the guidelines , most sentencing determinations follow from the final offense level identified at the end of the process .

the sentencing ranges for any term of imprisonment depend both on the final offense level and upon the offender's criminal history score calculated on the basis of his past criminal record and divided into categories .

each of the possible forty - three offense levels has six sentencing ranges corresponding to the six criminal history categories ( see the sentencing guidelines' sentencing table , supra ) .

the guidelines process involves: i .

identification of the most appropriate guidelines section for the crime ( s ) of conviction , based on the nature of the offense ( the most commonly applicable are noted in the guidelines index ) ii .

identification of the applicable base offense level indicated by the section iii .

addition / subtraction of offense levels per section instructions for the circumstances in the case at hand iv .

addition / subtraction of offense levels per instructions in those chapters of the guidelines relating to a .

victim related matters b .

role in the offense c. obstruction d. multiple counts e. acceptance of responsibility v. calculation of the criminal history score vi .

application guidelines instructions relating to a .

imprisonment ( sentencing table ) b .

probation c. supervised release d. special assessments e. fines f. restitution g. forfeiture vii .

consideration of departures ( more / less severe treatment ) which the guidelines permit viii .

sentence under the guidelines .

in imposing sentence , the court will include a detailed explanation of its determinations and may impose probation , a fine , a special assessment , a term of incarceration , a term of supervised release , an obligation to pay restitution , and / or order forfeiture .

the court may adjust an earlier sentence to correct clear error or to reflect substantial assistance to the government .

the parties may challenge on appeal the sentence or determinations upon which it is based .

the court's sentence will be upheld on appeal , if it is found procedurally and substantively reasonable .

having discerned the sentencing range recommended by the guidelines for either individual or organizational defendants , a court must consult the provisions of 18 u.s.c .

3553 ( a ) to determine the appropriate sentence .

section 3553 ( a ) begins with the observation that the court should impose "a sentence sufficient , but not greater than necessary , to comply with purposes set forth" in the section .

it then identifies factors other than the recommendations of the guidelines to be considered before imposing sentence .

the court shall impose a sentence sufficient , but not greater than necessary , to comply with the purposes set forth in paragraph ( 2 ) of this subsection .

the court , in determining the particular sentence to be imposed , shall consider - ( 1 ) the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics of the defendant ; ( 2 ) the need for the sentence imposed - ( a ) to reflect the seriousness of the offense , to promote respect for the law , and to provide just punishment for the offense ; ( b ) to afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct ; ( c ) to protect the public from further crimes of the defendant ; and ( d ) to provide the defendant with needed educational or vocational training , medical care , or other correctional treatment in the most effective manner ; ( 3 ) the kinds of sentences available ; ( 4 ) the kinds of sentence and the sentencing range established for - ( a ) the applicable category of offense committed by the applicable category of defendant as set forth in the guidelines - ( i ) issued by the sentencing commission ... ; and ( ii ) that ... are in effect on the date the defendant is sentenced ; or ( b ) in the case of a violation of probation or supervised release , the applicable guidelines or policy statements issued by the sentencing commission ... ; ( 5 ) any pertinent policy statement - ( a ) issued by the sentencing commission ... ; and ( b ) that ... is in effect on the date the defendant is sentenced .

 ( 6 ) the need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities among defendants with similar records who have been found guilty of similar conduct ; and ( 7 ) the need to provide restitution to any victims of the offense .

the no "greater than necessary" reference in the introductory clause of subsection 3553 ( a ) above means that "if a district court were to conclude that two sentences equally served the statutory purpose of §3553 , it could not ... impose the higher. .

since it is already the task of the guidelines to calibrate sentencing ranges that reflect "the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics of the defendant," §3553 ( a ) ( 1 ) comes into play only in presence of circumstances that are out of the ordinary .

section 3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) encapsulates the purposes for sentencing: just punishment , deterrence , public safety , and defendant rehabilitation .

here , trial courts are afforded considerable deference , unless the sentencing imposed "shockingly high , shockingly low," or justified on a ground which the law will not accept .

section 3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( a ) requires sentencing courts to impose a sentence which reflects "the seriousness of the offense," which "promote[s] respect for the law," and which "provide[s] just punishment. .

section 3583 ( e ) , which governs sentencing of those who violate the terms of their supervised release , omits §3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( a ) from the list of factors which the court may consider .

the lower federal appellate courts are divided over whether a sentencing court may nevertheless take the §3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( a ) factors in consideration in a revocation case .

section 3553 ( a ) ( 3 ) instructs a sentencing court to consider the kinds of sentences available .

the section seldom causes debate .

probation , the principal alternative to imprisonment , is only available at relatively low sentencing ranges .

as noted earlier , the guidelines specifically call for a sentencing court to address the other primary kinds of sentences – fines , forfeiture , and restitution .

this may be one of reasons why sentencing courts are not required to document their consideration of §3553 ( a ) ( 3 ) , unless a defendant asserts its importance .

sections 3553 ( a ) ( 4 ) and ( a ) ( 5 ) require sentencing courts to consider the recommendations of the guidelines .

these are the statutory mandates that command sentencing courts to begin with a calculation of the appropriate sentence under the guidelines , which the supreme court in booker recognized as a counterbalance to the constitutional prohibition against mandatory guidelines .

"under 18 u.s.c .

§3553 ( a ) ( 4 ) ( a ) ( ii ) , district courts are instructed to apply the sentencing guidelines issued by the united states sentencing commission that are 'in effect on the date the defendant is sentenced. .

the sentencing guidelines reiterate that statutory directive , with the proviso that '[i]f the court determines that use of the guidelines manual in effect on the date that the defendant is sentenced would violate the ex post facto clause of the united states constitution , the court shall use the guidelines manual in effect on the date that the offense of conviction was committed.' .

the obligation found in §3553 ( a ) ( 6 ) to avoid unwarranted disparity among the sentences for similar situated defendants speaks to federal sentencing disparity nation - wide .

nevertheless , the defendants raise the section most often to question disparity between their sentences of their codefendants or coconspirators .

some courts reject the argument out of hand ; some that disparity is one of the factors it may considered ; some that it must be addressed as circumstances dictate ; most , however , point out that it carries no sway when disparity is warranted .

the courts are more clearly divided over whether the discretionary downward departure under u.s.s.g §5k3.1 for early disposition programs available in some districts and unavailable in others permits a departure under §3553 ( a ) in those districts in which no such program exists .

finally , §3553 ( a ) ( 7 ) compels the sentencing court to consider the need to provide victim restitution .

the factor seems most likely to come into play when a split or probationary sentence is possible under the guidelines .

the trial court must present in open court and justify the sentence it imposes .

the sentence and court's justifications may be appealed by either the defendant or the government or both .

the sentence will be upheld on appeal if it is substantively and procedurally reasonable .

a sentence is procedurally reasonable if it is free of "significant procedural error , such as failing to calculate ( or improperly calculating ) the guidelines range , treating the guidelines as mandatory , failing to consider the §3553 ( a ) factors , selecting a sentence based on clearly erroneous facts , or failing to adequately explain the chosen sentence – including an explanation for any deviation from the guidelines range. .

a sentence is substantively reasonable if it is reasonable under the circumstances ; it is substantively unreasonable if it ignores a relevant sentencing factor , if it overvalues a relatively minor sentencing consideration , or if it undervalues a significant sentencing factor .

the appellate court may consider reasonable a sentence within the guidelines sentencing range , but it may not consider a sentence unreasonable simply because it rests outside that range .

