the united states has supported anti - malaria programs since the 1950s .

global malaria received greater attention in 2005 when president bush launched the president's malaria initiative ( pmi ) , a five - year plan to expand u.s. malaria efforts .

in fy2008 , congress significantly increased its funding for global malaria and authorized the creation of the u.s .

global malaria coordinator at the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) to oversee all u.s. malaria efforts .

president barack obama has also emphasized combating malaria in his global health initiative ( ghi ) .

this report provides background information on malaria and explains the key components of the u.s. response .

malaria is an infectious disease that is transmitted to people through the bite of infected mosquitoes .

the disease infects red blood cells , causing a range of symptoms that include fever , headache , and vomiting .

although malaria is preventable and curable , if left untreated , it can be fatal .

young children , pregnant women , and individuals with hiv / aids are particularly vulnerable to malaria due to their weakened immune systems .

malaria cases: the world health organization ( who ) estimates that half of the world's population is at risk of malaria infection .

malaria is prevalent in 106 countries , referred to as malaria - endemic countries .

in 2010 , there were approximately 216 million cases of malaria worldwide , down from approximately 233 million cases in 2000 .

since 2000 , 43 countries have reported a reduction in reported malaria cases of more than 50% .

likewise , the estimated incidence — new cases of malaria — has decreased by 17% globally between 2000 and 2010 .

malaria deaths: the malaria death toll declined from 985,000 in 2000 to 655,000 people in 2010 .

roughly 86% of 2010 malaria - related deaths occurred among children younger than five .

since 2000 , global malaria mortality has been reduced by 26% .

malaria occurs worldwide , though it is heavily concentrated in what are categorized by who as the african , south - east asian , and the eastern mediterranean regions ( figure 1 ) .

in 2010 , about 81% of all malaria cases and 91% of all malaria - related deaths occurred in the who africa region .

there are 43 malaria - endemic countries in the africa region .

the who southeast asia region was home to 13% of all malaria cases and 6% of malaria - related deaths in 2010 .

of the 10 malaria - endemic countries in the south - east asia region , india , myanmar ( burma ) , and indonesia make up 94% of all confirmed malaria cases .

the who eastern mediterranean region was home to 5% of all malaria cases and 3% of malaria - related deaths in 2010 .

in the region , sudan , pakistan , yemen , and afghanistan make up 97% of confirmed malaria cases .

the international community generally applies four strategies for combating malaria: treatment : anti - malarial treatments include chloroquine , primaquine , and artesmisinin - based combination therapy ( act ) .

act is the preferred treatment in areas with particularly deadly forms of malaria or with drug resistance to earlier generations of anti - malarials .

multi - drug resistant malaria is found worldwide , and there is evidence that act resistance is occurring in asia .

intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy ( iptp ) : in areas with high concentrations of malaria , physicians give pregnant women an anti - malarial drug to prevent them from transmitting the disease to their infants .

insecticide - treated bed nets ( itns ) : insecticides used to treat bed nets kill and repel mosquitoes .

itns are used as personal protection against mosquito bites , but evidence suggests that high community coverage of itns can lower the number of mosquitoes in a general area and reduce the life span of mosquitoes that remain .

itns retain effective levels of insecticide for up to six months .

newly developed long - lasting insecticide - treated nets ( llins ) last for at least three years .

indoor residual spraying ( irs ) : irs involves covering household walls with an insecticide to kill any mosquito that comes into contact with the surfaces for several months .

to be effective , irs must be applied to a high percentage ( 80% ) of household surfaces .

resistance to insecticides is a growing concern .

while there is presently no malaria vaccine , research is ongoing .

there are currently over a dozen vaccine candidates in clinical development , and one , produced by glaxosmithkline , is in clinical trials .

on december 27 , 2000 , president bill clinton signed into law the assistance for international malaria control act ( p.l .

106-570 ) .

the act authorized $50 million per year for fy2001 and fy2002 for anti - malaria activities in countries with high malaria prevalence .

on may 27 , 2003 , president george w. bush signed into law the united states leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria act of 2003 ( leadership act , p.l .

108-25 ) .

the act authorized $15 billion for global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs from fy2004 through fy2008 .

the act recognized malaria control as a major foreign policy objective , though it did not specify an amount for bilateral malaria programs .

the act also prohibited u.s. contributions to the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis and malaria ( global fund ) ( see " key partners in the response to global malaria " ) from exceeding 33% of funds contributed from all sources .

on july 24 , 2008 , president bush signed into law the tom lantos and henry j. hyde u.s .

global leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria reauthorization act of 2008 ( lantos - hyde act , p.l .

110-293 ) .

the act authorized $48 billion for global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs from fy2008 through fy2013 , including $5 billion for malaria programs over five years .

the act also created the position of u.s .

global malaria coordinator at usaid .

the malaria coordinator is charged with overseeing all u.s. anti - malaria efforts , submitting an annual report to congress describing u.s. malaria programs , and developing a five - year strategic plan for u.s. efforts to combat malaria .

this legislation will be up for reauthorization in fy2013 .

the united states has supported global malaria control efforts since the 1950s .

efforts to expand u.s. malaria programs and improve their coordination increased following the announcement of the president's malaria initiative ( pmi ) in 2005 .

pmi represented a growing acknowledgement of the efficacy of malaria prevention and treatment strategies and built on the success of the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) in harnessing resources to combat a disease .

pmi was initially created as a five - year , $1.2 billion effort to increase u.s. engagement in global malaria control and reduce malaria - related deaths by 50% in 15 high - burden focus countries .

focus countries were selected according to several criteria , including high malaria burden , capacity to implement anti - malaria programs , and willingness to partner with the united states .

pmi has since expanded into four other malaria - endemic countries in africa ( table 1 ) .

pmi is an interagency initiative run by usaid and jointly implemented by usaid and the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) .

the u.s .

global malaria coordinator at usaid coordinates malaria efforts across a number of agencies and departments , including cdc , the department of defense ( dod ) , and the national institutes of health ( nih ) .

oversight duties are shared with an interagency steering group composed of representatives from usaid , cdc / the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the department of state , dod , the national security council , and the office of management and budget .

usaid and cdc also provide bilateral malaria assistance to a handful of countries not designated as pmi focus countries .

president obama has indicated support for an expanded u.s. malaria program .

on may 5 , 2009 , the president announced global health initiative ( ghi ) , a new effort to develop a comprehensive u.s. global health strategy over the course of six years .

malaria is one of the ghi's six priority areas , and pmi is considered a key component of the ghi , reflecting the administration's belief that scaled - up malaria interventions can help maximize health impact per dollar spent .

the ghi calls for a more integrated u.s. response to global health issues , including better coordination between malaria and maternal and child health programs .

the ghi also calls for a shift in u.s. global health strategy from one focused on specific diseases to a more comprehensive approach to health , including a focus on health system strengthening .

in april 2010 , in response to congressional reporting requirements to develop a coordinated approach to global malaria , usaid , hhs ( including cdc ) , and the department of state released a joint "lantos - hyde united states government malaria strategy. .

the strategy explains how u.s. malaria programs will advance the goals of the ghi and outlines key targets for the u.s. malaria program from 2009 to 2014 .

key goals include the following: halve the burden of malaria ( morbidity and mortality ) in 70% of at - risk populations in sub - saharan africa ; limit the spread of anti - malarial multi - drug resistance in southeast asia and the americas ; assist host countries to revise and update their national malaria control strategies and plans to reflect the declining burden of malaria ; and link u.s. malaria efforts with host country malaria plans .

u.s. agencies supporting global malaria control efforts include the following: united states agency for international development : usaid manages pmi programs in the pmi focus countries .

usaid also supports malaria control programs in several other countries and facilitates efforts to identify and contain anti - malarial drug resistance through two regional programs in the amazon basin and the mekong delta .

usaid's malaria programs focus on five key areas: irs , itns , iptp , diagnosis and treatment , and pesticide management .

centers for disease control and prevention : cdc jointly implements pmi with usaid .

cdc's malaria efforts focus on monitoring and evaluation , disease surveillance , and capacity development for national malaria control programs .

cdc also undertakes global malaria research to improve prevention and treatment efforts with an emphasis on llins , irs , and iptp , and the elimination of malaria .

department of defense : dod supports malaria research , including anti - malaria treatment and vaccine development .

research is conducted at the u.s. military malaria vaccine program at the walter reed army institute of research and the malaria research department at the navy medical research center .

national institutes of health : the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases ( niaid ) of the nih is the lead u.s. agency supporting malaria research .

niaid works on developing tools for malaria prevention , treatment , and control , and enhancing research infrastructure in malaria - endemic countries .

congress designates funds for malaria to usaid , through state - foreign operations appropriations , and to cdc , through labor , health and human services , and education appropriations .

congress also provides resources to the dod and nih for malaria research efforts .

congressional appropriations for malaria have consistently increased since fy2004 .

in response to growing calls within the international community for global malaria control , funding for malaria interventions has increased most precipitously since fy2007 ( table 2 and figure 2 ) in support of pmi expansion into new countries .

the united states also supports global malaria programs through contributions to the global fund , an international financing mechanism for the response to hiv / aids , tb , and malaria .

u.s. contributions to the global fund support grants for hiv / aids , tb , and malaria .

the united states is the single largest donor to the global fund .

table 3 details u.s. contributions to the global fund from fy2004 to fy2013 .

the majority of total global funding for malaria control comes from three sources: external donor assistance , national government spending , and household expenditures .

according to who , of the total malaria spending in 2007 , donor assistance accounted for 47% , national government spending accounted for 34% , and household expenditures accounted for 19% .

the global fund is the single largest donor for global malaria efforts .

who estimates that in 2010 , the global fund accounted for approximately 50% of malaria funds from international sources , while pmi , dfid , and the world bank accounted for approximately 49% of international funding ( figure 3 ) .

international disbursements for global malaria appear to have peaked in 2011 .

the united states works with a range of partners to combat malaria , including other national governments , multilateral organizations , non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , and the private sector .

key partners include the following: the global fund: the global fund was established in 2002 as a public - private partnership to provide significant financial support for the global response to hiv / aids , tb , and malaria .

the united states contributes more to the global fund than any other donor .

the global fund has committed over $22.6 billion in grants in 150 countries since it was established and provides over half of all international funding for malaria control in endemic countries .

in november 2011 , the global fund announced that due to limited resources available , it would postpone its 11 th round of funding .

the world bank: in 2005 , the world bank launched the world bank booster program for malaria control in africa .

the booster program is implemented in 18 countries and supports the rapid scale - up of preexisting malaria control interventions and works to strengthen in - country procurement and supply - chain capacity , monitoring , and evaluation , and health planning .

world health organization: who is the authority for health within the united nations system .

it is responsible for shaping the global health research agenda , setting norms and standards , articulating evidence - based policy options , providing technical support to countries , and monitoring global health trends .

who's global malaria program ( gmp ) promotes global malaria policies and intervention guidelines , provides technical assistance to malaria programs , and supports research and development of anti - malarial drugs and insecticides .

roll back malaria ( rbm ) partnership: the rbm partnership was created in 1998 by who , united nations children's fund ( unicef ) , united nations development program ( undp ) , and the world bank to facilitate coordination of malaria activities and optimal use of resources .

the rbm partnership has 500 partners , including malaria - endemic countries , organization for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) donor governments , multilateral organizations , the private sector , ngos , foundations , research institutions , and ex - officio members .

the coordinator of pmi currently sits on the rbm partnership board .

united nations children's fund ( unicef ) : unicef supports malaria programs through its work on child survival and development .

unicef assists in developing national malaria plans and policies ; monitoring and evaluation ; and supplying , procuring , and distributing malaria commodities .

according to unicef , it is the world's largest procurer and deliverer of itns .

unicef and usaid have a "malaria control partnership" to support malaria programming and commodity procurement , supply , and distribution .

american red cross: the american red cross malaria programs support distribution of itns , community education on the threat of malaria and the proper use of itns , and operational research on the effectiveness of itns .

bill and melinda gates foundation: the gates foundation advocates increased support for malaria and funds the development of new tools to treat , diagnose , and prevent malaria .

the foundation hopes to have supported the development of a malaria vaccine by 2025 .

the 112 th congress will likely be faced with a number of issues regarding the u.s. response to global malaria , including how much assistance to provide and how to best apportion global malaria funds .

over the past decade , significant progress has been made in combating global malaria .

international assistance has helped to lower the number of malaria cases and deaths around the world .

at the same time , several key challenges threaten the progress achieved to date .

as congress continues to debate the role of the united states in global malaria control , it might consider the following issues: insecticide and drug resistance : growing instances of drug - resistant malaria and insecticide - resistant mosquitoes threaten global malaria control , particularly in southeast asia and africa .

there are currently no alternatives to available forms of insecticides and treatments .

some health experts argue that anti - malaria resources should prioritize drug and insecticide resistance , including efforts to improve drug quality control , resistance monitoring and surveillance , and research and development of new forms of malaria drugs .

health system strengthening : weak health systems have been a major impediment to successful malaria prevention and treatment .

in particular , shortages in health care personnel and weak supply chain networks have limited the delivery of essential commodities for malaria control .

there is some disagreement within the global health community about whether pmi has had a beneficial or detrimental impact on the broader functioning of health systems .

control vs. elimination: there is debate within the global health community over the degree to which the international community should commit itself to malaria control ( reducing the disease burden to a level at which it is no longer a public health problem ) or malaria elimination ( reducing incidence of infection to zero in a defined geographic ) .

while the majority of international funding for malaria efforts in the past decade has been focused on control efforts , a number of experts have argued that efforts should increasingly focus on elimination of the disease .

key issues affecting the debate over control versus elimination include whether countries have the capacity to support more ambitious programs , whether donor assistance is predictable enough to support elimination efforts , and how the international community can avoid any potentially detrimental consequences of an elimination campaign , such as increased insecticide and drug resistance .

