the congressional review act ( cra , 5 u.s.c .

§§801-808 ) requires each federal agency to send its covered final rules to the comptroller general at the government accountability office ( gao ) and to both houses of congress before the rules can take effect .

the cra generally requires agencies to delay the effective dates of "major" final rules until 60 days after the date that the rules are published in the federal register or submitted to congress , whichever is later .

the act also requires the comptroller general to provide a report to the congressional committees of jurisdiction within 15 calendar days after each major rule is submitted or published , with the report summarizing the issuing agency's compliance with relevant rulemaking requirements .

the cra defines a "major rule" as any rule that the administrator of the office of information and regulatory affairs [oira] of the office of management and budget [omb] finds has resulted in or is likely to result in — ( a ) an annual effect on the economy of $100,000,000 or more ; ( b ) a major increase in costs or prices for consumers , individual industries , federal , state , or local government agencies , or geographic regions ; or ( c ) significant adverse effects on competition , employment , investment , productivity , innovation , or on the ability of united states - based enterprises to compete with foreign - based enterprises in domestic and export markets .

the term does not include any rule promulgated under the telecommunications act of 1996 and the amendments made by that act .

the cra also established expedited legislative procedures ( primarily in the senate ) by which congress may disapprove any final rule ( not just major rules ) by enacting a joint resolution of disapproval ( which requires subsequent signature by the president ) .

signed into law on march 29 , 1996 , as part of the small business regulatory enforcement fairness act ( sbrefa , title ii of p.l .

104-121 , 5 u.s.c .

§601 note ) , the cra was an attempt to reestablish a measure of congressional authority over rulemaking .

however , in the nearly 15 years since the cra's enactment , it has been used to disapprove one rule .

the previously mentioned wall street journal editorial stated that the number of major rules issued by federal agencies had increased substantially during the barack obama administration , from an average of between 30 and 40 rules per year during the previous 25 years to 59 in 2009 and 62 in 2010 .

susan dudley , director of the george washington university regulatory policy center and former administrator of oira , wrote that the obama administration had issued an average of 66 major rules per year during its first two years in office , compared to 47 and 48 major rules per year during the clinton administration and the bush administration , respectively .

other observers have offered different counts for the number of major rules issued in recent years .

crs is not aware of any data on the number of major final rules published prior to march 1996 , when the cra was enacted .

as table 1 below indicates , however , gao's database of rules submitted to the comptroller general shows that in 9 of the 14 full calendar years since the cra was enacted , federal agencies published between 50 and 70 major rules .

the agencies issued 76 major rules in 1998 and 77 major rules in 2000 .

the number of major rules issued during a single calendar year first exceeded 80 in 2008 ( the last full year of the george w. bush administration ) , when 95 major rules were published .

in calendar year 2009 , the first calendar year of the obama administration , federal agencies issued 84 major final rules .

however , 11 of those 84 rules were actually issued in early january 2009 , during the final days of the bush administration .

during calendar year 2010 , federal agencies published 100 major final rules .

another way to discuss the gao data on major rules is by comparing time periods during recent administrations .

the results vary depending on which time periods are chosen .

for example , see the following: during the last full year of the bush administration ( from january 22 , 2008 , through january 21 , 2009 ) , federal agencies published 102 major rules .

during the first full year of the obama administration ( from january 22 , 2009 , through january 21 , 2010 ) , federal agencies published 79 major rules .

during the last two full years of the bush administration ( from january 22 , 2007 , through january 21 , 2009 ) , federal agencies published 168 major rules .

during the first two full years of the obama administration ( from january 22 , 2009 , through january 21 , 2011 ) , federal agencies published 175 major rules .

during the first full year of the bush administration ( from january 22 , 2001 , through january 21 , 2002 ) , federal agencies published 54 major rules .

during the first full year of the obama administration ( from january 22 , 2009 , through january 21 , 2010 ) , federal agencies published 79 major rules .

during the first two full years of the bush administration ( from january 22 , 2001 , through january 21 , 2003 ) , federal agencies published 103 major rules .

during the first two full years of the obama administration ( from january 22 , 2009 , through january 21 , 2011 ) , federal agencies published 175 major rules .

table 1 also indicates that the number of major rules issued in a particular year is not strongly correlated with the number of final rules that were issued during the year .

for example , in 1999 , federal agencies published 4,373 final rules ( the second - largest number of rules during the 14 full calendar years since the enactment of the cra ) , but only 51 major rules ( the second - lowest number of major rules during this period ) .

the years with the largest number of major rules ( 2008 and 2010 ) were also years in which the total number of final rules issued was relatively low .

as noted earlier in this report , the cra generally defines a "major rule" as one that oira concludes "has resulted in or is likely to result in ( a ) an annual effect on the economy of $100,000,000 or more ; ( b ) a major increase in costs or prices for consumers , individual industries , federal , state , or local government agencies , or geographic regions ; or ( c ) significant adverse effects on competition , employment , investment , productivity , innovation , or on the ability of united states - based enterprises to compete with foreign - based enterprises in domestic and export markets. .

within the first of these three definitional categories , omb reports , agency rules , and the current oira associate administrator indicate that a rule may have a $100 million annual "effect on the economy" in any of several ways .

for example , if a rule is expected to have $100 million in compliance costs in any one year , it would likely be considered a "major" rule .

if a rule is expected to produce economic benefits in any one year that are valued at $100 million , that rule would also likely be considered "major. .

other rules that increase or reduce federal grants , subsidies , or other types of "transfer" payments by at least $100 million in any year , or rules that increase federal fees or other revenues by at least $100 million in a year , would also appear to meet this definition of a major rule .

also , if a rule is expected to yield a $100 million "consumer surplus" during a year by triggering consumer spending , it would also appear to be a "major rule. .

table 3 below takes the 100 major rules that were published during calendar year 2010 and , using information in gao's reports on the major rules and information in the preambles to the rules themselves , illustrates which of the various definitions of a "major rule" appear to be applicable to them ( i.e. , why the rules were considered "major" ) .

the table divides the category of "$100 million annual effect on the economy" into five subcategories ( regulatory costs , regulatory benefits , transfers , consumer surplus , and fees and revenues ) .

in some cases , more than one category or subcategory applies to a single rule .

for example , if a rule was expected to result in at least $100 million in annual compliance costs and was also expected to result in at least $100 million in annual benefits , then both subcategories would appear to apply .

therefore , the number of explanations provided overall ( and sometimes by agency ) exceeds the number of rules issued .

however , if a rule appeared to be major because it had $100 million or more in annual compliance costs , crs did not also code it as having a "major" increase in costs or prices .

figure 1 below indicates how many rules were associated with each category ( or categories ) of explanation .

as the figure shows , 37 of the rules appeared to be "major" only because they were expected to produce $100 million in costs , $100 million in benefits , or both ; 34 of the rules appeared to only involve some type of transfer ( 23 were increased transfers , 7 were decreased transfers , and 4 were non - federal transfers ) ; 16 rules appeared to be major only because they were expected to result in increased costs or prices ( but not at or above the $100 million threshold ) ; 6 rules appeared to only involve "consumer surplus" issues ; 4 rules appeared to only involve changes to fee structures ; and 3 rules appeared to be major for multiple reasons .

to determine whether our conclusions regarding major rules published during calendar year 2010 were consistent with other years and perspectives , crs also examined the most recent edition of omb's reports to congress on the benefits and costs of federal regulations .

omb prepares these reports in accordance with the "regulatory right - to - know act," which requires the agency to identify the total annual benefits and costs of federal rules in the aggregate , by agency and agency program , and by "major rule. .

although the act does not define the term "major rule," omb has defined it as any rule ( 1 ) meeting the definition in the cra ( 5 u.s.c .

§804 ( 2 ) , ( 2 ) meeting the analysis threshold in the unfunded mandates reform act ( 2 u.s.c .

§1532 ) , or ( 3 ) designated as "economically significant" under section 3 ( f ) of executive order 12866 .

these three definitions overlap considerably , and any rule meeting the cra definition is likely to be covered by the other two .

according to the most recent "regulatory right - to - know" report , which was issued in july 2010 , omb said that it concluded review of 66 major final rules during the 12-month period beginning october 1 , 2008 , and ending september 30 , 2009 .

under executive order 12866 , omb does not review rules that are issued by independent regulatory agencies like the sec and the nrc .

however , omb said that it used information from gao's cra database , and reported that independent regulatory agencies issued another 11 major final rules during this one - year period , bringing the total number of major rules discussed in the omb report to 77 .

the reins act , like the congressional review act that it seeks to amend , is an attempt to reestablish a measure of congressional authority over agency rulemaking .

the bill's supporters have asserted that the number of "major rules" that impose at least $100 million in annual costs on regulated entities has grown significantly in recent years .

because all agency rulemaking authority is delegated from congress , supporters of the reins act assert that it is appropriate for congress to vote on whether or not these major rules should take effect .

while supporters and opponents of the reins act can vigorously debate the merits of a congressional approval process as contemplated in the legislation , the factual underpinnings of that debate should be as clear and agreed upon as possible .

however , there appear to be some misconceptions regarding the number of major rules that have been issued in recent years , and why those rules were considered "major. .

several observers have said that the number of rules , and the number of major rules , has increased sharply during the obama administration .

an editorial in the wall street journal stated that federal agencies had issued 59 major final rules in 2009 and 62 in 2010 , up from an average of between 30 and 40 major rules in the previous 25 years .

however , gao's federal rules database indicates that the number of major final rules has been at or above 50 in every full calendar year since the cra was enacted in march 1996 , and the number of major rules first exceeded 80 during the last calendar year of the george w. bush administration , when federal agencies issued 95 major rules .

the number of major rules fell somewhat in 2009 , the first year of the obama administration ( to 84 ) , but 11 of those rules appear to have been issued during the final days of the bush administration .

in 2010 , federal agencies published 100 major rules .

also , although several observers have indicated that all major rules have annual costs of at least $100 million , this report indicates that the major rules published in recent years appeared to be "major" for a variety of reasons .

many of the rules seemed to have been placed in that category because they substantially increased or decreased federal transfer payments — not because of expected regulatory compliance costs or benefits .

some observers may contend that at least some of these transfers are , in fact , regulatory costs ( eg , system - wide increases in the cost of health insurance , with the benefits flowing primarily from one group to another ) .

even under this view , however , those costs are somewhat different than compliance costs that are imposed upon particular industries or groups .

of the major rules that had annual compliance cost estimates of $100 million or more , the rules frequently had estimated benefits that were much higher .

in fact , in 14 of the major rules that were published in calendar year 2010 , the agencies' highest estimated compliance costs were less than the lowest estimated benefits .

in contrast , only one rule had estimated benefits that were lower than the lowest estimated costs ( the dot rule on "positive train control systems" ) , and in that rule the agency indicated that the costs were driven by the specific requirements in the underlying statute .

in many other rules , the agencies provided monetized estimates of regulatory costs , but provided only qualitative descriptions of expected regulatory benefits .

other rules were expected to result in increased costs or prices , but the estimates for those increases were either less than $100 million or were not monetized .

although the reasons why certain rules are considered major appear to be more varied than just compliance costs , that fact does not bring into question the appropriateness of congressional oversight of agency regulations , or the appropriateness of considering the type of congressional approval process contemplated by the reins act .

for example , see the following: if a major rule is expected to increase or decrease federal transfer payments by more than $100 million , congress may want to examine and / or approve the manner in which those regulatory transfers are constructed to ensure that they are consistent with the intent of the underlying statute , and that they are sustainable in the current budgetary environment .

if a major rule is expected to result in additional fee revenue , congress may want to ensure that the fee structure is appropriate , and that the amount of fees expected to be derived from the regulatory change is neither too high nor too low to cover the costs of the governmental function being funded .

if an agency indicates that a major rule is expected to result in regulatory costs that are substantially greater than the expected benefits ( as appears to be the case in the "positive train control systems" rule ) , congress may want to examine those estimates more closely , and may ultimately decide to prevent the rule from taking effect .

congress may also want to examine whether ( as dot indicated in the positive train control systems rule ) the requirements in the underlying statute are , in fact , the source of the negative net benefits .

on the other hand , if an agency indicates that a rule is expected to produce regulatory benefits well in excess of its expected costs , congress may want to question the accuracy of those estimated benefits and costs .

if congress concludes that a rule will cost much more than the agency estimated , or will yield much lower estimated benefits , then congress may decide not to approve the rule .

to carry out these kinds of congressional oversight actions , either as part of a disapproval action under the cra , or as part of an approval action under the reins act , congress may need particular types of expertise .

for example , to determine whether a cms rule has properly established prospective payment systems for hospitals and doctors , congress may want to consult with experts in how such systems are constructed and operate .

to determine whether epa has properly estimated the future benefits of a rule , congress may want to consult with experts in risk analysis to determine whether certain health benefits are likely to materialize .

h.r .

214 ( 112 th congress ) , if enacted , may help provide some of the expertise that may be needed .

the bill would create a congressional office of regulatory analysis ( cora ) , transferring to the director of that office the comptroller general's responsibilities under the cra .

the cora director would be required to prepare a report on each major rule , including potential benefits and costs and an analysis of less costly alternatives .

in carrying out these and other functions , the director is permitted to procure temporary experts and consultants .

in some cases , the agency issuing the rule appeared to have little or no discretion in determining whether or not the rule would be a "major rule. .

for example , see the following: doe said the january 25 , 2005 , rule on weatherization assistance for low income persons was "major" because of the $5 billion in grants provided by the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 .

dod said its april 16 , 2010 , rule on retroactive stop loss special pay to members of the military service was "major" because of the more than $534 million authorized and appropriated for that purpose in the supplemental appropriations act , 2009 .

the nrc said its june 16 , 2010 , was "major" because the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 , as amended , generally requires the agency to recover through fees approximately 90% of its fy2010 budget authority through fees ( about $900 million ) .

if a major rule that is of congressional concern is simply implementing statutory requirements , and the statute requires recurring rules , congress may want to revisit those statutory requirements to prevent future major rules with the same types of effects .

finally , some observers have asserted that one way to prevent burdensome federal regulations is for congress to be more specific in the statutes underlying those rules .

congress can assign regulatory responsibilities to federal agencies in any number of ways , and the manner in which congress does so can determine the amount of discretion given to the agencies and , conversely , the amount of control that congress retains for itself .

when congress requires that a regulation be issued or made effective by a particular date , that it contain certain substantive elements , and that the rule be developed following certain procedures , then the delegation of legislative rulemaking authority is somewhat limited and congress retains a measure of control over the subsequent policymaking process .

however , specificity in the statutes underlying agency rules can also constrain the agencies from developing regulations that are most cost effective .

for example , the federal railroad administration rule on "positive train control systems" was the only major rule issued in 2010 that was clearly expected to produce negative net benefits .

the agency said that the expected costs of the rule were about 20 times the expected benefits .

fra noted this imbalance in the rule , but said it was "constrained by the requirements of [the rail safety improvement act of 2008] , which do not provide latitude for implementing [positive train controls] differently. .

