access to mental health and substance use disorder services is determined in part by the insurance coverage of these services and by the terms under which the services are covered .

federal parity law and the health reform law affect both the coverage of mental health and substance use disorder services , as well as the terms under which they are covered .

federal law requires parity in annual and aggregate lifetime limits , treatment limitations , financial requirements , and in - and out - of - network covered benefits .

however , federal parity law does not mandate the coverage of mental health and substance use disorder services .

the health reform law builds on federal parity law and also contains provisions that mandate coverage of mental health and substance use disorder services .

this report begins with a brief summary of federal parity law and by discussing the provisions in the health reform law that build on federal parity law .

it then goes on to discuss those health reform provisions that mandate coverage of mental health and substance use disorder services .

the goal of federal parity law is to make coverage terms for mental health and substance use disorder services , when those services are offered , no more restrictive than those terms for medical and surgical services .

federal parity law consists of two laws: ( 1 ) the mental health parity act of 1996 ( mhpa , p.l .

104-204 ) and ( 2 ) the paul wellstone and pete domenici mental health parity and addiction equity act of 2008 ( mhpaea , p.l .

110-343 ) .

together , these laws identify a group of coverage terms that must be on par between mental health and substance use disorder services and medical and surgical services ( hereafter referred to as the "federal mental health parity requirements," see text box ) .

these coverage terms include ( 1 ) annual and aggregate lifetime limits , ( 2 ) treatment limitations , ( 3 ) financial requirements , and ( 4 ) in - and out - of - network covered benefits .

the health reform law ( the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 [ p.l .

111-148 , aca] ) did not modify or expand the federal mental health parity requirements themselves ; that is , it did not modify the specific coverage terms which must be on par between mental health and substance use disorder services and medical and surgical services .

federal parity law applies only to insurers who choose to cover mental health and substance use disorder services , and then it only applies to certain plan types .

federal parity law , prior to the passage of the aca , applied to both large fully insured and large self - insured plans .

in addition , it applied to medicaid managed care plans and to children's health insurance program ( chip ) plans .

the aca builds on federal parity law by expanding its applicability to a number of additional plan types .

traditionally , there has been a disparity not only in the coverage terms under which mental health and substance use disorder services were offered , but also in whether they were offered at all .

federal parity law aims to mitigate disparities in coverage terms between mental health and substance use disorder services and medical and surgical services .

however , as mentioned previously , federal parity law does not require the coverage of mental health and substance use disorder services .

this approach , where the coverage of mental health and substance use disorder services is not required , but where parity with medical and surgical services is required if mental health and substance use disorder services are covered , is termed a mandated offering parity approach .

this fundamental approach to federal parity law was not changed by the aca , as noted above .

the aca did , however , include broader changes which create requirements for the coverage of mental health and substance use disorder services , among other types of services .

the impact of these changes on the coverage of mental health and substance use disorder services is discussed in more detail below .

as discussed in this report , the health reform law made a number of changes that are likely to affect access to mental health and substance use disorder services .

specifically , many plans will now be required to cover these services and more plans will be required to offer coverage for these services on par with coverage for medical and surgical services .

although there are coverage arrangements that are not required to cover mental health and substance use disorder services or to comply with federal parity law , the broader requirements may lead to plans voluntarily offering these services or complying with federal parity law in order to be more competitive in the private market .

