this report explains the process for filling positions to which the president makes appointments with the advice and consent of the senate ( pas positions ) .

it also identifies , for the 110 th congress , all nominations to full - time positions requiring senate confirmation in 39 organizations in the executive branch ( 26 independent agencies , 6 agencies in the executive office of the president ( eop ) , and 7 multilateral banking organizations ) and 4 agencies in the legislative branch .

it excludes appointments to executive departments and to regulatory and other boards and commissions , which are covered in other reports .

a profile of each agency tracks the agency's nominations , providing information on senate activity ( confirmations , rejections , returns to the president , and elapsed time between nomination and confirmation ) as well as further related presidential activity ( including withdrawals and recess appointments ) .

the profiles also identify , for each agency , positions requiring senate confirmation , the incumbents in those positions as of the end of the 110 th congress , and the pay levels of those officials .

appendix a .

summary of all nominations and appointments to independent and other agencies appendix b .

nomination action by agency type , 110 th congress appendix c. agency abbreviations independent agencies arc — appalachian regional commission bbg — broadcasting board of governors cia — central intelligence agency cncs — corporation for national and community service csosa — court services and offender supervision agency for the district of columbia dra — delta regional authority epa — environmental protection agency fmcs — federal mediation and conciliation service gsa — general services administration mcc — millennium challenge corporation nara — national archives and records administration nasa — national aeronautics and space administration nfah — national foundation on the arts and humanities nsf — national science foundation odni — office of the director of national intelligence oge — office of government ethics onhir — office of navajo and hopi indian relocation opic — overseas private investment corporation opm — office of personnel management osc — office of special counsel pc — peace corps sba — small business administration ssa — social security administration sss — selective service system tda — trade development agency usaid — united states agency for international development executive office of the president ( eop ) cea — council of economic advisers ceq — council on environmental quality omb — office of management and budget ondcp — office of national drug control policy ostp — office of science and technology policy oustr — office of u.s. trade representative multilateral banking organizations afdb — african development bank asdb — asian development bank ebrd — european bank for reconstruction and development iadb — inter - american development bank ibrd — international bank for reconstruction and development ijc — international joint commission , u.s. and canada imf — international monetary fund legislative branch agencies ac — architect of the capitol gao — government accountability office gpo — government printing office lc — library of congress appendix d. senate intersession recesses and intrasession recesses of four or more days , 110 th congress appendix e. change in methodology from previous tracking reports the calculations of nomination - to - confirmation intervals provided in this report counted all the days within the interval , including those during summer recesses and between sessions of the senate .

the inclusion of all days differs from the methodology used in similar crs reports for previous congresses .

in these earlier reports , days during august and intersession recesses were not included in calculations of nomination - to - confirmation intervals .

the rationale for the earlier methodology was that the senate was unlikely to continue consideration of nominations during these periods ; committee hearings and votes , among other activities , typically do not occur during these times .

the exclusion of days during only certain periods of adjournment — intersession recesses and august recesses , which are usually longer than 30 days — is suggested by senate rules regarding when nominations are to be returned to the president .

these provide: nominations neither confirmed nor rejected during the session at which they are made shall not be acted upon at any succeeding session without being again made to the senate by the president ; and if the senate shall adjourn or take recess for more than thirty days , all nominations pending and not finally acted upon at the time of taking such adjournment or recess shall be returned by the secretary to the president .

this earlier methodology was also consistent with the approach of some political scientists who study executive branch appointments .

the methodology for this report is different from that which was used in previous similar reports for several reasons .

first , as discussed above in the section on recess appointments , from the latter part of the first session through the end of the 110 th congress , the senate chose to break up what would otherwise have been longer recesses into shorter recesses separated by pro forma sessions .

this introduced two options for this report with regard to the calculation of nomination - to - confirmation intervals .

the first option would have been to treat each series of short recesses created in this fashion as one long recess and to subtract these days from the nomination - to - confirmation interval .

the second option would have been to treat each recess in the series of short recesses created in this fashion as a short recess , and not to subtract these days from the nomination - to - confirmation interval .

arguably , the senate and president actions were consistent with the latter construction — short recesses as short recesses .

otherwise , senate rules would have required the return of pending nominations ( or the waiver of that rule ) and the president could have made recess appointments .

the senate and the president did not take these actions .

as a result , short recesses created by pro forma sessions are treated as short recesses in the count of the length of time to confirmation .

it should be noted , however , that the inclusion of these days reduces the comparability of statistics provided in this report with statistics in previous similar tracking reports , since the intervals calculated in this report include days that , in previous reports , were part of longer recesses and therefore were subtracted from the length of the interval .

although the phenomenon underlying this methodological problem first arose during the 110 th congress , it could arise again in future congresses .

other reasons for the methodological change are not unique to the 110 th congress .

first , in some cases , committee or floor action on a nomination that could have been completed before a recess has been , instead , deferred until after the recess .

for such a nomination , the period of senate consideration arguably has been intentionally extended .

counting all days , including those during a long recess , in calculations of elapsed time reflects that extension of senate consideration .

second , it is unlikely that all work pertaining to nominations stops over a recess , and the inclusion of recess days is a reflection of the fact that the nominee is still under consideration , even during recess .

member and committee staffs may still be considering nominations at that time , even though they may not take direct action in the form of hearings or votes on the nominees .

ongoing activities may include investigatory work and interviews with nominees .

finally , although , as mentioned above , some political scientists who study nominations do subtract recess days during calculations of nomination - to - confirmation intervals , many others do not .

in addition , the calculation of nomination - to - confirmation intervals in crs research concerning judicial nominations does not exclude days that fall during recesses .

by using methodology that is more similar to the work of other political scientists and to crs judicial nominations research , the research presented here could be more easily compared and combined with related work .

for all of these reasons , in this report , we employ a new methodology for calculating nomination - to - confirmation intervals .

