signed into law on february 17 , 2009 , the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) provided $7.2 billion for broadband grant and loan programs at the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) of the department of commerce ( doc ) and the rural utilities service ( rus ) of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the arra directed broadband grant and loan funding in the following way: $4.7 billion to ntia / doc for a broadband grant program including broadband infrastructure grants , grants for expanding public computer capacity , and grants to encourage sustainable adoption of broadband service .

the ntia grant program is called the broadband technology opportunity program ( btop ) .

$2.5 billion to rus / usda for broadband grants , loans , and loan / grant combinations .

the law stated that 75% of the area to be served by an eligible project must be a rural area .

the rus broadband grant and loan program is called the broadband initiatives program ( bip ) .

subsequently , p.l .

111-226 , signed into law on august 10 , 2010 , rescinded $302 million of unobligated btop money from ntia .

there were two rounds of arra broadband funding .

both ntia and rus evaluated and scored each application based on the proposed project's purpose , benefits , viability , budget , and sustainability .

the arra mandated that all funding be obligated and awarded by september 30 , 2010 , and as of october 1 , 2010 , all arra broadband funds were awarded .

for both btop and bip , all projects will be closed out and unobligated funds returned to the u.s. treasury on september 30 , 2015 .

as of october 1 , 2010 , all btop and bip awards were announced .

in total , ntia and rus announced awards for 553 projects , constituting $7.465 billion in federal funding .

this included 233 btop projects ( totaling $3.936 billion ) and 320 bip projects ( totaling $3.529 billion ) .

of the $7.465 billion total announced , $6.273 billion was grant funding , and $1.192 billion was loan funding .

pursuant to statute , both ntia and rus are preparing to close out all btop and bip projects by september 30 , 2015 .

section 1306 of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ) requires that any and all unspent monies be returned to the u.s. treasury for the purpose of deficit reduction .

unspent bip or btop money cannot be reallocated for other purposes , programs , or projects .

both bip and btop projects draw down funds as they progress .

concerns have been raised that some btop and bip projects may not be completed by the september 30 , 2015 , deadline , and that all funding not yet drawn down will be returned to the u.s. treasury .

under this scenario , any uncompleted projects would have to find alternate sources of funding if they are to be completed after september 30 , 2015 .

with the awards phase completed , the focus shifted to oversight and monitoring of funded projects .

for each project , federal funds are drawn down incrementally as various milestones are reached ( for example , meeting environmental and historic preservation requirements , resolving rights of way issues , arriving at various phases of construction , etc. ) .

recipients and subrecipients are monitored by agency staff to ensure that project goals , performance , timelines , milestones , budgets , and other requirements are being met .

in cases where ntia or rus detects waste , fraud , or abuse , or where it is determined that the awardee is not fulfilling the terms of the award conditions , the agencies have the authority to take back the funding ( deobligate ) and return the money to the u.s. treasury .

in the 114 th congress , a number of committees — including the house committee on energy and commerce ; the house committee on agriculture ; the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation ; the senate committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry ; and the house and senate appropriations committees — have continued to monitor the arra broadband programs in ntia and rus .

with the september 30 , 2015 , deadline approaching , congress has expressed concern that some bip and btop projects may not be fully completed before all unspent funding permanently returns to the u.s. treasury for deficit reduction .

the july 28 , 2015 , politico article on bip ( "wired to fail" ) , as well as delays in the btop public safety projects have sparked these concerns .

options for congress would be to do nothing and allow all unspent monies for these projects to expire ; pass legislation that would extend the deadline for bip and / or btop projects ; or pass new appropriated funding to continue these projects after september 30 , 2015 .

an amendment proposed to the highway bill ( s.amdt .

2285 to h.r .

22 ) by senator wicker ( for himself , senator cochran , and senator feinstein ) would provide that btop funding "shall remain available for expenditure through fiscal year 2020 for the purpose of liquidating valid obligations of active grants under such program. .

the house subcommittee on communications and technology has held four hearings specifically focusing on btop and bip .

the first hearing , held on february 10 , 2011 , heard testimony from the inspectors general of the departments of commerce and agriculture .

the second hearing , held on april 1 , 2011 , heard testimony from the administrators of ntia and rus .

the third hearing , held on may 16 , 2012 , heard testimony from the administrators of ntia and rus and from the offices of the inspector general of the departments of commerce and agriculture .

the fourth hearing , held on february 27 , 2013 , heard testimony from ntia and rus , the doc office of the inspector general , and from public witnesses .

in the 112 th congress , referring to the facts that a fraction of btop and bip obligated funds had as yet been spent ( as outlays ) , that the oigs of both commerce and agriculture planned on investigating complaints about individual awards as they arise ( or had already arisen ) , and that awards had already been returned by awardees , subcommittee chairman walden cited the need for legislation , stating that "it is logical to expect that issues of fraud , waste , and abuse will start popping up now that the money is beginning to flow. .

on april 5 , 2011 , the full committee approved legislation , introduced by representative bass as h.r .

1343 , which contained the following provisions: ntia and rus were directed to take prompt and appropriate action to terminate for cause any btop or bip award ; cause may include an insufficient level of performance , wasteful spending , or fraudulent spending .

whether reclaimed by the agency for cause or returned voluntarily by the awardee , upon terminating an award ntia or rus was directed to immediately deobligate an amount equivalent to the award , less allowable costs , and return the money to the u.s. treasury within 30 days .

if ntia or rus receives information from the oig of the department of commerce or the u.s. department of agriculture , or the comptroller general of the united states , pertaining to material noncompliance or improper usage of award funds , the agencies shall decide within 30 days whether to terminate the award unless the official providing the information recommends that ntia or rus not make such a determination .

when ntia or rus consider terminating an award , they shall , within three days , notify congressional committees of their determination and any action taken as a result of the determination , or why no action was necessary ; in cases where a determination is made not to terminate the award , the notification can be made on a confidential basis .

while rus and ntia ( as well as minority members on the energy and commerce committee ) supported h.r .

1343 , they asserted that existing statute already required the agencies to return unused funds to the u.s. treasury and to take steps against waste , fraud , and abuse .

the energy and commerce committee majority argued that the legislation would add another level of required reporting , establish formal timelines for agencies to respond to ig reports , and remove all ambiguity related to the requirement that agencies return unused funds to the u.s. treasury .

h.r .

1343 was also referred to the house committee on agriculture , which subsequently discharged the bill on september 29 , 2011 .

h.r .

1343 was reported by the committee on house energy and commerce ( h.rept .

112-228 ) on september 29 , 2011 .

on october 5 , 2011 , h.r .

1343 was considered by the house under suspension of the rules and passed by voice vote .

also on october 5 , 2011 , a substantially identical bill , s. 1659 , was introduced into the senate by senator ayotte and referred to the committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

one of the ongoing concerns expressed by some members of congress is the extent to which grants and loans have been awarded to projects serving areas that may already have existing providers offering broadband service .

while the arra statute does not explicitly address the issue of existing providers , the law does direct rus and ntia to favor projects proposing to serve areas that have limited or no broadband service .

for example , the arra specified that at least 75% of the area to be served by a rus bip project shall be in a rural area "without sufficient access to high - speed broadband service to facilitate economic development , as determined by the secretary of agriculture," and that priority shall be given to "projects that provide service to the highest proportion of rural residents that do not have access to broadband service. .

regarding ntia's btop program , the arra stated that the purpose of the program is to "provide access to broadband service to consumers residing in unserved areas of the united states" and to "provide improved access to broadband service to consumers residing in underserved areas of the united states. .

at the same time , the arra directed ntia to give higher consideration to projects that would increase affordability , subscribership , and broadband speeds to the greatest population of users in the area .

thus , rus and ntia had some degree of flexibility in how to implement the grant and loan programs and how to define project eligibility with respect to the level of existing broadband service in proposed project areas .

in the first - round notice of funds availability ( nofa ) , both ntia and rus used the same definition of unserved and underserved areas .

eligible "unserved areas" were defined as areas where at least 90% of households lacked access to terrestrial broadband service .

eligible "underserved areas" for last - mile projects were defined as areas in which at least one of the following factors was met: no more than 50% of the households in the proposed funded service area have access to facilities - based , terrestrial broadband service at greater than the minimum broadband transmission speed ; no broadband service provider advertises broadband transmission speeds of at least 3 megabits per second ( mbps ) downstream ; or the rate of broadband subscribership for the proposed funded service area is 40% of households or less .

additionally , a proposed funded service area would qualify as underserved for middle - mile projects if one interconnection point terminated in a proposed funded service area that qualified as unserved or underserved for last - mile projects .

for first - round bip projects only , an additional project category called "remote area" was defined as an unserved , rural area 50 miles from the limits of a nonrural area .

in the second - round nofas ( separate nofas were issued by rus and ntia respectively ) , the characterization of eligible project areas was altered .

bip projects were required to cover an area that was at least 75% rural and that did not have high speed access broadband service at the rate of 5 mbps ( upstream and downstream combined ) in at least 50% of its area .

regarding btop projects ( which in the second round were exclusively oriented toward large middle - mile projects called comprehensive community infrastructure or cci ) , virtually all proposed service areas were considered eligible , with the understanding that during the application evaluation , factors such as unserved and underserved areas , remoteness , and delivered speed would be considered .

in order to help assess the level of existing broadband service in proposed bip and btop projects , rus and ntia established a process whereby existing providers were given 30 days to file a public notice response ( pnr ) for each broadband infrastructure application received by the agencies .

in the pnr , existing providers had the opportunity to indicate if they were already providing broadband service in each and any of the service areas within the proposed project area , and if they believed that the proposed project area did not meet the threshold of being unserved or underserved .

in round one , based on their assessment of the public notice response from the existing service provider , the agencies could either reclassify the application from "unserved" to "underserved," reject the application , or continue to consider the application as it was submitted .

in round two , rus stated that existing service providers were not required to provide a pnr , but they must do so in order for their existing services to be considered when determining the eligibility of the proposed funded service areas identified in the associated bip application .

while the presence of a pnr likely indicates that an existing service provider is offering some level of broadband service somewhere within the proposed project area , it does not necessarily mean that the area is not unserved or underserved or that the existing service provider is providing adequate broadband service in terms of such factors as coverage , affordability , or speed .

on the other hand , the lack of a public notice response does not necessarily indicate the absence of an existing service provider within the proposed service area ; rather an existing service provider might simply have declined to file a public notice response within the 30-day period .

based on the pnr data provided in the broadbandusa applications database and the round two application directory , about two - thirds of awarded bip projects already had some level of existing broadband service , and three - quarters of the awarded bip money went to projects with at least one existing provider somewhere within the project area .

many of the awarded projects received more than one pnr .

in round one , btop and bip used the same methodology for collecting pnrs .

of the 48 btop applications that received awards in round one , 5 had zero pnrs submitted .

thus , 90% of awarded btop infrastructure projects received one or more pnrs in round one .

the high percentage is not surprising , given that most btop infrastructure projects are middle - mile projects ( 85% of total btop infrastructure projects ) , which cover a significantly larger project area than last - mile projects .

in round two , ntia significantly changed the methodology for collecting pnrs .

ntia posted a list of 69,880 census block groups or tracts that each round two comprehensive community infrastructure ( cci ) applicant proposed to serve through its project .

the posting of this information initiated a window for existing broadband service providers to submit information about the broadband services they currently offer in their respective service territories by census block group or tract .

census block group or tract numbers are not listed according to specific applications , and ntia stated that they would connect challenges from service providers to the proposed service areas of relevant round two cci applications .

in total , 391 existing broadband providers filed pnrs in round two .

the presence of an existing broadband provider in a project's proposed service area was one of many factors rus and ntia considered when deciding whether to fund an application .

in the case of some "unserved" areas , it was possible that there could be at least one existing provider present , and in the case of "underserved areas" it was a certainty that one or more existing broadband providers would be present in the proposed service area .

thus , pnrs were one , but by no means the only , tool used by rus and ntia to assess the level of existing broadband service in proposed project areas .

agencies also used available broadband deployment data and analysis gathered by the fcc , the states , and others .

where feasible , rus also relied on regional usda rural development staff to assess the adequacy of broadband service in proposed project areas .

finally , other factors were considered when assessing the existing broadband service in a proposed project area — factors such as affordability , quality of service , available download and upload speeds , and adoption rates .

the issue of providing federal funding to areas and communities with existing providers is controversial and has been previously raised with respect to the rus rural broadband access loan and loan guarantee program .

broadband awards to areas with preexisting service — that is , areas where existing companies already provide some level of broadband — have sparked controversy because award recipients might compete to some extent with other companies already providing broadband service .

on the one hand , one could argue that the federal government should not be subsidizing competitors for broadband service , particularly in sparsely populated rural markets which may be able only to support one provider .

furthermore , providing grants and loans for projects serving communities with preexisting broadband service may divert assistance from unserved areas that are most in need .

on the other hand , many suburban and urban areas currently receive the benefits of competition among broadband providers — competition which can potentially drive down prices while improving service and performance .

it is therefore appropriate , others have argued , that rural areas also receive the benefits of competition , which in some areas may not be possible without federal financial assistance .

it is also argued that it may not be economically feasible for applicants to serve sparsely populated unserved communities unless they are permitted to also serve more lucrative areas that may already have existing providers .

additionally , it is argued that middle - mile broadband facilities , which are primarily being constructed under btop , can in some cases serve to assist existing providers to more economically serve unserved communities .

in addition to issuing btop and bip awards , both ntia and rus must oversee and administer those awarded projects as they progress toward completion .

in fy2009 and fy2010 , ntia administration of the btop program was funded by the arra , which allocated not more than 3% of btop funding for administrative costs .

with that funding expiring on september 30 , 2010 , ntia sought additional administrative funding in the appropriations process .

ntia argued that additional appropriations were essential to enable oversight and management of the grants that had been awarded .

beginning with its fy2011 budget proposal , the administration has requested and received additional appropriations ( typically in the range of $20 to $30 million each fiscal year ) necessary for ntia administration and oversight of btop grants .

in contrast to ntia , rus has not requested additional appropriations to manage the bip program .

according to the government accountability office ( gao ) , rus used recovery act funds to fully fund a contract extension with icf international to provide bip program support through 2013 .

as mandated by the arra , the national broadband plan ( nbp ) was released by the fcc on march 17 , 2010 .

the nbp set a broadband availability goal that "every american should have affordable access to robust broadband service , and the means and skills to subscribe if they so choose," and cited a "broadband availability gap" of 14 million people in the united states living in 7 million housing units that do not have access to terrestrial broadband infrastructure capable of download speeds of at least 4 mbps .

the fcc estimated that $24 billion in additional funding would be necessary to fill what it refers to as the "broadband availability gap. .

as provided for in the arra , btop and bip are one - time - only programs , and are but one component in any strategy to reach ubiquitous nationwide broadband availability .

according to the national broadband plan: btop and bip alone will not be sufficient to close the broadband availability gap .

other government support is required to complete the task of connecting the nation to ensure that broadband reaches the highest - cost areas of the country .

closing the broadband availability gap and connecting the nation will require a substantial commitment by states and the federal government alike .

this commitment must include initial support to cover the capital costs of building new networks in areas that are unserved today , as well as ongoing support for the operation of newly built networks in areas where revenues will be insufficient to cover ongoing costs .

the other major federal vehicle for funding telecommunications development in rural areas is the universal service fund ( usf ) .

subsidies provided by usf's schools and libraries program and rural health care program are used for a variety of telecommunications services , including broadband access .

while the usf's high cost program does not explicitly fund broadband infrastructure , subsidies are used , in many cases , to upgrade existing telephone networks .

another important component of reaching national broadband plan goals is encouraging the continuing and accelerating rollout of wireless broadband .

in recent years wireless broadband has grown faster than any other broadband technology deployment — according to the fcc , the number of mobile wireless broadband connections has almost tripled since 2008 .

in his 2011 state of the union address , president obama set a goal of enabling entities to provide wireless broadband to at least 98% of all americans within five years .

among the ways wireless broadband could be further deployed to unserved or underserved areas is through broadband funding programs ( such as universal service ) and by making additional spectrum available to providers .

finally , there exist other federal programs that provide financial assistance for various aspects of telecommunications and broadband development .

these include the rural broadband access loan and loan guarantee program , the community connect broadband grants , and the telecommunications infrastructure loan program at the rural utilities service .

those programs are ongoing ( unlike the arra broadband programs ) but operate on a smaller scale than the bip program .

