there is a broad - based consensus that the u.s. immigration system is broken .

this consensus erodes , however , as soon as the options to reform the u.s. immigration system are debated .

substantial efforts to comprehensively reform immigration law failed in the 109 th and 110 th congresses , prompting some to characterize the issue as a "zero - sum game" or a "third rail. .

the number of foreign - born people residing in the united states is at the highest level in u.s. history and has reached a proportion of the u.s. population — 12.5% — not seen since the early 20 th century .

of the 38 million foreign - born residents in the united states , approximately 16.4 million are naturalized citizens .

the remaining 21.6 million foreign - born residents are noncitizens .

an estimated 12.5 million foreign - born residents of the united states in 2009 were legal permanent residents .

according to the latest estimates by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , about 10.8 million of the 21.6 million noncitizens were unauthorized aliens living in the united states in january 2010 , down from a peak of 11.8 million in january 2007 .

some observers and policy experts maintain that the presence of millions of unauthorized residents is evidence of inadequacies in the legal immigration system as well as failures of immigration control policies and practices .

whether and how the 112 th congress will address immigration reform in the midst of historically high levels of unemployment and budgetary constrictions is difficult to project .

current circumstances may sharpen the social and business cleavages as well as narrow the range of options .

nonetheless , selected immigration issues are likely to be a major concern for the 112 th congress , even if legislative action on such contentious issues appears daunting .

the department of state ( dos ) and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) each play key roles in administering the law and policies on the admission of aliens .

although dos's consular affairs is responsible for issuing visas , u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) in dhs approves immigrant petitions , immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) in dhs operates the visa security program ( vsp ) in selected embassies abroad , and customs and border protection ( cbp ) in dhs inspects all people who enter the united states .

the scope of legal immigration includes permanent admissions ( eg , employment - based , family - based immigrants ) and temporary admissions ( eg , guest workers , foreign students ) .

there are some foreign nationals admitted temporarily in a conditional status who may be on a path to permanent residence .

the challenge inherent in reforming the system of legal immigration is balancing the hopes of employers to increase the supply of legally present foreign workers , the longings of families to re - unite and live together , and a widely shared wish among the various stakeholders to improve the policies governing legal immigration into the country .

efforts to improve the security of immigration documents initially emphasized developing documents that were tamper - resistant and difficult to counterfeit .

the objectives were to impede document fraud and unauthorized employment .

since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the policy priorities have centered on document integrity and personal identification , with a sharp focus on intercepting terrorist travel and other security risks .

in recent years , congress has enacted several specific laws aimed directly at closing perceived loopholes of citizenship self - attestation and identity document integrity .

in the 112 th congress , the issues of how best to verify legal status for employment or to obtain entitlements are likely to arise .

reassessing immigration control policies and agencies and considering options for more effective enforcement of the ina are integral immigration issues .

immigration control encompasses an array of enforcement tools , policies , and practices to prevent and investigate violations of immigration laws .

the spectrum of enforcement issues includes apprehending unauthorized aliens ; worksite enforcement ; investigating immigration fraud ; identifying criminal aliens ; and the detention and removal of foreign nationals .

the involvement of states and localities in matters relating to immigration enforcement is also likely to arise in the 112 th congress .

the degree to which foreign nationals should be accorded certain rights and privileges as a result of their presence in the united states , along with the duties owed by such aliens given their legal status , sparks debate .

any immigration legislation — whether it expands , alters , or retracts migration levels — will likely prompt a debate over potential trade - offs and impacts on alien rights and responsibilities .

all persons in the united states , whether u.s. nationals or foreign nationals , are accorded certain rights under the u.s. constitution .

however , foreign nationals do not enjoy the same degree of constitutional protections as u.s. citizens .

the united states grants refugee status to aliens overseas , and grants asylum to aliens in the united states , who are unwilling or unable to return to their home countries due to persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution based on one of five characteristics ( race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion ) and who meet other criteria .

an overriding issue in u.s. refugee and asylum policy is how to adapt policies forged during the cold war to a changing world and the war on terrorism .

some argue that current law does not offer adequate protections for people fleeing persecution and other abuses occurring around the world .

others assert that forms of humanitarian relief intended to provide protection in extraordinary cases are being misused as alternative pathways for immigration .

the bureau of population , refugees and migration in dos handles overseas processing of refugees , and uscis in dhs makes final determinations about eligibility for admission .

in the post - september 11 world , there is particular concern that potential terrorists — especially aliens from trouble spots in the mideast , northern africa , and south asia — could try to gain legal entry into the united states as refugees or asylees .

more generally , some regard as a key challenge for refugee and asylum policy the increasing difficulty in differentiating the persecuted from the persecutors in light of the religious , ethnic , and political violence in various countries around the world .

the efficacy of refugee resettlement programs in the united states is a related concern .

foreign nationals present in the united states may apply for asylum with the uscis after arrival into the country , or may seek asylum before a department of justice's executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) immigration judge during removal proceedings .

aliens arriving at a u.s. port who lack proper immigration documents or who engage in fraud or misrepresentation are placed in expedited removal ; however , if they express a fear of persecution , they receive a "credible fear" hearing with an uscis asylum officer and — if found credible — are referred to an eoir immigration judge for a hearing .

asylum issues that may arise in the 112 th congress include the one - year time limit on filing asylum cases , the mandatory detention of asylum seekers who lack proper documents , and the thresholds for establishing religious persecution .

while refugee status and asylum are permanent forms of relief , the united states also offers temporary humanitarian relief in certain circumstances .

temporary , or nonimmigrant , visas , known as "t" and "u" visas , may be granted to aliens who are victims of a severe form of trafficking in persons or who have suffered substantial physical or mental abuse due to having been victims of criminal activity , respectively , and who assist in investigations or persecutions .

current debate surrounding the t visa epitomizes the debate over u.s. humanitarian policies generally , with some questioning whether the application process may make it difficult for victims to obtain t status and others expressing concern about the possibility of aliens' falsely claiming that they qualify for t status in order to remain in the country .

revisions to the u visa may arise in the broader context of domestic violence legislation .

when civil unrest , violence , or natural disasters erupt in spots around the world , concerns arise over the safety of foreign nationals from these troubled places who are in the united states .

provisions exist in the ina to offer temporary protected status ( tps ) or relief from removal under specified circumstances .

a foreign national who is granted tps receives a registration document and an employment authorization document for the duration of tps .

the united states currently provides tps or deferred enforced departure ( ded ) to over 300,000 foreign nationals from a total of seven countries: el salvador , haiti , honduras , liberia , nicaragua , somalia , and sudan .

under the ina , the executive branch grants tps or relief from removal ; however , congress has also provided tps legislatively .

as a consequence , legislation may emerge when the administration is perceived as slow to grant tps after a humanitarian crisis or opts not to grant tps to foreign nationals whom some members of congress think warrant temporary protections .

