the 112 th congress is currently discussing how to fund the federal government's discretionary programs for the remainder of fy2011 , which began on october 1 , 2010 .

congress approved a series of seven short - term continuing resolutions ( crs ) to fund government activities .

the current cr provides funding until april 15 , 2011 .

if further funding were not provided , much of the federal government would be shut down .

this report compares the various funding levels that have been considered during the 112 th congress with h.r .

1473 , a compromise reached just before the expiration on april 8 of the sixth cr ( p.l .

112-8 ) .

h.r .

1473 provides discretionary budget authority to run the federal government for the remainder of fy2011 , and includes both discretionary and mandatory spending reductions .

budget authority ( ba ) provides government agencies with the legal ability to make obligations on behalf of the federal government , subject to restrictions in appropriations legislation .

outlays occur once the u.s. treasury department disburses funds to discharge those obligations .

the last part of this report summarizes long - term trends in federal spending and presents projections of fy2011 and fy2012 federal spending in terms of outlays .

congress approved a series of seven short - term continuing resolutions to fund government activities since october 1 , 2010 , when the fiscal year began .

the current cr ( p.l .

112-8 ; h.r .

1363 ) provides funding until april 15 , 2011 .

the bill reflecting the last minute compromise reached on april 8 , 2011 , h.r .

1473 , the department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 , is expected to be considered this week .

table 1 shows both short - term and longer - term continuing resolutions considered during the 112 th congress .

congressional discussions of fy2011 measures have opened a vigorous interchange of views on the federal budget , with a strong focus on restraining federal spending .

some contend that fy2011 funding decisions should take a first step in reshaping the size and responsibilities of the federal government .

others note that the economy has not yet fully recovered from the 2009 recession , and criticize the proposed reductions for their likely impact on programs and services provided by the government , and potentially on a still fragile economy .

in particular , unemployment rates remain high in most parts of the country , the housing sector remains weak , and the number of banking and financial institutions on watch lists is at historically elevated levels .

discretionary spending is provided and controlled through appropriations acts , which fund many of the activities commonly associated with such federal government functions as running executive branch agencies , congressional offices and agencies , and international operations of the government .

essentially all spending on federal wages and salaries is discretionary .

discretionary spending , in general , funds costs of administering federal programs such as medicare and social security , whose benefits are funded by mandatory spending .

mandatory spending , by and large , has grown more rapidly than discretionary spending over the past several decades .

figure 1 shows trends in spending , as measured by budget authority , since fy1976 .

budget authority ( ba ) , which gives federal agencies the legal ability to obligate federal funds , has been compared to funds in a checking account .

outlays occur once the u.s. treasury disburses funds to federal contractors , employees , grantees , or other payees .

congressional analysts often consider spending in terms of budget authority , which congress controls , rather than outlays , which can depend on decisions made in the executive branch .

deficits , however , are computed as the difference between revenues and outlays .

both discretionary and mandatory spending spiked in fy2009 due to the effects of the financial crisis of 2007-2009 and the subsequent recession .

president obama has proposed a five - year freeze in discretionary spending in his fy2012 budget submission , which is reflected in the projected decline in discretionary spending as a proportion of the economy after fy2011 .

net interest payments are expected to rise after fy2011 because interest rates typically increase during economic recovery .

cbo current - law baseline projections are computed using assumptions set forth in budget enforcement legislation .

the cbo baseline projections are not intended to serve as a prediction of what budget outcomes are most plausible or likely .

rather , the cbo baseline projections are designed to serve as a budgeting tool , which is used to determine how legislative changes would increase or decrease the federal deficit .

cbo baseline projections are based on current law , not current policy .

if under current law a provision is slated to expire , the cbo baseline is computed on the assumption that the provision will expire — even when past congresses have repeatedly extended similar provisions .

for example , if a tax cut is slated to expire under current law , the baseline revenue projections would include an increase in revenues after the scheduled expiration of that tax cut — even if similar tax cuts had been extended in the past .

cbo baseline projections presume that discretionary spending remains constant in inflation - adjusted ( real ) terms .

as figure 1 shows , discretionary spending in past decades has generally kept pace with growth of the economy as a whole , and thus has increased in terms of inflation - adjusted dollars .

for these reasons , the cbo current - law baseline projections typically yield estimates of higher growth in revenue and slower growth of discretionary spending relative to scenarios that independent forecasters consider likely .

cbo typically includes alternative projections that use assumptions that many economists consider more plausible as predictions of future budgetary outcomes .

while discussions of appropriations legislation typically consider spending in terms of budget authority , data on estimated outlays are important because they are used to compute total budget deficits .

furthermore , the federal government's current fiscal policy stance ( i.e. , its effect on current macroeconomic trends ) depends on outlays .

table 5 presents projections and proposals for fy2011 , along with enacted levels for fy2010 .

table 6 presents projections and proposals for fy2012 , along with actual levels for fy2010 .

