on april 5 , 2011 , representative paul ryan , the chairman of the house budget committee , released the chairman's mark of the fy2012 house budget resolution .

additional detail on budgetary objectives and justifications was provided in chairman ryan's report entitled "the path to prosperity: restoring america's promise," issued the same day .

the house budget committee considered and amended the chairman's mark on april 6 , 2011 and voted 22-16 to report the budget resolution to the full house .

h.con.res .

34 was introduced in the house on april 11 , 2011 , and was accompanied by the house budget committee report , h.rept .

112-58 .

on april 15 , 2011 , the house passed h.con.res .

34 by a vote of 235-193 .

the house budget resolution sets general budgetary parameters .

among other things , it expresses the desired levels of spending for government health programs over 10 years ( fy2012-fy2021 ) , it creates two health care related reserve funds , and presents a policy statement regarding assumptions about future medicare reforms .

the budget resolution does not include instructions for reconciliation .

a budget resolution is not intended to establish details of spending or revenue policy and does not provide levels of spending for specific agencies or programs ; it is not a law and is not signed by the president .

rather , the budget resolution provides the framework for the consideration of other legislation .

while the house budget resolution suggests and assumes certain health care related policy changes , separate legislation would need to be developed ( by the committees of jurisdiction ) and passed to actually modify federally funded health care programs .

cbo was asked to provide an analysis of the long - term budgetary impact of chairman ryan's budget proposal , and issued its report on april 5 , 2011 .

cbo was provided additional detail by the staff of the house budget committee regarding assumptions that should be made while conducting the analysis that was not included in the budget resolution or the accompanying report .

cbo's analysis , however , does not provide an official cost estimate for legislation that might implement the proposal , as it did not conduct its analysis using actual legislative language and was asked to provide an impact analysis beyond the 10-year budgetary window .

cbo's most recent long - term projections , which were the basis for its analysis , were issued in june 2010 and were derived from the agency's march 2010 baseline projections .

in general , chairman ryan's budget proposal , as outlined in his "path to prosperity," in the committee report , and in cbo's analysis , suggests a change in the structure of the medicare and medicaid programs , the repeal many of the provisions in the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca , p.l .

111-148 ) and the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-152 ) including those that establish insurance exchanges , and changes to tort law governing medical malpractice .

chairman ryan provided unofficial 10-year spending estimates in the "path to prosperity" report .

these estimates suggest that the budget plan would reduce federal health care spending about $2.2 trillion over fy2012-fy2021 from cbo's baseline estimate .

this would include a reduction of approximately $1.4 trillion that would have been spent to implement ppaca health insurance reforms , and a reduction of $771 billion for medicaid and $30 billion for medicare during this time period .

in its long – term analysis of the proposal , cbo estimated that government mandatory spending for healthcare would be about 6% of gdp in 2030 , 5.75% in 2040 , and 4.75% in 2050 , compared to 8.75% , 10.75% and 12.25% for the same years under cbo's baseline current - law projections .

this report provides a synopsis of the health care related changes in chairman ryan's fy2012 budget proposal .

our summary is based on the text of h.con.res .

34 , the chairman's "path to prosperity" report , the house budget committee report , and the cbo analysis of the proposal .

the collective details are referred to in this report as the "budget proposal" or chairman ryan's proposal .

medicare is the nation's federal insurance program that pays for covered health services for most persons 65 years and older and for most permanently disabled individuals under the age of 65 years .

generally , individuals are eligible for medicare if they or their spouse worked for at least 40 quarters in medicare - covered employment , are 65 years old , and are a citizen or permanent resident of the united states .

individuals under the age of 65 may also qualify for coverage if they have a permanent disability , have end - stage renal disease , or have amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( als ) .

in fy2011 , the program will cover an estimated 48 million persons at an estimated total cost of about $569 billion , accounting for approximately 3.7% of gdp .

cbo estimates that federal medicare spending ( after deduction of beneficiary premiums and other offsetting receipts ) will be about $485 billion in fy2011 , accounting for over 15% of total federal spending .

medicare is an entitlement program , which means that it is required to pay for covered services provided to eligible persons so long as specific criteria are met .

spending under the program ( except for a portion of the administrative costs ) is considered mandatory spending and is not subject to the appropriations process .

the medicare program has four parts , each responsible for paying for different benefits , subject to different eligibility criteria and financing mechanisms .

part a ( hospital insurance , or hi ) covers inpatient hospital services , skilled nursing care , and home health and hospice care .

the hi trust fund is mainly funded by a dedicated payroll tax of 2.9% of earnings , with employers and workers each paying 1.45% .

 ( the self - employed pay 2.9%. ) .

ppaca added an additional 0.9% hospital insurance tax on high - income taxpayers .

part b ( supplementary medical insurance , or smi ) covers physician services , outpatient services , and some home health and preventive services .

the smi trust fund is funded through beneficiary premiums ( set at 25% of estimated program costs for the aged ) and general revenues ( the remaining amount , approximately 75% ) .

high income enrollees pay higher premiums .

enrollment in part b is voluntary , with over 90% of medicare beneficiaries choosing this option .

part c ( medicare advantage , or ma ) is a private plan option for beneficiaries that covers all part a and b services , except hospice .

individuals choosing to enroll in part c must also enroll in part b .

part c is funded through both the hi and smi trust funds .

part d covers prescription drug benefits .

funding is included in the smi trust fund and is financed through beneficiary premiums ( about 25.5% ) and general revenues ( about 74.5% ) .

high income enrollees pay higher premiums .

this portion of the program is also voluntary ; about 60% of eligible medicare beneficiaries are enrolled in a part d plan , while another 14% are enrolled in an employer plan subsidized by medicare .

under traditional medicare , parts a and b , services are generally paid directly by the government on a "fee - for - service" basis , using different prospective payment systems or fee schedules .

under parts c and d , private insurers are paid a monthly "capitated" amount to provide enrollees with at least a minimum standard benefit .

premium amounts may vary depending on which plan the enrollee selects .

the capitated payment is adjusted to reflect the higher relative cost of older or sicker beneficiaries , but is not adjusted for the actual amount of health care used .

since its establishment in 1965 , the medicare program has undergone considerable change .

most recently , ppaca made numerous changes to the medicare program that modify provider reimbursements , provide incentives to improve the quality and efficiency of care , and enhance certain medicare benefits .

in fy2011 , the medicaid program will cover an estimated 69.5 million people .

medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services as well as long - term care .

medicaid is jointly funded by the federal government and the states .

federal medicaid payments to states are estimated to reach $275 billion in fy2011 , which would include $12 billion as a result of increased federal medical assistance percentage funding that congress provided through the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

in a typical year , the federal government covers roughly 57% of the total cost for medicaid .

as a percent of gdp , federal medicaid spending is expected to reach about 1.9% of gdp in fy2011 .

each state designs and administers its own version of medicaid under broad federal rules .

while states that choose to participate in medicaid must comply with all federal mandated requirements , state variability is the rule rather than the exception in terms of eligibility levels , covered services , and how those services are reimbursed and delivered .

ppaca makes changes along these dimensions for the medicaid program .

some of the changes are mandatory for states and others are available at state option .

most notable of these provisions is the expansion of medicaid eligibility levels for individuals under the age of 65 with incomes up to 133% of the federal poverty level .

estimates provided in chairman ryan's "path to prosperity" report suggest that the proposed budget would reduce federal outlays for medicaid by about $771 billion from fy2012-fy2021 compared to cbo's baseline projection .

according to cbo's long - term analysis of the proposal , when compared to long - term estimates of current law , federal spending for medicaid would be 35% lower in fy2022 and 49% lower in fy2030 .

private health insurance covers about 195 million people in the united states .

workers and their families often receive health insurance as a fringe benefit from their employers .

some individuals and families purchase private insurance on their own , where premiums and benefits may be based on health status and may be more limited than in the employer market .

reflecting the attributes of these different "customers" for insurance ( larger firms , smaller firms , and individuals ) , the private health insurance market is made up of three different segments: the large group market , the small group market , and the nongroup ( individual ) market .

each of these market segments offer distinct insurance products , and each is governed by different regulatory structures .

traditionally , the primary regulators of private insurance have been the states .

however , overlapping federal requirements complicate the regulation of this industry and enforcement of insurance standards .

ppaca increases access to health insurance coverage , expands federal private health insurance market requirements , and requires the creation of health insurance exchanges to provide individuals and small employers with access to insurance .

ppaca also increases access to health insurance coverage by subsidizing private insurance premiums and cost - sharing for certain lower - income individuals enrolled in exchange plans , among other provisions .

these costs are projected to be offset by reduced spending for public coverage , and by increased taxes and other revenues , such as a 40% excise tax on health insurers and health plan administrators for coverage that exceeds certain thresholds in 2018 .

the law creates several temporary programs to increase access and funding for targeted groups .

they include ( 1 ) temporary high - risk pools for uninsured individuals with preexisting conditions ; ( 2 ) a reinsurance program to reimburse employers for a portion of the health insurance claims' costs for their 55- to 64-year - old retirees and their dependents ; and ( 3 ) small business tax credits for firms with fewer than 25 full - time equivalents ( ftes ) and average wages below $50,000 that choose to offer health insurance .

also , most individuals will be required to have insurance or pay a penalty ( "individual mandate" ) .

certain employers with more than 50 employees who do not offer health insurance may be subject to penalties .

while most employers who offer health insurance will meet the law's requirements , some may be required to also pay a penalty if any of their full - time workers enroll in exchange plans and receive premium subsidies .

medical malpractice has attracted congressional attention numerous times over the past few decades , particularly in the midst of three "crisis" periods for medical malpractice liability insurance in the mid - 1970s , the mid - 1980s , and the early 2000s .

these periods were marked by sharp increases in medical liability insurance premiums , difficulties in finding any liability insurance in some regions and among some specialties as insurers withdrew from providing coverage , reports of providers leaving areas or retiring following insurance difficulties , and a variety of public policy measures at both the state and federal levels to address the market disruptions .

in each case , attention receded to some degree after a few years as premium increases moderated and market conditions calmed .

the overall medical liability insurance market is not currently exhibiting the same level of crisis as in previous time periods .

nonetheless , problems with the affordability and availability of malpractice insurance persist , especially in particular regions and physician specialties ( eg , obstetricians ) .

in addition , the fear of claims for medical malpractice may affect individual provider decisions particularly through increased use of tests and procedures to protect against future lawsuits ( "defensive medicine" ) and drive up the overall cost of health care .

according to the cbo analysis of the ryan budget proposal , the proposal assumes reforms to tort law governing medical malpractice .

the tort reforms would include: a cap of $250,000 on awards for noneconomic damages ; a cap on awards for punitive damages of $500,000 or two times the award for economic damages , whichever is greater ; modification of the "collateral source" rule to allow evidence of income from such sources as health and life insurance , workers' compensation , and automobile insurance to be introduced at trials or to require that such income be subtracted from awards decided by juries ; a statute of limitations — one year for adults and three years for children — from the date of discovery of an injury ; and replacement of joint - and - several liability with a fair - share rule , under which a defendant in a lawsuit would be liable only for the percentage of the final award that was equal to his or her share of responsibility for the injury .

ppaca established a federally administered voluntary long - term care insurance program entitled the community living assistance services and supports ( class ) program .

under this program , active workers will be able to purchase long - term care insurance , usually through one's employer , and premiums are to be set to cover the full cost of the program .

the budget proposal would repeal the class act .

the cbo analysis indicated that a number of mandatory grant programs including funds for prevention and public health activities created by ppaca would be repealed .

however , insufficient detail was provided to identify the specific ppaca provisions that would be repealed .

