a clean energy standard ( ces ) has been proposed as a tool to provide a more sustainable domestic energy supply , reduce greenhouse gas emissions , and secure the united states as a leader in clean energy technology .

some assert that a ces could contribute to economic growth .

opponents of a ces contend that a ces could raise electricity prices , introduce grid reliability concerns , require significant investment in additional transmission lines , and depend on adopting some technologies not yet established for widespread commercial - scale use .

a ces could require certain electricity providers to obtain a portion of their electricity from qualifying clean energy sources .

in his 2012 state of the union address , president obama challenged congress to "set a clean energy standard that creates a market for innovation. .

a ces could be one approach if congress chooses to act .

on march 21 , 2011 , senators bingaman and murkowski issued a white paper on a clean energy standard that laid out some of the key questions and potential design elements of a ces , in order to solicit input from a broad range of interested parties , to facilitate discussion , and to ascertain whether or not consensus can be achieved .

on march 1 , 2012 , senator bingaman introduced the clean energy standard act of 2012 ( s. 2146 ) , which would require large utilities to sell a percentage of their electricity from clean energy sources — at least 24% in 2015 and gradually increasing over time to 84% by 2035 .

the ces expands on the concept of a national renewable energy standard ( res ) , an idea that has received significant congressional attention .

an res would encourage the production of electricity from renewable resources .

res legislative discussions date back to at least the 105 th congress .

a ces expands qualifying energy sources to include other "clean" energy sources ( eg , nuclear , natural gas , clean coal ) along with renewable energy sources ( eg , wind , solar ) .

any ces would need to define which energy sources would qualify as "clean. .

the bulk of electricity generation in 2011 was from coal , natural gas , and nuclear ( see figure 1 ) .

renewable sources constituted roughly 12% of total electric power net generation in 2011 ( including conventional hydroelectric ) .

analysis from the energy information administration ( eia ) that does not include the addition of a federal res or ces suggests that electricity generation from renewable sources ( including conventional hydroelectric ) will grow from 10% in 2010 to 16% in 2035 .

eia analysis indicates that most of the growth in renewable electricity generation in the power sector , excluding hydroelectricity , from 2010 to 2035 will consist of generation from wind and biomass facilities .

multiple features of a ces may require congressional action .

eligible energy sources would likely be among the topics at the forefront of a ces debate ; at stake is what resources could and could not participate in a ces .

each energy source has advantages and disadvantages , and each brings different natural resource , economic , and technical challenges .

for example , the cost to build clean energy projects and operate and maintain them is expected to vary ( see table 1 ) .

additionally , sources for supply - side energy options are dependent on regional resources ; energy efficiency is a demand - side source that is available everywhere because it is derived from power consumption locations — not from natural resource geography .

congress might consider these factors , among others such as how a federal ces would interact with state power provisions , in determining which energy sources would be eligible for a ces .

this report begins with a brief examination of clean energy , renewable energy , and alternative energy .

it then presents possible selection criteria congress could use to determine which sources could be eligible for a ces depending on the goal ( s ) of the ces .

the report provides an overview of the energy sources most commonly discussed as potential ces qualifying sources: biomass , fossil fuels ( natural gas combined - cycle and coal - fired power plants with carbon capture and sequestration ) , geothermal resources , nuclear , solar , water , and wind .

the report describes where each source can be found in the united states , the estimated quantity available for electricity generation , technologies used to create electricity from the source , advantages and disadvantages of using the source for electricity generation , and policy implications should the source be included in a ces .

the report also contains a section on energy efficiency and its potential inclusion in a ces .

clean energy , renewable energy , alternative energy — these terms have been used interchangeably .

however , they are not synonymous , although one term can encompass another .

the terms differ with respect to an energy source's point of origin ( eg , fossil or non - fossil ) , replenishment time frame ( eg , instantaneously or millions of years ) , supply ( eg , exhaustible or inexhaustible ) , and environmental impact ( eg , greenhouse gas emissions and other pollutants ) , among other qualities .

in general , a renewable energy source is naturally replenishing but flow - limited .

a clean energy source is typically a source that produces little to no air pollution .

the term "alternative" usually describes a non - conventional energy source .

most but not all renewable energy sources qualify as clean energy , depending on how electricity is produced from the source .

some clean energy sources ( eg , nuclear ) are not generally considered renewable .

potential ces energy source selection criteria could depend on the goal of a ces .

while a ces generally would have the basic goal of producing a significant portion of electricity from clean energy sources , the reasoning behind this goal could influence which sources are selected .

in evaluating individual energy sources for possible inclusion , congress might consider the following criteria: geographic location of the energy source , energy source supply levels , job creation associated with the energy source , implementation time frame , epa regulations ( existing and forthcoming ) , environmental issues ( air quality , water quality , water quantity , wildlife ) , greenhouse gas emissions , baseload versus non - baseload , energy balance , energy content , land use change , scalability , and cost .

this section discusses selected energy resources that are commonly identified as potential qualifying sources for a ces .

each overview describes where the source can be found in the united states , how much is estimated to be available for electricity generation , the technologies used to create electricity from the identified source , advantages and disadvantages of using the source for electricity generation , and policy implications .

potential resources are renewable ( eg , wind ) or technology - aided ( eg , fossil fuels ) .

the energy resources may include biomass , clean energy fossil fuels , geothermal resources , nuclear , solar , water , and wind .

energy efficiency is a demand - side resource that could contribute to a ces if reducing future needs for electric energy and power plant capacity is a goal .

this section describes the concept of energy efficiency , opportunities for energy efficiency measures , and policy design issues concerning efficiency use in a ces .

the section ends with possible policy implications should energy efficiency be included in a ces .

an energy efficiency measure reduces the amount of energy required by specific end - use devices and systems , without reducing the services provided .

energy efficiency is increased when an energy conversion device , such as a household appliance , central air conditioner , or electric motor , undergoes a technical change that enables it to provide the same service ( lighting , cooling , motor drive ) while using less energy .

energy efficiency involves all aspects of energy production , distribution , and end - use .

the energy - saving result of the efficiency improvement is often called "energy conservation. .

for an electric utility company , energy efficiency measures are usually packaged into an outreach program that targets demand reductions on the customer's side of the meter .

the collective effect of efficiency improvements to a variety of end - use equipment ( eg , lights , refrigerators , air conditioners ) provides demand - side power reductions that are equivalent in many ways to supply - side production from new power plants .

as a result , energy efficiency can provide power service needs while actually reducing resource use and environmental impacts .

there has been considerable debate about the possible role of energy efficiency in a ces .

there are at least three key advantages to the use of energy efficiency measures: it is available everywhere that power demand is located ; because it cuts energy use , it may reduce environmental impacts ; and when it helps avoid growth in power plant capacity , it also reduces the need for additional reserve capacity and may reduce the need for additional transmission infrastructure .

on the other hand , there are at least three disadvantages and / or barriers to the use of energy efficiency measures .

first , utility profits generally follow in direct proportion to volume of power sales: the utility has an incentive to increase power sales and a disincentive to reduce power sales .

second , the analytic difficulty of estimating the potential cost savings from energy efficiency measures can deter utility customers ( especially residential customers ) from using cost - effective efficiency measures .

third , the time requirement and statistical nature of evaluating the impacts of utility energy efficiency programs tend to cause a time delay for the results , and some degree of uncertainty about the magnitude of actual energy savings .

the three main sectors that present opportunities for improving demand - side efficiency in electric energy use are buildings , industry , and transportation .

buildings in the residential , commercial , and industrial sectors present the largest available opportunity .

in existing buildings , efficiency improvements can reduce power demanded by hundreds of types of electrical end - use equipment ( eg , lights , refrigerators , air conditioners ) .

savings may also be available through increased insulation , more efficient windows , and other measures .

for new buildings , additional design measures can be incorporated , such as passive heating and cooling features and building integrated solar photovoltaics .

for industry , on - site power generation is another means to reduce demand for electricity generation .

industrial process use of electricity is the next largest opportunity for efficiency .

for example , large amounts of electricity are needed to process bauxite into final alloy products in the aluminum industry .

due to heavy dependence on liquid fuels , the transportation sector currently provides a smaller opportunity for efficiency to reduce electric power use .

currently , most electric power use in this sector supports public transit systems .

however , the recent policy focus on increasing the use of electric vehicles and hybrid - electric vehicles could cause the share of power use in this sector to climb significantly .

in such a case , efficiency measures for electric vehicles would take on greater importance .

there is at least one key issue that would influence the potential contribution from energy efficiency resources .

decoupling of electric utility profits from sales volume is a long - standing issue for the development of energy efficiency resources in power markets .

most utilities have rate structures that encourage greater electricity use by offering lower rates for larger purchases .

this practice deters utility use of efficiency because it would reduce profits .

some states ( eg , california ) have experimented with innovative rate - making policies that make efficiency profitable .

historically , utilities were designed to make profits in proportion to power sales volume .

in the face of growing power demands , that design factor has driven utilities to seek additional supply - side sources and deterred them from seeking demand - side energy efficiency sources that curb sales .

recognition of this key barrier has led to some state regulatory efforts to "decouple" utility profits from sales volume .

california , for example , had such an electricity rate - adjustment mechanism in the early 1990s , dropped it during the industry restructuring trend of the mid - to - late 1990s , and re - instated it after the state power shortages of 2001 .

the mechanism allows rates to increase slightly , to compensate for reduced sales , with the goal of reducing the overall consumer bill .

the role of energy efficiency in a ces depends on potentially conflicting policy goals: use of new , more expensive clean energy technologies or reducing overall demand for electricity .

one alternative that has been proposed is to establish a fixed percentage carve - out or "cap" for energy efficiency resources .

this was an issue for recent efforts in the debate on renewable energy portfolio standard ( res ) legislation .

there are at least two purposes of such a cap .

one purpose is to provide flexibility to regulated entities that may have a limited amount of clean energy resources .

another purpose is to limit the amount of efficiency resources that could have lower costs , in order to avoid diluting the main ces focus on developing new higher - cost forms of power supply .

policy questions for energy efficiency as a qualifying ces energy source could include the following: do potential benefits of energy efficiency , such as lower power costs and reduced pollution , justify its inclusion as an eligible resource under a ces ? .

many energy efficiency measures are capable of rapid implementation and are available at costs well below those for supply - side resources .

in this regard , efficiency may be seen to have less need for new incentives and regulatory policies , such as the ces .

if energy efficiency measures were included in a ces , would the relatively low costs inhibit the development and implementation of some clean energy and other supply - side power generation options ? .

could a cap on the maximum contribution from efficiency measures help avoid such a concern ? .

some previous proposals for an res ( i.e. , §101 of h.r .

2454 in the 111 th congress ) included energy efficiency as a qualified source , but with a cap that set a maximum for its contribution .

a key purpose for including efficiency was to increase flexibility for those states or regions that had limited renewable energy resources .

if energy efficiency measures were included in a ces , would additional federal funding and regulatory policies ( e.g .

 , to help realign utility incentives for profitability ) still be needed to help overcome barriers to broader use of energy efficiency measures to defer or displace power plants ? .

the napee study suggests that efficiency could make a major contribution , effectively providing the equivalent of up to 20,000 mw of new generating capacity over 10 to 15 years , conditioned on a major increase in efficiency program funding and alignment of the utility profitability incentive .

congress has discussed a clean energy standard and its role in the larger national energy debate .

at least two bills pertaining to a clean energy standard were introduced during the 112 th congress — the fulfilling u.s. energy leadership act of 2011 ( s. 1220 ) and the clean energy standard act of 2012 ( s. 2146 ) .

legislative examination of a ces could raise multiple questions , including similar questions posed during the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) debate .

which sources should be included ? .

should legislation account for other sources and technologies that are not yet developed ? .

how much clean electricity can be generated in the time frame specified from each qualifying energy source ? .

should a carbon accounting factor be assigned to each qualifying energy source ? .

will a time come when some resources ( eg , wind , solar ) used to generate clean electricity cease to be considered a "free" resource ? .

if so , what impact might this have on using that resource to meet the ces mandate ? .

will certain clean energy sources ( eg , natural gas ) force out or significantly lower electricity generation from renewable resources ? .

should energy efficiency be included in a ces , and if so , how should it be included ? .

how would a ces interact with state renewable electricity requirements ? .

who would assume the costs of new transmission capacity ? .

these questions and other concerns require further exploration to ensure that , if established , a ces would work as intended .

