taxpayers are seen as more likely to pay taxes on income if the realization of that income has been communicated to the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

to encourage compliance with tax laws , the internal revenue code ( irc ) includes a number of information reporting requirements regarding payments that may result in taxable income for the payee .

one such reporting requirement , contained in irc § 6041 ( a ) , applies to certain payments made by persons in the course of a trade or business .

under irc § 6041 ( a ) , if the total amount of payments made to a single payee over a year equals at least $600 , the payer is required to file an information return with the irs providing information identifying the payer , the payee , and the total amounts paid to that payee over the past calendar year .

the information returns required to be filed under irc § 6041 are typically versions of form 1099 .

a copy of this information return must also be provided to the payee .

although payees may receive copies of information returns , payees are not required to file any information returns under irc § 6041 .

section 6041 was amended twice in 2010: once by § 9006 of the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) and a second time by § 2101 of the small business jobs act of 2010 .

both amendments were subsequently repealed by the comprehensive 1099 taxpayer protection and repayment of exchange subsidy overpayments act of 2011 .

as a result , the information reporting requirements have been restored to their pre - ppaca scope .

they may , however , be subject to stronger enforcement as a result of a surviving provision of the small business jobs act that revised the penalties for failing to file an accurate 1099 with the irs or failing to provide an accurate copy of that form to the payee .

this report briefly discusses the procedures and penalties under current law applicable to the information reporting requirements under irc § 6041 , and also briefly describes recent amendments that have been repealed .

for a more detailed discussion of the repealed amendments , including responses to them by various stakeholders , see crs report r41504 , 1099 information reporting requirements and penalties as modified by the patient protection and affordable care act and the small business jobs act of 2010 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

the procedures for filing information returns with the irs were not changed by either ppaca or the small business jobs act ; therefore , the repeal of the amendments to § 6041 has no effect on those procedures .

both the failure to submit an accurate information return to the irs and the failure to provide a copy of the information return to the payee are subject to monetary penalties assessed by the irs .

as a unique information return is required with respect to each payee , penalties are assessed on each deficient information return .

both § 6721 ( pertaining to failure to file accurate returns with the irs ) and § 6722 ( pertaining to failure to provide payees with correct copies of the information returns ) of the irc have been amended by the small business jobs act to revise the amounts of the penalties .

section 6722 has been amended to change the structure of the penalty so that it is similar to the structure of the § 6721 penalty .

in so doing , the effect is that the amended penalty may be lower than it previously would have been where corrective action is taken .

the changes to both sections are scheduled to become effective for returns required to be filed after december 31 , 2010 .

thus , the new penalty amounts are expected to apply to returns that report payments made during calendar year 2010 .

section 6041 was amended twice in 2010: once by § 9006 of ppaca and a second time by § 2101 of the small business jobs act of 2010 .

both amendments were subsequently repealed by the comprehensive 1099 taxpayer protection and repayment of exchange subsidy overpayments act of 2011 .

each repealed amendment is described below .

for a more detailed discussion of the repealed expansions , including responses to them by various stakeholders , see crs report r41504 , 1099 information reporting requirements and penalties as modified by the patient protection and affordable care act and the small business jobs act of 2010 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

for payments made after december 31 , 2011 , § 9006 of ppaca amended the reporting requirement in irc § 6041 in two principal ways .

first , payments to corporations would no longer be automatically exempt from reporting requirements by virtue of the payee's corporate status , superseding existing regulations to the contrary .

second , the types of payments that could trigger the reporting requirement were expanded to include amounts paid in consideration of property and other gross proceeds .

although now repealed , the effect of this amendment would have been to require those engaged in a trade or business to report a broader range of payments made to a broader range of payees in order to encourage the voluntary reporting of taxable income and also to facilitate the enforcement and collection of taxes on income that is not voluntarily reported .

section 2101 of the small business jobs act expanded the payers who would be required to comply with the section's reporting requirements to include landlords .

generally , those receiving rental income from real estate have not been considered to be engaged in a trade or business ; however , the recent amendment of § 6041 would have changed this .

solely for purposes of § 6041 ( a ) , most landlords would have been considered to be engaged in the trade or business of renting real estate and , therefore , might have been required to file forms 1099 to report payments made in conjunction with their rental properties .

