the state secrets privilege , primarily a construct of the judiciary that has been derived from common law , is an evidentiary privilege that allows the government to resist court - ordered disclosure of information during civil litigation if there is a reasonable danger that such disclosure would harm the national security of the united states .

the privilege belongs to the government alone , and may be invoked only after personal consideration by the head of the department with control over the information .

the validity of the claim is then independently evaluated by the court after an inquiry that may require in camera review of the information sought to be protected .

if the court determines that the information in question falls under the protection of the state secrets privilege , then the information will be considered unavailable , and the court must determine how or whether the litigation can proceed absent the protected evidence .

in recent years , some have suggested that the privilege has been overused by the executive branch to prevent disclosure of its own questionable , embarrassing , or unlawful conduct — particularly with respect to the "war on terror. .

in response , the obama administration has issued a new policy on the state secrets privilege in an attempt to "strengthen public confidence that the u.s. government will invoke the privilege in court only when genuine and significant harm to national defense or foreign relations is at stake and only to the extent necessary to safeguard those interests. .

under the policy established by attorney general eric holder , any decision by an agency to invoke the privilege in litigation must first be reviewed by a state secrets review committee and receive the personal approval of the attorney general .

the new procedures specifically state that the department of justice will not defend an invocation of the state secrets privilege to conceal "violations of the law" or "administrative error" ; avoid "embarrassment" ; or to "prevent or delay the release of information … which would not reasonably be expected to cause significant harm to national security . .

while the state secrets privilege arises in a wide array of cases , recently the privilege has been characterized by a number of high - profile assertions — including invocation of the privilege to defend against claims arising from the government's "extraordinary rendition" practices , challenges to the terrorist surveillance program , and claims against various national security agencies for unlawful employment practices .

the government has also intervened and invoked the privilege in a significant number of cases involving claims against government contractors .

this report is intended to present an overview of the protections afforded by the state secrets privilege ; a discussion of some of the many unresolved issues associated with the privilege ; and , a selection of high - profile examples of how the privilege has been applied in practice .

although previously established , the supreme court first articulated the modern analytical framework of the state secrets privilege in the 1953 case of united states v. reynolds .

that case involved multiple wrongful death claims brought by the widows of three civilians who died aboard a military aircraft that crashed while testing secret electronic equipment .

the plaintiffs had sought discovery of the official post - incident report and survivors' statements that were in the possession of the u.s. air force .

the air force opposed disclosure of those documents , as the aircraft and its occupants were engaged in a "highly secret mission of the air force" at the time of the crash .

the federal district court ordered the air force to produce the documents so that it could independently determine whether they contained privileged information .

when the air force refused to provide the documents to the court , the district court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs on the issue of negligence ; the court of appeals subsequently affirmed the district court's ruling .

the supreme court reversed .

in its opinion , the court laid out a two - step procedure to be used when evaluating a claim of privilege to protect state secrets .

first , "there must be a formal claim of privilege , lodged by the head of the department which has control over the matter , after actual personal consideration by that officer. .

second , "the court itself must determine whether the circumstances are appropriate for the claim of privilege , and yet do so without forcing a disclosure of the very thing the privilege is designed to protect. .

ultimately , the reynolds court determined that the air force's invocation of the privilege was valid and that in camera review of the incident report was not necessary .

importantly , the court did not dismiss the claims , but rather remanded the case and directed the district court to provide the plaintiffs with the opportunity to pursue their case without the privileged evidence .

the 2010-2011 term saw the supreme court hear its first state secrets privilege case since the 2005 case of tenet v. doe .

in general dynamics corporation v. united states , the federal government validly asserted the privilege to prevent the disclosure of sensitive stealth technology in a defense contract dispute with a government contractor .

however , in addition to asserting the privilege , the government also sought the return of progress payments made to the contractor .

the complex factual scenario is discussed in greater length infra , however it is important to note that the case focused on the consequences of a valid privilege in situations where the privilege acts to inhibit a party's ability to defend against the government's breach of contract claim .

although the case was more a contract remedy case than a state secrets privilege case , the opinion contained potentially important language with respect to the evidentiary foundation of the privilege and the scope of the totten rule .

the general dynamics opinion contained language suggesting a reaffirmation of the court's view that the reynolds privilege is based in the law of evidence rather than in the constitution .

the court expressly stated that " reynolds was about the admission of evidence .

it decided a purely evidentiary dispute by applying evidentiary rules. .

the court also clearly established that the legal theory of nonjusticiability behind totten and tenet did not solely apply to cases involving secret espionage contracts .

in citing the two espionage contract cases , rather than reynolds , as the applicable authority in the case , the court stated: "we think a similar situation obtains here , and that the same consequence should follow. .

in extending totten into this new context and in refusing to find an enforceable contract , the court held that "where liability depends upon the validity of a plausible ... defense , and when full litigation of that defense 'would inevitably lead to the disclosure of' state secrets , neither party can obtain judicial relief. .

the court also cited totten in noting that "[b]oth parties — the government no less than petitioners — must have assumed the risk that state secrets would prevent the adjudication of claims of inadequate performance. .

the united states has invoked the state secrets privilege in a wide array of cases , many of which have resulted in the outright dismissal of the plaintiffs' claims .

this section of the report provides a brief overview of a selection of recent , high - profile uses of the privilege .

the federal courts continue to wrestle with the precise contours of the state secrets privilege .

although the privilege has been invoked in a significant number of cases in a range of areas of the law , a variety of important questions have yet to be resolved in an authoritative manner .

unsettled issues include whether the state secrets privilege is more accurately defined as a common law evidentiary privilege or a constitutional doctrine ; the degree of deference to be accorded to the executive branch during a court's independent evaluation of an assertion of the privilege ; the circumstances under which a valid claim of privilege must result in outright dismissal as opposed to allowing the claim to proceed absent the privileged evidence ; and , finally , the scope of totten and the nature of the relationship between the reynolds privilege and the totten bar .

