the 111 th congress enacted the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 , ppaca ) and the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-152 ) .

on january 19 , 2011 , the house passed h.r .

2 , which would repeal ppaca .

nonetheless , it is possible that the 112 th congress will examine other legislation to amend parts of ppaca .

during any debate to amend ppaca , one issue that may arise is the eligibility of aliens ( noncitizens ) for some of the key provisions of the act .

this report discusses alien eligibility for the provisions in ppaca that have restrictions based on immigration status: participation in high - risk pools , the requirement to maintain health insurance , the ability to purchase insurance through an exchange , and eligibility for premium credits and cost - sharing subsidies .

the report concludes with an analysis of data from the current population survey ( cps ) that illuminate some of the possible effects of ppaca on the health insurance coverage of the noncitizen population .

the following section discusses alien eligibility for the following provisions under ppaca: high - risk pools , the heath insurance mandate , the exchanges , and premium credits and cost - sharing subsidies .

in general , aliens are separated into two groups for eligibility purposes under ppaca: aliens who are "lawfully present in the united states" are eligible for the provisions discussed below while aliens who are not "lawfully present in the united states" ( i.e. , unauthorized / illegal aliens ) are ineligible .

the following section uses analysis from the current population survey ( cps ) to provide an overview of the health insurance coverage of u.s. citizens and noncitizens , and to gain some insight into the possible effects of the changes in ppaca to medicaid eligibility on the health insurance coverage of noncitizens .

the data used in this study are from the march 2010 supplement of the cps , the main source of labor force data for the united states .

the cps is a household survey sample of the non - institutionalized civilian population conducted by the census bureau for the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) .

the data are weighted to reflect the population .

all differences discussed in the text of this report are statistically significant at the .05 level unless otherwise specified .

the comparisons in this report are based on three groups residing in the united states: ( 1 ) native - born u.s. citizens , ( 2 ) naturalized u.s. citizens , and ( 3 ) noncitizens .

although one of the issues surrounding health insurance coverage for noncitizens is the number of unauthorized aliens living in the united states , it is not possible using cps data to differentiate between aliens who are in the united states legally or illegally , nor is it possible to differentiate between different categories of noncitizens ( eg , legal permanent residents , temporary workers , students , refugees , asylees ) .

the cps asks whether the respondent has had various types of coverage during the previous year .

thus , respondents may have more than one type of health insurance during the year .

theoretically , an uninsured respondent is someone who lacked any type of health insurance during the past year and the term does not capture people who were uninsured for part of the year .

however , research has shown that the cps estimates appear to reflect the number of people uninsured at a point in time ( that is , when the survey was taken ) rather than the number uninsured for the entire previous year .

the types of health insurance used in this report are private insurance ( both employer sponsored and individually purchased ) , medicare , medicaid , and military or veterans coverage .

if the respondent reported not having any of these types of coverage , they are considered uninsured .

as shown in figure 1 , noncitizens are more than three times as likely as native - born u.s. citizens , and more than two times as likely as naturalized u.s. citizens , to be uninsured: 46% of noncitizens lacked any type of health insurance , compared with 14.1% of the native - born population and 19% of the naturalized population .

similarly , noncitizens have the lowest rate of private insurance coverage ( 37.1% ) , while native - born citizens have a slightly higher rate of private health insurance than naturalized citizens ( 66.3% and 60.5% , respectively ) .

the noncitizen population also has the lowest rate of medicare coverage , most likely due to the relatively young age of the population and the decreased likelihood that noncitizens would meet the eligibility requirements for medicare .

naturalized citizens have the highest rate of medicare coverage , which may be attributable to the fact that the naturalized population is , on average , older than both the native - born and the noncitizen populations .

noncitizens are slightly less likely to have medicaid coverage ( 15.4% ) than native - born citizens ( 15.9% ) , while naturalized citizens are the least likely to have medicaid coverage ( 12.4% ) .

lastly , due to the fact that , in general , noncitizens must be legal permanent residents ( lprs ) to join the armed forces , the noncitizen population has much lower rates of military / veterans coverage ( 0.8% ) than the naturalized ( 3.2% ) and native - born ( 4.4% ) populations .

overall , noncitizens tend to be poorer than native - born and naturalized citizens .

thirty - five percent of noncitizens have family incomes that are less than 133% of poverty , compared with 19.2% of native - born citizens and 16.9% of naturalized citizens ( see table 2 ) .

as shown in table 3 , expectedly , as family income increases , people are more likely to have private health insurance .

nonetheless , for all levels noncitizens are less likely than citizens to have private insurance , but this difference is smallest for those whose family income is more than 400% of poverty .

only 12.9% of noncitizens with family incomes less than 133% of poverty have private insurance , while 24.5% of native - born citizens and 21.7% of naturalized citizens with similar family incomes have private insurance .

for those with family incomes that are more than 400% of poverty , 76.6% of noncitizens , 88.4% of native - born citizens , and 82.8% of naturalized citizens have private insurance .

as discussed above ( see figure 1 ) , although noncitizens are only slightly less likely overall to have medicaid coverage ( 12.6% ) than native - born citizens ( 14.4% ) , and naturalized citizens are the least likely to have medicaid coverage ( 11.4% ) , when examining those at or below 133% of poverty , noncitizens are much less likely than the native born to be covered by medicaid .

for those with family incomes at or below 133% of poverty , 25.2% of noncitizens are covered by medicaid , compared with 33.6% of naturalized citizens and 45.7% of native - born citizens .

the difference between medicaid coverage for those with family incomes above 133% and not exceeding 400% of poverty is much smaller , with 12.6% of noncitizens and 13.6% of native - born citizens being covered by medicaid .

for all income levels , noncitizens are more likely to be uninsured than u.s. citizens .

for example , as table 3 illustrates , for those with incomes above 133% and not exceeding 400% of poverty , 46.8% of noncitizens are uninsured , compared to 15.6% of native - born citizens and 21.9% of naturalized citizens .

it is likely that due to the changes made in ppaca to medicaid eligibility , the rates of medicaid coverage for the u.s. citizen and noncitizen populations with incomes at or below 133% of poverty will increase .

however , due to the alien eligibility requirements for medicaid , which were unchanged by ppaca , this increase in medicaid coverage ( and the resulting decrease in the number of the uninsured ) may not be as strong for noncitizens as for u.s. citizens .

nonetheless , the ability of lawfully present noncitizens who are medicaid - ineligible to purchase insurance through an exchange may be a factor in decreasing the uninsured rate for noncitizen populations with incomes at or below 133% of poverty .

