for many individuals , the amount being withheld for federal taxes from their paychecks or pension payments in 2011 is larger than it was in 2010 .

the increases caught many people by surprise , since the 111 th congress extended the reductions in individual income tax rates enacted during the first term of the bush administration for another two years , through 2012 .

as a result , congressional offices have received numerous inquiries from constituents wanting an explanation for the higher withholding amounts .

for many other individuals , however , withholding for federal taxes is lower than it was a year ago .

this report is intended to help members of the 112 th congress and their staff respond to taxpayer inquiries by examining the reasons for the changes in withholding .

it begins with a brief description of the current system for federal withholding from wage and pension income and then assesses the effects of two federal economic stimulus measures on withholding amounts: the making work pay tax credit ( mwptc ) that was available in 2009 and 2010 and the social security tax reduction for employees and the self - employed in 2011 that replaced the credit .

in combination , the two measures account for the vast share of whatever increases and decreases in withholding individual taxpayers have experienced since the beginning of 2011 .

the assessment includes a comparison of their average benefits by income level and their cost - effectiveness in promoting growth in national income and employment .

some have criticized the replacement of the credit with the social security tax cut as an unintended tax hike on the working poor .

the report will be updated to reflect significant new developments .

section 3401 of the internal revenue code ( irc ) requires employers to withhold federal income and employment ( or payroll ) taxes from gross wage payments to employees .

wage payments in this context are defined as all compensation ( excluding fees paid to public officials ) for services performed by an employee for an employer , including the cash value of compensation paid in a form other than cash ( such as health benefits ) .

this means that salaries , fees , bonuses , commissions on sales or insurance premiums , taxable fringe benefits , pensions , and retirement pay are subject to withholding .

withholding from wage payments is required , regardless of the circumstances under which an employee is employed or the frequency and size of the payments , and it must be done for every payroll period when wages are paid .

for the purpose of withholding , an employer can be a business ; tax - exempt organization ; or federal , state , or local government agency .

in addition , under irc section 3405 , withholding is mandatory for taxable payments from employer - sponsored pension , annuity , profit - sharing , or stock bonus or other deferred compensation plans , unless the recipient chooses to have no taxes withheld .

the same rule applies to an individual retirement account ( ira ) or an annuity , endowment , or life insurance contract issued by an insurance company .

for periodic payments ( such as an annuity ) , withholding is done in the same manner as it is done for wage payments during a payroll period .

in the case of non - periodic distributions ( such as profit - sharing ) , withholding is generally done at a rate of 10% .

a special rule applies to distributions that were eligible for rollover but were not actually transferred from the distributing plan to the plan of an eligible transferee .

recipients who want no federal taxes withheld must fill out form w - 4p and submit it to their plan's administrator ; the election remains in effect until it is revoked .

if a recipient has not submitted a form w - 4p , he or she is automatically treated as a married individual claiming three exemptions for the purpose of withholding .

not all income payments are subject to withholding .

it does not apply to payments to persons pursuing a trade , business , or profession in which their services are offered directly to the public ; examples of such individuals include physicians , dentists , veterinarians , contractors , public stenographers , and auctioneers .

for tax purposes , they are considered independent contractors .

nor are employers required to withhold taxes on payments they make to independent contractors .

and although payments of supplemental unemployment compensation are treated as wages , withholding applies only to the portion of those payments included in an employee's gross income .

employers have several options for determining how much federal income tax to withhold .

the two most widely used methods rely on information that employees provide in their form w - 4: the wage - bracket method and the percentage method .

under the wage - bracket method , an employer finds the appropriate table for its payroll period and the marital status of its employees .

the table shows how much to withhold , taking into account the number of withholding allowances claimed by an employee and the amount of his or her wages in the period .

if an employee's wages exceed the amount shown in the last bracket of the table , the employer must use the percentage method of withholding .

the main advantage of the wage - bracket method is that it is capable of accommodating a variety of payroll systems and equipment .

there are separate tables for single persons ( including heads of households ) and married couples , covering weekly , bi - weekly , semi - monthly , and monthly payroll periods .

if an employer uses the percentage method , it must perform several steps to determine how much to withhold for each employee .

first , the amount of one withholding exemption for the payroll period is multiplied by the number of exemptions claimed on an employee's form w - 4 .

that amount is then subtracted from an employee's wages for the period .

in the final step , the adjusted wages are matched with the appropriate percentage - rate table to figure out how much tax to withhold .

each withholding exemption is equal to a single personal exemption , prorated by the number of payroll periods in a calendar year .

for example , if a payroll period is one month and the personal exemption in 2011 is $3,650 , then the amount of one withholding exemption for the period is $3,650 divided by 12 , or $304 .

employers also have the option of combining the amounts to be withheld for the income tax and the employee's share of the social security and medicare hospital insurance taxes .

total withholding can be determined by using the combined withholding tables for single and married taxpayers ; once again , separate tables are available for weekly , biweekly , semi - monthly , monthly , and daily or miscellaneous payroll periods .

in 2011 , the maximum amount of wages subject to the social security tax is $106,800 , and the employee's share of the tax is 4.2% of annual wages up to that amount .

there is no wage limit for the medicare tax , which for employees is equal to 1.45% of annual wages .

a key element of the first economic stimulus bill ( the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 or arra , p.l .

111-5 ) passed by the 111 th congress in february 2009 was a temporary refundable tax credit ( irc section 36a ) designed to benefit low - and middle - income households .

known as the making work pay tax credit ( mwptc ) , it was equal to the lesser of 6.2% of a taxpayer's earned ( or wage ) income or $400 for single filers and $800 for married couples filing jointly ( even if only one spouse has earned income ) in both 2009 and 2010 .

as such , the mwptc effectively eliminated the employee's share of the social security tax on the first $6,450 of a single filer's wage income .

only persons who had earned income and a social security number , could not be claimed as a dependent on another taxpayer's return , and did not qualify as non - resident aliens were eligible for the credit .

the credit was subject to two significant limitations .

first , it was reduced by the amount of any economic recovery payment or refundable credit received by an eligible taxpayer as a result of arra .

under the act , the internal revenue service ( irs ) sent economic recovery payments of $250 to adults who were eligible for certain federal benefits , and certain government retirees could claim a $250 refundable tax credit in either 2009 or 2010 .

failure to reduce the mwptc by the amount of any such payment or credit is considered a mathematical or clerical error on an individual's tax return , allowing the irs to assess an additional tax without going through the otherwise required deficiency procedures .

second , the mwptc was reduced by an amount equal to 2% of a recipient's modified adjusted gross income ( magi ) in excess of $75,000 ( or $150,000 in the case of a joint return ) .

magi , in this instance , consisted of a taxpayer's agi for 2009 and 2010 , plus any amounts excluded from gross income under irc section 911 ( relating to foreign earned income ) , irc section 931 ( relating to income from sources in guam , american samoa , or the northern mariana islands ) , and irc section 933 ( relating to income from sources in puerto rico ) .

as such , the credit for single filers completely phased out at an magi of $95,000 and for joint filers at an magi of $190,000 .

unlike the individual recovery rebates established by the economic stimulus act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-185 ) , which were paid in one lump sum in 2008 to qualified taxpayers as a tax rebate based on 2007 returns , the mwptc was disbursed in small increments over the course of a year through reduced income tax withholding .

this approach arguably reflects the views of richard thaler , a pioneer in the field of behavioral economics , on mental accounting and the findings of laboratory experiments that have been done to test some of the predictions based on his theoretical framework .

drawing on this body of work , some obama administration officials contended that offering the credit as a small but steady increase in take - home pay would encourage a relatively large percentage of recipients to spend the entire amount of the credit on goods and services .

in making this argument , they were hoping to avoid a repeat of what happened with the 2008 tax rebates: many recipients saved most or all of their rebates or used them to pay down debt .

the same officials also pointed out that handing out the credit through reduced employer withholding would boost consumer spending sooner than a conventional refundable tax credit , which would not benefit recipients until they filed their tax returns the following year .

under the design for the mwptc , the only recipients who have had to wait until they file their returns for 2009 and 2010 to claim the credit are lower - income individuals who have little or no tax liability , and thus were unaffected by the lower withholding amounts .

new withholding tables incorporating the mwptc were issued in march 2009 , and the reduced withholding went into effect on april 1 .

single filers received the maximum credit of $400 at an annual wage income of $6,452 , while married persons filing jointly received the maximum credit of $800 at an annual wage income of $12,903 .

the incremental benefit of the credit can be seen by comparing the tax withholding amounts set for the 2009 calendar year before and after the passage of arra .

before the enactment of the credit and using the percentage method of withholding , $14.61 was withheld from the biweekly paychecks of single filers with annual wage income of $6,452 and no withholding allowances , and $18.83 was withheld for joint filers with an annual wage income of $12,903 and no withholding allowances .

after the credit became available , nothing was withheld from the biweekly paychecks of the same individuals , increasing their take - home pay by about $15 for single filers and $19 for married individuals filing jointly .

 ( the increase in take - home pay was smaller for each payroll period in 2010 , because the disbursement of the credit took place over the entire year , instead of the final eight months of the year , as was the case with the mwptc in 2009. ) .

reflecting the phaseout range for the credit , the amount withheld from biweekly paychecks that year was lower for single and married wage earners in the 10% , 15% , 25% , and 28% tax brackets than it would have been without the mwptc , but withholding was identical for wage earners in the 33% and 35% brackets .

reduced withholding in 2009 and 2010 affected more than wage income .

pension payments were also subject to the revised tables .

consequently , less federal income tax was withheld over that period from pension payments to federal and non - federal retirees , unless pension plan administrators or retirees made an adjustment to their federal tax withholding .

in may 2009 , the irs released an optional procedure for additional withholding on payments by plan administrators ; the adjusted tables were intended to offset the reduced withholding from the mwptc that year .

retirees could also arrange to have more withheld from their pension payments by filing a revised form w - 4p with plan administrators that did not adopt the procedure .

all other things being equal , retirees who had no wage income and whose pension payments were subject to the reduced withholding tables had more disposable income in 2009 and 2010 .

at the same time , because they were not eligible for the mwptc , their tax liabilities for those years are larger than they would have been under the adjusted withholding tables .

under the federal insurance contributions act ( fica ) , an employer has to withhold social security and medicare hospital insurance taxes from wages paid to employees and to match the employees' contributions .

for 2010 , employees and employers were subject to a payroll tax rate of 7.65%: 6.2% for the social security trust fund ( which is also known as old - age , survivors , and disability insurance or oasdi ) and 1.45% for the medicare hospital insurance trust fund .

the oasdi rate applies to wages up to $106,800 in 2010 and 2011 .

there is no cap on the wage income subject to the medicare tax .

 ( see irc sections 3101 , 3111 , and 3121 ( a ) . ) .

self - employed individuals must also contribute to both insurance trust funds , but at a rate that is double the rate that applies separately to employees and employers .

under the self - employment contributions act ( seca ) , self - employment income , which is defined as net earnings from self - employment , was subject to a tax of 15.3% in 2010 , of which 12.4% was for oasdi and the remaining 2.9% for medicare .

the same rules about annual wage caps apply to each tax .

 ( see irc sections 1401 and 1402. ) .

congress allowed the mwptc to expire at the end of 2010 .

in its place , it established a temporary payroll tax cut for employees and self - employed persons , as part of the tax relief , unemployment compensation reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( trucjca , p.l .

111-312 ) .

section 601 of the act lowers the employee's portion of the social security tax by two percentage points , from 6.2% to 4.2% , for 2011 only .

the act also reduces the social security portion of the self - employment tax from 12.4% to 10.4% in the same year .

there are no changes in the employer's portion of the payroll tax or the medicare tax rate for employees and self - employed individuals .

in the case of the self - employment tax , the oasdi rate reduction does not affect the deduction for self - employment income in calculating net earnings from self - employment in the 2011 tax year .

as a result , the deduction remains equal to 7.65% of self - employment income , or the sum of 59.6% of the oasdi tax and 50% of the medicare tax .

federal , state , and local government employees who are ineligible for social security benefits under their pension plans receive no benefit from the payroll tax holiday .

money from the general fund of the u.s. treasury is being transferred to the oasdi fund to compensate for the loss of revenue from the payroll tax holiday .

because trucjca was enacted late in december 2010 , the irs gave employers until january 31 to implement the reduced payroll tax withholding tables , even though they were supposed to go into effect on january 1 .

employers have until march 31 to correct any excess oasdi tax withholding that occurred before the lower tax rate was implemented .

as with the mwptc , the temporary social security tax reduction is intended to boost spending by low - to - middle - income households .

unlike the credit , however , the payroll tax holiday has immediate benefits for workers at the bottom of the wage scale , since the first dollar of annual wages is subject to the payroll tax but exempt from the income tax .

the payroll tax holiday also raises the take - home pay of some of the workers whose wage income was too high to benefit from the mwptc .

in 2009 and 2010 , a single filer reaped the full amount of the mwptc ( $400 ) when her wage income was between $6,450 and $75,000 , but she gradually gave back or lost that benefit as her income rose from $75,000 to $95,000 .

in contrast , the same person does not gain a $400 reduction in payroll tax liability in 2011 until her wage income reaches $20,000 .

moreover , the incremental gain in her take - home pay from the social security tax reduction continues to grow until her wage income reaches $106,800 .

these differences indicate that the credit put more money in the pockets of lower - income taxpayers , but that the social security tax reduction will benefit a greater range of taxpayers and produce a larger average benefit per taxpayer .

a recent analysis by the urban - brookings tax policy center ( tpc ) substantiates this assessment .

using detailed individual tax data and a microsimulation model of the federal tax system , the analysis estimated that 77.8% of all tax units ( or 120,846 individual taxpayers ) will benefit from the payroll tax holiday in 2011 .

by contrast , if the mwptc were available in 2011 and not the payroll tax holiday , an estimated 75.5% of all tax units ( or 117,362 taxpayers ) would benefit from it .

a tax unit is an individual or married couple that would file an individual tax return , if their income were above the filing threshold ; it includes any person who would be claimed as a dependent on that return .

for all cash income levels , the average benefit per tax unit from the payroll tax holiday is an estimated $934 , compared to $508 for the credit .

tax units with cash incomes of $30,000 or less would benefit more from the credit than from the payroll tax holiday , while tax units with cash incomes greater than $30,000 would receive a greater benefit from the social security tax cut .

as figure 1 shows , the added benefit from the payroll tax cut steadily expands from $126 for tax units with cash income between $30,000 and $40,000 to $2,141 for tax units with cash income between $200,000 and $500,000 , before declining .

critics of trucjca have argued that it constitutes a tax hike on the working poor , among other things .

some of the findings from the tpc analysis seem to support this claim .

in 2011 , an estimated 51,063 tax units would benefit more from the credit , whereas an estimated 72,929 would benefit more from the payroll tax cut .

among both sets of beneficiaries , 76% of the former have cash incomes at or below $34,896 ( 2009 dollars ) , while 82% of the latter have cash incomes above that amount .

in addition , more than an estimated 51 million tax units are paying more in federal taxes in 20ll because of trucjca , and 78% of those taxpayers have cash incomes below $34,896 .

the most likely explanation for the tax increases is the loss of the mwptc .

lawmakers may find it useful to compare the cost - effectiveness of the mwptc and the current payroll tax holiday for employees as tools to promote economic growth .

cost - effectiveness in this context denotes the added dollars of gross domestic product ( gdp ) and full - time jobs associated with a specific dollar cost to the federal budget of using a particular option for fiscal stimulus .

the two temporary tax cuts are similar in that they have raised the disposable income of eligible households .

in assessing their cost - effectiveness , a critical consideration is the fraction of any additional household income that is used to purchase new goods and services .

this fraction tends to be larger among lower - income households or households with unemployed members than it does among upper - income households , which are inclined to save a large share of additional income .

if there is reliable evidence of a significant difference between the cost - effectiveness of the credit and the payroll tax holiday , congress may want to take that difference into account when considering the need for future legislation to stimulate the economy .

a report issued by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) in january 2010 evaluated the cost - effectiveness of a variety of policy options that the obama administration and some members of the 111 th congress were then considering for another round of fiscal stimulus .

cbo evaluated the potential effects of the options on output and employment between 2010 and 2015 .

the output effect of each option was measured by the cumulative impact on gdp for each dollar of budgetary cost , which in this case consisted of additional federal spending or a decline in federal revenue .

and the employment effect of each option was measured by the cumulative impact on years of full - time - equivalent ( fte ) employment for every $1 million of budgetary cost .

each policy option was assumed to be temporary .

to account for uncertainty over the forecast period , cbo provided low and high estimates of the output and employment effects of each option .

in generating the estimates , cbo assumed that the federal reserve would act at the end of 2011 to gradually lower the risk of inflation .

two of the options analyzed in the report were virtually identical to the mwptc and the temporary social security tax reduction for employees: ( 1 ) a reduction in employees' payroll taxes and ( 2 ) an additional refundable tax credit for lower - and middle - income households in 2011 .

cbo estimated that the former would boost output cumulatively between 2010 and 2015 by $0.30 to $0.90 for each additional dollar of budgetary cost and would add two to seven cumulative years of fte employment for each additional $1 million of budgetary cost .

in the case of the latter , cbo estimated that it would raise output cumulatively between 2010 and 2015 by the same amount as the other option: $0.30 to $0.90 for each additional dollar in budgetary cost ; the estimated employment effect was also similar: three to seven cumulative years of fte employment for each additional $1 million in budgetary cost .

these results clearly indicate that it is reasonable to regard the mwptc and the current payroll tax cut for employees as equally cost - effective instruments for promoting economic recovery and growth .

as a result of arra and trucjca , many taxpayers have experienced a change in the amount withheld for federal taxes from their paychecks or pension payments in 2011 .

the expiration of the mwptc , combined with the implementation of the social security tax reduction for employees , has altered the formulas used to determine how much to withhold .

whether the amount withheld in a particular case is larger or smaller than the amount withheld in 2010 depends mainly on a taxpayer's work status and the type of income .

the impact of those factors can be seen in the figures shown in the tables below .

table 1 addresses the amount withheld for federal income and payroll taxes at different biweekly wage levels in 2010 and 2011 for employees claiming no withholding allowances .

the amount withheld for a single person receiving $500 in wages every two weeks is greater in 2011 than in 2010 , reflecting the net loss of tax benefits for lower - wage workers from the shift from the mwptc to the social security tax reduction .

but at biweekly wage payments of $1,000 , $1,500 , and $2,000 , the amounts withheld are lower than they were in 2010 , reflecting the net gain in tax benefits from the shift .

a similar pattern exists among married persons filing jointly .

by contrast , table 2 examines the change in withholding ( determined using the wage - bracket method ) from 2010 to 2011 for retired persons ( federal and non - federal ) who receive monthly pension payments but no wage income and claim no withholding allowances .

since those individuals received no benefit from the mwptc in 2010 and will not benefit from the 2011 payroll tax holiday , the amount withheld for federal taxes is larger at all payment levels , though the difference remains constant at payments of $4,000 or more to single filers and $3,000 or more to married individuals filing jointly .

since individual income tax rates did not change from 2010 to 2011 , it is reasonable to conclude that the primary cause of the increase in withholding is the credit's expiration .

