the u.s. - south korea free trade agreement ( korus fta ) , which was approved by congress in p.l .

112-41 and entered into force on march 15 , 2012 , follows current u.s. free trade agreement ( fta ) practice in containing two types of dispute settlement: ( 1 ) state - state , applicable to disputes between the parties to the korus fta , and ( 2 ) investor - state , applicable to claims by an investor of one party against the other party for breach of a korus fta investment obligation .

investor - state dispute settlement procedures have been a key element of u.s. bilateral investment treaties ( bits ) and , with the inclusion of investment obligations in most u.s. ftas , they have become a feature of these agreements as well .

the united states originally decided to include reciprocal investor - state dispute settlement in its bits , as described by one commentator , "to provide investors with a stable and secure dispute settlement device and to de - politicize investment disputes. .

as further noted , "[c]ompulsory arbitration provisions can deter some disputes , and can resolve others without the necessity of state department involvement. .

the korus fta also contains language relevant to dispute settlement stemming from a bipartisan understanding on trade policy between congressional leaders and the george w. bush administration finalized on may 10 , 2007 , setting out various provisions to be added to completed or substantially completed ftas pending at the time .

aimed at , among other things , expanding and further integrating labor and environmental obligations into the fta structure , the may 10 understanding provides that labor and environmental obligations in an fta are to be subject to the same state - state dispute settlement provisions , enforcement mechanisms , and remedies for non - compliance as the agreement's commercial obligations .

the same approach to labor and environmental disputes is also found in the u.s. - peru trade promotion agreement , which entered into force on february 1 , 2009 , and in u.s. ftas with colombia and panama , approved by congress in october 2011 along with the korus fta .

the potential scope of korus fta dispute settlement is limited by the scope of the korus fta obligations that would be taken on by the parties , and it is thus important to consider the nature and scope of these obligations in considering the potential ramifications of the dispute settlement articles .

exceptions to korus fta obligations are also an element in assessing the scope of the commitments undertaken by each party .

for example , general exceptions contained in world trade organization ( wto ) agreements — namely , article xx of the general agreement on tariffs and trade 1994 ( gatt 1994 ) and article xiv of the general agreement on trade in services ( gats ) — are incorporated into the korus fta for purposes of obligations involving trade in goods and services .

the korus fta also contains an "essential security" exception , which a dispute or arbitral panel must find to apply if it is invoked by the defending party to justify the challenged measure .

in general , resort to panels under fta state - state dispute settlement has been uncommon and thus there has been relatively little experience with the operation of this mechanism over a range of agreements and issues .

this may be the case because of fta consultative arrangements that facilitate the informal resolution of disputes or questions over the scope of an agreement or its application in a particular instance before resort to more structured dispute settlement procedures is considered necessary .

in addition , the fact that a party may ultimately seek a panel may provide leverage for settlement at an early stage of the dispute .

in addition , wto dispute settlement is generally available where a dispute arises under both a wto agreement and an fta .

south korea and the united states have each initiated disputes against each other in the wto since the wto agreements entered into force on january 1 , 1995 , the cases illustrating the types of trade issues that have been particularly significant to each country .

of the 15 wto complaints brought by south korea against wto members , nine disputes have been instituted against the united states , each involving a trade remedy , most often the imposition of an antidumping or countervailing duty on south korean products .

it should be noted , however , that in general wto complaints brought against the united states have increasingly involved trade remedy issues .

the united states has instituted 100 wto disputes , with six of these brought against south korea .

five u.s. complaints have challenged restrictive korean requirements on trade in agricultural products or alcoholic beverages , including restrictions on imports of beef , with one case addressing a government procurement issue .

fta investor - state claims have been the most prevalent under the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , with cases filed against all three nafta parties , that is , the united states , canada , and mexico .

the u.s. state department currently lists 17 claims against the united states , all but one instituted by a canadian investor or investors .

in addition , five investor - state cases have been filed under the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( dr - cafta ) , the regional agreement to which costa rica , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , and nicaragua are also party .

one dr - cafta cases has been brought against the dominican republic , two against el salvador , and two against guatemala , each filed by a u.s. investor .

one claim under the u.s. - peru trade promotion agreement , filed by the u.s. investor renco group , is currently pending .

to date , investor - state claims have not been filed under other u.s. ftas .

the united states has entered into bits and most of its ftas with developing countries and , thus , with countries that import capital from the united states rather than exporting it to this country .

as is the case with its nafta partners , however , the united states imports capital from south korea to a greater degree than it does from parties to these other u.s. investment agreements and korean investment in the united states may indeed grow over the course of the fta .

while this situation may thus create a greater potential for investor - state disputes than exists under most other u.s. investment agreements , the extent to which disputes involving korean investors will in fact arise would seemingly depend upon a variety of factors and interests unique to an investor's individual situation and thus for now remains only a matter for conjecture .

to date , the united states has prevailed in all investor - state cases brought against it .

state - state dispute settlement procedures in most u.s. free trade agreements generally follow the pattern of dispute settlement set out in the world trade organization ( wto ) dispute settlement understanding and thus provide for ( 1 ) initial consultations ; ( 2 ) a dispute panel if consultations fail to resolve the dispute ; ( 3 ) an implementation period if the challenged party is found to be in violation of an agreement obligation ; and ( 4 ) remedies for non - compliance .

state - state or general dispute settlement is set out in chapter twenty - two , section b , of the korus fta , which applies to disputes involving the interpretation or application of the agreement or wherever a party considers ( 1 ) that a measure of the other party is inconsistent with korus fta obligations ; ( 2 ) that the other party has otherwise failed to carry out its korus fta obligations ; or ( 3 ) , with some exceptions , that an enumerated korus fta benefit that the complaining party could reasonably have expected to accrue to it — for example , a tariff reduction — is being nullified or impaired by a measure of the other party that is not inconsistent with the agreement .

like bilateral investment treaties ( bits ) and the investment chapters of other u.s. free trade agreements , chapter eleven , the korus fta investment chapter , sets out rights and obligations aimed at facilitating investment by nationals of the united states and south korea in each other's territory .

it also contains investor - state dispute settlement provisions providing for binding arbitration of investment disputes between investors and the state parties to the fta .

as in other u.s. investment agreements , key elements of chapter eleven are its coverage of all forms of investment and the fundamental obligations placed on the parties to accord foreign investors and investments national and most - favored - nation ( mfn ) treatment ; to grant foreign investments also a minimum standard of treatment ( set out here as "treatment in accordance with customary international law , including fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security" ) ; to compensate investors promptly , adequately , and effectively for expropriation of their property ; to permit the free transfer of investment - related funds into and out of the host party's territory ; and to refrain from imposing certain performance requirements , for example , requirements that an investment achieve a given level of domestic content or export a given level of goods or services .

while the korus fta investment chapter does not contain a list of general exceptions that apply to its obligations overall , chapter eleven obligations are nonetheless subject to various specific exceptions , exemptions and qualifications , including the essential security exception mentioned earlier .

it also contains annexes to chapter eleven pertaining to specific investment issues , such as the situations that will give rise to a "direct" or "indirect" expropriation , and broader annexes in which a party may ( 1 ) exempt existing non - conforming laws and regulations from certain korus obligations and ( 2 ) identify sectors and activities to which the party might not accord full investment benefits with respect to both existing or future laws and regulations .

these annexes permit parties to exempt listed measures and sectors from chapter eleven mfn and national treatment obligations , as well as from prohibitions on performance requirements for investments and nationality requirements for senior management of firms .

the agreement itself exempts government procurement and subsidies or grants provided by a party , including government - supported loans , guarantees or insurance , from chapter eleven national treatment and mfn obligations and obligations involving nationality requirements for senior management .

government procurement is also exempted from those prohibitions on performance requirements focusing on domestic content , preferences for domestic goods and services , and technology transfer to domestic persons .

in addition , the korus fta contains a gatt - like exception for certain performance requirements , stating that korus fta prohibitions on performance requirements involving domestic content , local preferences , and technology transfer are not to be construed to prevent a party from adopting or maintaining measures , including environmental measures , that are ( 1 ) necessary to secure compliance with korus fta - consistent laws and regulations ; ( 2 ) necessary to protect human , animal , or plant life or health ; or ( 3 ) related to the conservation of living or non - living exhaustible natural resources , provided that the measures are not applied in an arbitrary or unjustifiable manner , and provided that such measures do not constitute a disguised restriction on international trade or investment .

a korus fta party may deny chapter eleven benefits to investors of the other party that are enterprises and to their investments in two circumstances , these taking into account sanctions regimes and shell companies established to take advantage of korus fta benefits .

these situations are as follows: 1. if the persons of a non - party own or control the enterprise and ( a ) the denying party does not maintain normal economic relations with the non - party or ( b ) it adopts or maintains measures with the non - party that would prohibit transactions with the enterprise or would be violated if chapter eleven benefits were accorded to the enterprise or its investments ; 2. if the enterprise has no substantial business activities in the territory or the other party and persons of a non - party , or of the denying party , own or control the enterprise .

the korus fta also incorporates language reflecting a trade negotiating objective set out in the trade act of 2002 , namely that negotiators , in seeking to reduce foreign investment barriers , also ensure that "foreign investors in the united states are not accorded greater substantive rights with respect to investment protections than united states investors in the united states," an issue raised by various critics of ftas that was also addressed in the may 10 understanding discussed earlier .

to this end , the korus fta states in its preamble that the parties are resolved to "agree that foreign investors are not hereby accorded greater substantive rights with respect to investment protections than domestic investors under domestic law where , as in the united states , protections of investor rights under domestic law equal or exceed those set forth in this agreement. .

another long - standing and fundamental element of bits and fta investment chapters that is contained in the korus fta is its provision for investor - state dispute settlement , permitting u.s. investors in south korea and , likewise , south korean investors in the united states , to file arbitral claims against south korea and the united states , respectively , for violations of chapter eleven obligations .

claims may involve not only federal measures , but also measures of states and localities to the extent they are subject to chapter eleven obligations .

an arbitral proceeding may be initiated by an "investor of a party" on the ground that ( 1 ) the other party has breached a korus fta investment obligation , an investment authorization , or an investment agreement ; and ( 2 ) the investor has incurred loss or damage from the breach .

the investor may also submit a claim alleging a breach on behalf of an enterprise of the other korus fta party that the investor owns or controls , where the enterprise is alleged to have been injured by the breach .

investor - state dispute settlement may also be invoked in certain cases involving investors and investments in financial services institutions in the united states and south korea .

while the korus fta refers to the possible breach of an "investment authorization," neither party has an authority that provides such authorizations , nor does the definition of this term include actions taken by a party to enforce laws of general application such as competition laws .

the term "investment agreement" is defined to include specific types of agreements and to require the investor to have relied on the agreement in establishing or acquiring an investment: investment agreement means a written agreement between a national authority of a party and a covered investment or an investor of the other party , on which the covered investment or the investor relies in establishing or acquiring a covered investment other than the written agreement itself , that grants rights to the covered investment or investor: ( a ) with respect to natural resources that a national authority controls , such as for their exploration , extraction , refining , transportation , distribution , or sale ; ( b ) to supply services to the public on behalf of the party , such as power generation or distribution , water treatment or distribution , or telecommunications ; or ( c ) to undertake infrastructure projects , such as the construction of roads , bridges , canals , dams , or pipelines , that are not for the exclusive or predominant use and benefit of the government .

at least 90 days before submitting a claim for arbitration , the investor must deliver to the respondent government a written notice that it intends to do so .

further , six months must have elapsed since the events giving rise to the claim before the investor may submit the claim to an arbitral institution .

filing a notice of intent does not commit the investor to submitting the claim to arbitration in the event issues are not resolved during the required notice period .

chapter eleven also contains a statute of limitations , prohibiting a claim from being brought if more than three years have elapsed from the date that the claimant "first acquired , or should have first acquired , knowledge of the alleged breach" and knowledge that the claimant or enterprise "has incurred loss or damage. .

the united states and south korea give their consent in the korus fta to the submission of chapter eleven investor claims against them in accordance with the agreement .

the claimant must consent to arbitration in writing .

chapter eleven does not require that an investor , or an investor and an enterprise , exhaust local judicial or administrative remedies before a claim may be filed .

the investor may submit a claim under various arbitral mechanisms , including the convention on the settlement of investment disputes between states and nationals of other states ( icsid convention ) and the icsid rules of procedure for arbitration proceedings , the icsid additional facility rules , united nations commission on international trade law ( uncitral ) arbitration rules , or , if the disputants agree , any other arbitration institution or rules .

both the united states and south korea are parties to the icsid convention and may thus avail themselves of the convention and its procedural rules .

once an investor claim is filed , a three - member arbitral tribunal will be established .

one arbitrator is to be appointed by each disputing party , and the third , the presiding arbitrator , is to be appointed by agreement of the disputing parties .

the secretary - general of the international center for the settlement of investment disputes ( icsid ) is to serve as appointing authority for chapter eleven investment disputes .

if the tribunal has not been constituted within 75 days after the claim is filed , the secretary - general , if requested by a disputing party , will appoint the outstanding arbitrator or arbitrators .

the secretary - general may not appoint a national of either party as the presiding arbitrator unless the disputing parties agree .

chapter eleven contains rules for the conduct of the arbitration , including various provisions aimed at transparency and efficiency of the arbitral proceedings .

tribunals may accept and consider amicus submissions from persons or entities that are not disputing parties .

tribunals are required to rule expeditiously on any preliminary objections by the defending party that the claim submitted is legally not a claim for which a chapter eleven award can be made or that the dispute is not within the competence of the tribunal .

as a result , defending parties need not wait for a ruling on a jurisdictional issue until the tribunal rules on the merits and may thus dispose of frivolous claims at an early stage without needing to expend resources on further defense of the claim .

multiple claims with certain common elements may be consolidated .

subject to provisions aimed at preventing disclosure of protected information , documents submitted by the parties and tribunal orders , awards , and decisions are to be made available to the public .

the tribunal must also conduct public hearings .

when a claim involves an alleged breach of a korus fta obligation ( as opposed to the breach of an investment agreement ) , the tribunal is to decide the issues in accordance with the korus fta and "applicable rules of international law. .

in the event that the u.s. - korea joint committee issues an interpretation of a korus fta provision , as it is authorized to do under article 22.3.3 ( d ) of the agreement , the decision declaring the interpretation would be binding on the tribunal and any tribunal decision or award must be consistent with the joint committee decision .

a tribunal may only make monetary awards and thus may not direct a party to withdraw or modify a disputed measure .

an award may consist of monetary damages , restitution of property , or both .

if restitution is awarded , the party is to pay monetary damages and applicable interest in lieu of restitution .

the tribunal may also award costs and attorneys' fees .

it may not award punitive damages .

an arbitral award has no binding force except between the disputing parties and with respect to the case at hand .

a prevailing investor may not seek enforcement of the final award until 90 or 120 days after it is issued ( depending on the arbitral rules used ) , a period allowing for possible proceedings to revise or annul the award .

if the party does not ultimately abide by a final award , the investor may request that a panel be established under the korus fta state - state dispute settlement chapter and ask that it determine that the defending party's failure to comply with the award is inconsistent with korus fta obligations and recommend that the party comply .

regardless of whether a compliance panel is sought , however , the prevailing investor may seek judicial enforcement of the award under either the icsid convention or the new york convention on the recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards , two multilateral conventions providing for the recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards to which the united states and south korea are party .

