in june 2008 , the supreme court issued its decision in district of columbia v. heller , holding by a 5-4 vote that the second amendment to the constitution of the united states protects an individual right to possess a firearm , unconnected with service in a militia , and to use that firearm for traditionally lawful purposes such as self - defense within the home .

in heller , the court affirmed the lower court's holding that declared three provisions of the district of columbia's firearms control regulation act to be unconstitutional .

the decision in heller marked the first time in almost 70 years that the supreme court addressed the nature of the right conferred by the second amendment .

although the court conducted an extensive analysis of the second amendment to interpret its meaning , the decision left unanswered other significant constitutional questions , including the standard of scrutiny that should be applied to laws regulating the possession and use of firearms , and whether the second amendment applies to the states .

this latter issue was subsequently addressed by the supreme court in mcdonald v. city of chicago .

accordingly , this report first provides a historical overview of judicial treatment of the second amendment and a discussion of the court's decision in heller .

it then examines the issue of incorporation , which was the focus of the mcdonald decision .

lastly , this report concludes with an analysis that focuses on the potential impact of the court's decisions in heller and mcdonald on such legislation pertaining to the use and possession of firearms at the federal , state , and local levels .

the second amendment to the constitution states that "a well regulated militia , being necessary to the security of a free state , the right of the people to keep and bear arms , shall not be infringed. .

despite its brevity , the nature of the right conferred by the language of the second amendment has been the subject of great debate in the political , academic , and legal spheres for decades .

generally , it can be said that there are two opposing models that govern second amendment interpretation .

on one side of the debate , there is the "individual right model," which maintains that the text and underlying history of the second amendment clearly establishes that the right to keep and bear arms is committed to the people , that is , an individual , as opposed to the states or the federal government .

on the other end of the spectrum is the "collective right model," which interprets the second amendment as protecting the authority of the states to maintain a formal organized militia .

a related interpretation , commonly called the "sophisticated collective right model," posits that individuals have a right under the second amendment to own and possess firearms , but only to the extent that such ownership and possession is connected to service in a state militia .

the text of the amendment is often raised to both support and contravene the argument that there is an individual right to keep and bear arms .

the individual right model places great weight on the operative clause of the amendment that states "the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed. .

accordingly , it is argued that this command language clearly affords a right to the people , and not simply to states .

to support this notion , it is argued that the text of the tenth amendment , which clearly distinguishes between "the states" and "the people," makes it evident that the two terms are , in fact , different , and that the founders knew to say "state" when they meant it .

under this reading , it may be argued that if the second amendment did not confer an individual right , it simply would have read that the right of the states to organize the militia shall not be infringed .

supporters of the collective right model , by contrast , often counter with the argument that the dependent clause , which refers to "a well regulated militia," qualifies the rest of the amendment , thereby limiting the right of the people to keep and bear arms and investing the states with the authority to control the manner in which weapons are kept , and to require that any person who possesses a weapon be a member of the militia .

an outgrowth of the rationale used by the collective right proponents has been the argument that the militia , in modern times , is embodied by the national guard , and that the realities of modern warfare have negated the need for the citizenry to be armed .

individual right theorists have countered these arguments by noting that the militia of the founders' era consisted of every able - bodied male , who was required to supply his own weapon .

these theorists also point to 10 u.s.c .

§ 311 , which as part of its express definition of the different classes of militia states that in addition to the national guard , there is an "unorganized militia" that is composed of all able - bodied males between the ages of 17 and 45 who are not members of the national guard or naval militia .

moreover , proponents of the individual right model deride the notion that an individual right to keep and bear arms can be read out of the constitution as a result of technological advancements or shifting societal mores .

as illustrated below , various federal appellate courts gave effect to each of these interpretive models , contributing to the uncertainty that characterized the debate over the meaning of the second amendment prior to the court's decision in heller .

in light of the split interpretations of the meaning of the second amendment in the circuit court decisions emerson and silveira , both of which were denied certiorari by the supreme court , the stage for just such a conflict was set in 2007 in parker v. district of columbia .

the decision in parker , which eventually made its way to the supreme court , marked the first time that a federal appellate court struck down a law regulating firearms on the basis of the second amendment .

on june 28 , 2010 , the supreme court issued its decision in mcdonald v. city of chicago .

the issue before the court in mcdonald was whether the second amendment applies to , or is incorporated against , the states .

an incorporation analysis generally asks whether the protections provided for in the first eight amendments of the bill of rights apply to state governments in the same manner that they directly apply to the federal government .

judicial treatment of incorporation has evolved over time , with the court inquiring: ( 1 ) if the first eight amendments apply directly to the states ; ( 2 ) if the privileges or immunities clause of the fourteenth amendment guarantees these rights ; and ( 3 ) if the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment incorporates the protections provided for in the first eight amendments .

these three inquiries are explained below .

on june 28 , 2010 , the supreme court issued its decision in mcdonald v. city of chicago .

the petitioners , otis mcdonald and other residents of chicago and the village of oak park , illinois , asserted that certain municipal ordinances prevented them from keeping handguns in their homes for self - defense .

the chicago ordinance provided: "no person ... shall ... possess ... any firearm unless such person is the holder of a valid registration certificate of such firearm. .

the chicago code , however , prohibited the registration of most handguns , which "effectively ban[s] handgun possession by almost all private citizens who reside in the city. .

similarly , oak park made it "unlawful for any person to possess ... any firearm," a term that included "pistols , revolvers , guns and small arms ... commonly known as handguns. .

petitioners advocated for incorporation of the second amendment against the states either under the fourteenth amendment's privileges or immunities clause or under the fourteenth amendment's due process clause .

it is worth noting that the petitioners devoted much of their brief and oral argument for application of the second amendment via the privileges or immunities clause of the fourteenth amendment .

on the other hand , the nra , who was recognized by the court as a "respondent" in support of the petitioners' ( mcdonald ) group , primarily argued for incorporation of the second amendment via the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment .

although five justices agreed that the second amendment applies to the states , these justices came to different conclusions as to how the amendment is incorporated , resulting in a fractured opinion .

justice alito delivered the opinion of the court and concluded that the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment incorporates the second amendment .

this opinion was joined by chief justice roberts , and justices scalia and kennedy .

justice thomas , however , filed a concurring opinion in which he concluded that the privileges or immunities clause of the fourteenth amendment guarantees the right to keep and bear arms .

two dissenting opinions were filed .

justice stevens opined that whether the second amendment applies should be analyzed under a substantive due process analysis , and that "the analysis should depend on whether there is a constitutionally protected liberty to keep handguns in the home ... which he [consequently] did not believe existed due to the 'fundamentally ambivalent relationship' of firearms to liberty. .

the second dissenting opinion was authored by justice breyer , joined by justices ginsburg and sotomayor , who opined that the history of the right is so uncertain that it does not support incorporation ; that determining the constitutionality of a particular state gun law is outside the court's scope and expertise ; and that incorporation would intrude significantly upon state police power .

justice alito , writing for the court , revisited the precedents in barron and slaughter - house cases , which precluded application of the bill of rights either by direct application or the privileges or immunities clause of the fourteenth amendment , respectively .

although justice alito , writing for the plurality , declined to disturb these holdings , and further acknowledged that the court's decisions in cruikshank , presser , and miller held that the second amendment applies only to the federal government , he stated that those decisions "do not preclude us from considering whether the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment makes the second amendment right binding on the states. .

before analyzing how the fourteenth amendment incorporates the second amendment , the court first examined the evolution of its due process clause analysis .

it noted five features of its earlier approach to a due process clause analysis , which included viewing "the due process question as entirely separate from the question whether a right was a privilege or immunity of national citizenship" ; the use of "different formulations in describing the boundaries of due process," which included looking to "immutable principles of justice which no member of the union may disregard," or protecting rights that are "so rooted in the traditions and conscience of our people as to be ranked fundamental," and that are "the very essence of a scheme of ordered liberty ... and essential to 'a fair and enlightened system of justice'" ; asking whether any other "civilized system could be imagined" as not affording a particular procedural safeguard before compelling a state to recognize a particular right ; recognizing that some rights set out in the bill of rights failed to meet the test for inclusion within the protection of the due process clause ; and holding that even if a right was protected against state infringement that "the protection or remedies afforded against [the state] sometimes differed from the protection or remedies provided against abridgment by the federal government. .

out of these five features , the court pointed out that later cases , which selectively incorporated certain rights , abandoned three of the previously noted characteristics .

the court , instead of examining " any civilized system," now asks "whether a particular guarantee is fundamental to our scheme of ordered liberty and system of justice. .

the second feature the court has shed was any prior "reluctance to hold that rights guaranteed by the bill of rights met the requirements for protection under the due process clause," stating that the court has incorporated almost all of its provisions , as discussed above .

lastly , the court has "abandoned 'the notion that the fourteenth amendment applies to the states only a watered - down , subjective version of the individual guarantees of the bill of rights,' stating that it would be 'incongruous' to apply different standards 'depending on whether the claim was asserted in a state or federal court.' .

with some exceptions , the court has held that incorporated bill of rights protections "'are all to be enforced against the states under the fourteenth amendment according to the same standards that protect those personal rights against federal encroachment.' .

with this modern framework for analyzing if a right comes under the protection of the due process clause , the court turned to the issue of whether the second amendment was just such a right that was incorporated in the concept of due process .

the court , similar to the ninth circuit , analyzed whether "the right to keep and bear arms is fundamental to our scheme of ordered liberty , ( citation omitted ) or as [it has] said in a related context , whether this right is 'deeply rooted in this nation's history and tradition' washington v. glucksberg , 521 u.s. 702 , 721 ( 1997 ) ( internal quotation marks omitted ) . .

turning back to its decision in heller , the court emphasized self - defense as a basic right that is the "central component" of the second amendment right .

it reiterated that it had found "the need for defense of self , family , and property [as] most acute" in the home and that the right applies to handguns because they are "the most preferred firearm in the nation to 'keep' and use for protection of one's home and family. .

thus , the court's decision appeared to concentrate on whether the fourteenth amendment's due process clause incorporated the second amendment as it was defined in heller , that is , the right to keep and bear arms for a lawful purpose such as self - defense and that it protects those weapons typically possessed by law - abiding citizens for lawful purposes .

in the court's review of historical evidence from both the framing - era of the bill of rights and the ratifying era of the fourteenth amendment , it believed it to be "clear that the framers and ratifiers ... counted the right to keep and bear arms among those fundamental rights necessary to our system of ordered liberty. .

according to the court , both federalists and antifederalists of the framing - era considered the right to keep and bear arms as fundamental to the newly formed system of government , but differed as to whether the right was sufficiently protected .

federalists believed that the right was adequately protected due to the limited powers assigned to the federal government , while antifederalists , who feared that the new federal government would infringe on traditional rights , insisted on the adoption of the bill of rights as a condition of ratification .

by the mid - 19 th century , the court found that the second amendment "was still highly valued for the purposes of self - defense" even though the perceived threat of the federal government's intrusion had faded .

according to the court , in the aftermath of the civil war , southern states and militia members made "systematic efforts" to disarm african americans , to which the 39 th congress decided that legislative action was necessary .

the legislative actions included the freedmen's bureau act and the civil rights act of 1866 , both of which the court found demonstrated that the right to keep and bear arms was still recognized as fundamental .

specifically , section 14 of the freedmen's bureau act provided that "the right ... to have full and equal benefit of all laws and proceedings concerning personal liberty , personal security , and the acquisition , enjoyment , and disposition of estate , real and personal , including the constitutional right to bear arms , shall be secured to and enjoyed by all citizens ... without respect to race or color , or previous condition of slavery ( emphasis added ) . .

section 1 of the civil rights act , similarly , guaranteed the "full and equal benefit of all laws and proceedings for the security of person and property , as is enjoyed by white citizens. .

although the civil rights act does not explicitly define the meaning of "all laws and proceedings," the court stated that representative bingham , one of the drafters of the fourteenth amendment , believed the act "protected the same rights as enumerated in the freedmen's bureau bill. .

based on this evidence , the court concluded that "the civil rights act , like the freedmen's bureau act , aimed to protect 'the constitutional right to bear arms' and not simply to prohibit discrimination" and that "[t]oday , it is generally accepted that the fourteenth amendment was understood to provide a constitutional basis for protecting the rights set out in the civil rights act. .

in addition , the court presented excerpts of the congressional debates on the fourteenth amendment , and from the period immediately following ratification of the amendment , as well as emphasized the number of state constitutions that recognized the right , as evidence that the right to keep and bear arms was considered fundamental .

although the court found incorporation under the due process clause , the plurality chose to address an argument made by respondents concerning the privileges or immunities clause , specifically that the historical record provides no basis for imposing the second amendment on the states , and that section 1 , presumably in its entirety , was "overwhelmingly" viewed by members of the u.s. house of representatives as an antidiscrimination rule .

the respondents' end point seemed to be that mixed understanding and divided views among 19 th century legislators and legal scholars alike demonstrate that the public could not have understood the reach of the privileges or immunities clause or understood that the clause incorporated the bill of rights .

the court , however , focused on the assertion that section 1 would only outlaw discriminatory measures and stated five reasons as to why such a construction would be "implausible. .

these reasons included ( 1 ) that if section 1 did no more than prohibit discrimination , it would be plausible that "the fourth amendment , as applied to the states , would not prohibit all unreasonable searches and seizures , but only discriminatory searches and seizure" ; ( 2 ) that the freedmen's bureau act must be read as more than a simple prohibition of racial discrimination because it would have been nonsensical for congress to guarantee "the full and equal benefit" of "the constitutional right to bear arms," if it did not exist ; and ( 3 ) that if the 39 th congress and the ratifying public had simply prohibited racial discrimination with respect to the bearing of arms , opponents of the black codes , laws that deprived blacks of their rights , would have been left without the means of self - defense .

although the plurality declined to find incorporation under the privileges or immunities clause , justice thomas in his concurring opinion proceeded with his own analysis of the second amendment's application through the clause , because he could "not agree that it is enforceable against the states through a clause that speaks only to 'process.' .

justice thomas took to task the court's precedent where it has determined that the due process clause applies to unenumerated rights against the states , believing that "neither its text nor its history suggests that it protects the many substantive rights this court's cases now claim it does. .

in acknowledging the numerous cases founded upon the substantive due process framework and the importance of stare decisis , justice thomas stated that his only task at hand is to decide "to what extent , [a] particular clause in the constitution protects the particular right at issue" and that the objective of his inquiry is to "discern what 'ordinary citizens' at the time of ratification would have understood the privileges or immunities clause to mean. .

first , justice thomas found that "the terms 'privileges' and 'immunities' had an established meaning as synonyms for 'rights.' .

second , in tracing the english roots , he concluded that the "[f]ounding generation generally did not consider many of the rights identified in [the] amendments as new entitlements , but as inalienable rights of all men," and that "both the states and federal government had long recognized the inalienable rights of state citizenship. .

third , he concluded that article iv , § 2 , which provides that "[t]he citizens of each state shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states," protected traveling citizens against state discrimination with respect to the fundamental rights of state citizenship .

noting textual similarity between article iv , § 2 and that of the privileges or immunities clause ( § 1 ) of the fourteenth amendment , justice thomas stated that "it can be assumed that the public's understanding of the latter was informed by its understanding of the former. .

therefore , to determine whether the second amendment was one of the rights guaranteed in the fourteenth amendment's privileges or immunities clause , he explored two remaining questions .

first , he asked if "the privileges or immunities of 'citizens of the united states' recognized by § 1 [are] the same as the privileges and immunities of 'citizens in the several states' to which article iv , § 2 refers ? .

to a certain extent , justice thomas implicitly answered this question by referring to some instances where politicians debating the fourteenth amendment and legal commentators equated the privileges and immunities of § 1 to those referred to in article iv , § 2 .

however , much of justice thomas's analysis focused on presenting evidence , such as treaties , congressional speeches , and legislation of the era .

from these various sources , justice thomas concluded that the "evidence overwhelmingly demonstrates" that "the ratifying public understood the privileges or immunities clause to protect constitutionally enumerated rights , including the right to keep and bear arms. .

the second question asked is if "§ 1 [of the fourteenth amendment] , like article iv , § 2 prohibits only discrimination with respect to certain rights if the state chooses to recognize them , or does it require states to recognize those rights ? .

or , more specifically applied to the right at issue , "whether the privileges or immunities clause merely prohibits states from discriminating among citizens if they recognize the second amendment's right to keep and bear arms , or whether the clause requires states to recognize the right. .

in his analysis , justice thomas seemed to answer this question by stating "it was understood that liberty would be assured little protection if §1 left each state to decide which privileges or immunities of united states citizenship it would protect. .

however , a greater part of his discussion to this second question was devoted to why the privileges or immunities clause protects against more than just state discrimination and establishes a "minimum baseline of rights for all american citizens. .

first , justice thomas pointed out that the privileges or immunities clause uses the verb "abridge" rather than "discriminate," to describe the limit it imposes on state authority ( "[n]o state shall" ) .

he referred to the dictionary which defines the word "abridge" to mean "[t]o deprive ; to cut off ... as , to abridge one of his rights. .

thus , a plain reading of the clause indicates that it is meant to impose a limitation on state power to infringe upon pre - existing substantive rights and does not indicate that the framers of the clause used "abridge" to prohibit only discrimination .

second , justice thomas presented several reasons as to the lack of discussion on this clause and section 1 to rebut the "typical" argument that because there was no extensive public discussion on the clause , that it must "not have been understood to accomplish such a significant task of subjecting states to federal enforcement of minimum baseline of rights. .

he , instead , looked to historical events that "underscored the need for , and wide agreement upon , federal enforcement of constitutionally enumerated rights against the states , including the right to keep and bear arms. .

chronicling the many instances prior to , and after , the civil war where pro - slavery forces and southern legislatures enacted laws that "repressed virtually every right recognized in the constitution" including prohibiting blacks from carrying or possessing firearms , justice thomas , reiterating the court , stated that "if the fourteenth amendment 'had outlawed only those laws that discriminate on the basis of race or previous condition of servitude , african - americans in the south would likely have remained vulnerable to attack by many of their worst abusers: the state militia and state peace officers.' .

in other words , because evidence demonstrates that the intent was to protect blacks from such abuses , the clause , contrary to respondents' claim , cannot simply be about protection from discriminatory state laws , as a nondiscriminatory law banning firearm possession outright would have still "left firearms in the hands of militia and local peace officers. .

building upon his privileges or immunities clause analysis , justice thomas concluded that "history confirms what the text of the .. .

clause most naturally suggests: ... that '[n]o state shall ... abridge' the rights of united states citizens , the clause establishes a minimum baseline of federal rights , and the constitutional right to keep and bear arms plainly was among them. .

justice stevens began his dissent by rephrasing the question presented .

rather than asking if the fourteenth amendment incorporates the second amendment , a question he believed to be settled by the cruickshank , presser , and miller decisions , the question he posed was "whether the constitution 'guarantees individuals to a fundamental right,' enforceable against the states , 'to possess a functional , personal firearm , including a handgun , within the home.' .

he stated that the court's decisions that render procedural guarantees in the bill of rights enforceable against the states have little impact on the meaning of the word "liberty" in the clause or about the scope of its protection of nonprocedural rights , such as the second amendment .

asserting that a substantive due process analysis must be used to determine if the second amendment should be applied to the states , his dissent provided a "fresh survey of this old terrain. .

justice stevens presented three general principles elicited from the court's substantive due process case law .

first , he stated "that the rights protected by the due process clause are not merely procedural in nature. .

a second principle made clear by case law is that substantive due process is fundamentally a matter of personal liberty , in which it must be asked if the interest asserted is "compromised within the term liberty. .

the third principle derived from case law is that "the rights protected against state infringement by the fourteenth amendment's due process clause need not be identical in shape or scope to the rights protected against federal government infringement by the various provisions of the bill of rights. .

he also forewarned that "the costs of federal courts' imposing a uniform national standard may be especially high when the relevant regulatory interests vary significantly across localities , and when the ruling implicates the states' core police powers. .

justice stevens disagreed with the plurality that the historical pedigree of a right is dispositive of its status under the due process clause , and its suggestion "that only interests that have proved 'fundamental from an american perspective,' ... or 'deeply rooted in this nation's history and tradition,' to the court's satisfaction , may qualify for incorporation into the fourteenth amendment. .

he stated that although the tests have varied , the court "has been largely consistent in its liberty - based approach to substantive interests outside of the adjudicatory system," and that the focus has been "not so much on the historical conceptions of the guarantee as on its functional significance within the states' regimes. .

with this framework , justice stevens believed it necessary to examine the "nature of the right that petitioners have asserted," and "whether [the right asserted] is an aspect of fourteenth amendment 'liberty.' .

finding the gravamen behind petitioners' complaint plainly to be "an appeal to keep a handgun or other firearm of one's choosing in the home," justice stevens stated that the petitioners' argument "has real force" but felt that a number of factors supported the respondents .

first , justice stevens stated that "firearms have a fundamentally ambivalent relationship to liberty. .

on the one hand , "[g]uns may be useful for self - defense , as well as hunting and sport , but they also have a unique potential to facilitate death and destruction and thereby to destabilize ordered liberty. .

second , "the right to possess a firearm of one's choosing is different in kind from the liberty interests [the court] has recognized under the due process clause" and that is "not the kind of substantive interest ... on which a uniform , judicially enforced national standard is presumptively appropriate. .

third , the experience of other advanced democracies undermines "the notion that an expansive right to keep and bear arms is intrinsic to ordered liberty. .

fourth , justice stevens reasoned that the second amendment differs from the other amendments in that it is a federalism provision and that "it is directed at preserving the autonomy of the sovereign states , and its logic therefore 'resists' incorporation by a federal court against the states. .

in other words , because the second amendment , like the tenth amendment , exists for the vitality of the states , one cannot argue that it applies to the states .

furthermore , justice stevens stated the reasons that motivated the framers or reconstruction congress to act "have only a limited bearing on the question that confronts the homeowner in a crime - infested metropolis today. .

fifth , he emphasized that the "idea that states may place substantial restrictions on the right to keep and bear arms short of complete disarmament , is in fact , far more entrenched than the notion that the federal constitution protects any such right. .

agreeing with the seventh circuit that "[f]ederalism is a far 'older and more deeply rooted tradition than is a right to carry,' or to own , 'any particular kind of weapon,'" justice stevens noted that the court's ruling in particular will take a "heavy toll in terms of state sovereignty. .

lastly , due to the varying patterns of gun violence and traditions and cultures of lawful gun use across the states and localities , among other things , justice stevens asserted that even if the court could assert a plausible constitutional basis for intervening , that it should not necessarily do so .

justice scalia also wrote a concurring opinion , which takes issue with the substantive due process , or "liberty clause" analysis espoused by justice stevens .

justice scalia primarily critiqued the subjective nature of the standard proposed by the dissent , stating that any of the guideposts or constraints listed by justice stevens still leaves too much power in the hands of judges , ultimately depriving people of power .

justice breyer issued a separate dissenting opinion , in which justices ginsburg and sotomayor joined .

noting justice stevens's conclusion that the fourteenth amendment's guarantee of substantive due process does not include a general right to keep and bear firearms for purposes of self - defense , justice breyer chose to consider separately the question of "incorporation" as the court had done so when it asked "if the second amendment right to private self - defense is 'fundamental' so that it applies to the states through the fourteenth amendment. .

in short , justice breyer concluded that he could "find nothing in the second amendment's text , history , or underlying rationale that could warrant characterizing it as 'fundamental' insofar as it seeks to protect the keeping and bearing of arms for private - self - defense purposes. .

first , justice breyer revisited the heller decision by stating that the court had based its conclusion "almost exclusively upon its reading of history. .

yet , he cited numerous articles by historians , scholars , and judges that the history underlying the heller decision is far from clear .

given the court's emphasis on the historical pedigree of the right , he thus posited "where heller 's historical foundations are so uncertain , why extend its applicability ? .

however , justice breyer expressed that the court "has never stated that the historical status of a right is the only relevant consideration," but rather it has asked if the "right in question has remained fundamental over time. .

furthermore , he opined that the court should look to other factors where history does not provide a clear answer .

these factors include "the nature of the right ; any contemporary disagreement about whether the right is fundamental ; the extent to which incorporation will further other ... constitutional aims ; and the extent to which incorporation will advance or hinder the constitution's structural aims , including its division of powers among different governmental institutions. .

justice breyer applied these factors to the "private right of self - defense" as it is considered "the central component" of the second amendment by the court in heller .

with respect to these factors , he found ( 1 ) that there is disagreement , or no consensus , that the private right of self - defense is fundamental ; ( 2 ) that there is no reason to believe that incorporation will further any broader constitutional objectives ; and ( 3 ) that incorporation of the right will disrupt the constitutional allocation of decision - making authority .

justice breyer gave several reasons in support of this last factor , including that incorporation of the right recognized in heller "would amount to an incursion on a traditional and important area of state concern , altering the constitutional relationship between the states and the federal government. .

additionally , because "determining the constitutionality of a particular state gun law requires finding answers to complex empirically based questions," he made the case that the courts are not suited with either the expertise or the tools to weigh the constitutional right to bear arms "against the 'primary concern of every government — a concern for the safety and indeed the lives of its citizens'" ( citation omitted ) .

in light of these factors , he suggested that the court could proceed in examining state gun regulation by "adopting a jurisprudential approach similar to the many state courts that administer a state constitutional right to bear arms. .

however , he noted that the court has not only not done so , but also rejected an "interest - balancing approach" similar to that utilized by the states .

second , justice breyer returned to examine history after determining that none of the factors supported incorporation .

because the court examined whether the interests the second amendment protects are "deeply rooted in this nation's history and tradition," justice breyer declared that the question , thus , is not whether there are references to the right to bear arms for self - defense throughout the nation's history as there naturally would be , but rather "whether there is a consensus that so substantial a private self - defense right as the one described in heller applies to the states. .

although the court in heller collected much evidence , justice breyer stated that he found "no more than ambiguity and uncertainty" when he supplemented the findings in heller with additional historical facts from the 18 th , 19 th , 20 th , and 21 st centuries .

he declared that "a historical record that is so ambiguous cannot itself provide an adequate basis for incorporating a private right of self - defense and applying it against the states. .

the plurality opinion criticized justice breyer's dissent on four grounds .

first , it did not approve of his assertion that "there is no popular consensus" that the right is fundamental , stating that the court has never used "popular consensus" as a rule for finding incorporation .

second , the plurality did not agree with his argument that "the right does not protect minorities or persons holding political power" when he argued that incorporation should not be found because the right at issue does not further any broader constitutional objective .

the plurality countered by citing petitioners' and other supporting briefs' claims that the right is especially important for women and members of groups vulnerable to crime as evidence that the second amendment right protects "the rights of minorities and other residents of high - crime areas whose needs are not being met by elected public officials. .

third , the plurality agreed with justice breyer that incorporation will limit the legislative freedom of the states , but it was not convinced that this argument was persuasive in finding a lack of incorporation , given that a limitation on the states always exists when a provision is incorporated .

last , the plurality disagreed with justice breyer's argument that "incorporation will require judges to assess the costs and benefits of firearms restrictions," because "[t]he very enumeration of the right takes out of the hands of government ... the power to decide on a case - by - case basis whether the right is really worth insisting upon" ( emphasis in the original ) .

although holding that the second amendment as recognized in heller applies to the states , the court did not decide whether the challenged municipal ordinances were in violation of the amendment , leaving the question for the lower court to examine .

because the mcdonald decision was thus limited , a number of questions unanswered by the court in heller still remain , most of which are concerned with the scope of the second amendment .

first , what standard of judicial scrutiny will be used to decide if a firearms law is in violation of the second amendment ? .

as discussed above , the court in heller did not specify a particular level of scrutiny , instead stating that the three challenged district of columbia firearms provisions were unconstitutional "[u]nder any of the standards of scrutiny that we have applied to enumerated constitutional rights. .

the court in heller rejected a rational basis standard as well as justice breyer's proposed "interest - balancing" inquiry , which would have examined "whether the statute burdens a protected interest in a way that is out of proportion to the statute's salutary effects upon other important governmental interests. .

 ( for more of the court's discussion of the standard of scrutiny in heller , see " the second amendment post - heller " ) .

since mcdonald , the u.s. court of appeals for the third circuit ( third circuit ) , in united states v. marzzarella , attempted to draw a framework for how to approach such cases when it held that a federal ban on possession of unmarked firearms was constitutional .

the third circuit noted that heller suggested a two - pronged approach: first , we ask whether the challenged law imposes a burden on conduct falling within the scope of the second amendment's guarantee ( citations omitted ) .

if it does not , our inquiry is complete .

if it does , we evaluate the law under some form of means - end scrutiny .

if the law passes muster under the standard , it is constitutional .

if it fails , it is invalid .

with respect to the challenged federal statute , the defendant argued that because firearms in common use in 1791 did not have serial numbers , the second amendment must protect firearms without serial numbers .

the court was not convinced by this argument because it found that "it would make little sense to categorically protect a class of weapons bearing a certain characteristic wholly unrelated to their utility .

.. .

the mere fact that some firearms possess a nonfunctional characteristic should not create a categorically protected class of firearms on the basis of that characteristic. .

the court was further skeptical of the defendant's argument that "possession in the home is conclusive proof that § 922 ( k ) regulates protected conduct. .

nonetheless , the court assumed that 18 u.s.c .

§ 922 ( k ) burdened the defendant's second amendment right .

looking to first amendment jurisprudence for guidance , the court noted that even an enumerated , fundamental right may be subjected to varying levels of scrutiny depending on the circumstances .

the court noted that § 922 ( k ) "does not severely limit the possession of firearms," and still pass muster because the statute is narrowly tailored to achieve the government's compelling interest in preserving serial numbers for tracing purposes .

second , does the second amendment right for purposes of lawful self - defense extend only to the home ? .

in both heller and mcdonald , the provisions challenged were those that prevented handgun possession in the home , and in each case the supreme court stressed the right of self - defense within the home as being central component of the right to keep and bear arms .

however , the court did not make clear if this similar protective right extend to a vehicle , a temporary living space , a place of business , or in public places ? .

heller mentioned the possibility that the self - defense right has the potential to extend further upon "future evaluation. .

third , what types of regulations would be burdensome enough to infringe on the second amendment right ? .

both heller and mcdonald emphasized that the right to keep and bear arms is not "a right to keep and carry any weapon whatsoever in any manner whatsoever and for whatever purpose. .

the court further repeated assurances that its holding "does not imperil every law regulating firearms," and "[does] not cast doubt on [] longstanding regulatory measures [such] as 'prohibitions on the possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill,' 'laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive places such as schools and government buildings , or laws imposing conditions and qualifications on the commercial sale of arm.' .

heller indicated that mere regulation of a right would not sufficiently infringe upon , or burden , the second amendment right , when it pointed out that certain colonial - era ordinances did not "remotely burden the right of self - defense as much as an absolute ban on handguns. .

in other words , it appears that to be burdensome , a regulation must also substantially burden the self - defensive right .

fourth , what types of weapons will fall within the protection of the second amendment ? .

heller determined that the second amendment protection extends to weapons that are "in common use at the time," and not those that are "dangerous and unusual. .

the court in heller made clear that the second amendment protects handguns , as it found them to be a common weapon "overwhelmingly chosen by american society" for purposes of self - defense , but not other weapons such as machine guns , short - barreled rifles and shotguns , or grenade launchers .

however , it is unclear if other types of so - called "assault" weapons , martial arts weapons , and clubs will be protected under the second amendment .

there have been recent challenges to state and local "assault weapons" bans , which have been upheld .

in 2009 , the california court of appeals in people v. james considered heller 's impact on california's roberti - roos assault weapons control act of 1989 , which several localities like the district of columbia and cook county , illinois have mirrored .

in james , the court declared that the prohibited weapons on the state's list "are not the types of weapons that are typically possessed by law - abiding citizens for lawful purposes such as sport hunting or self - defense ; rather these are weapons of war. .

it concluded that the relevant portion of the act did not prohibit conduct protected by the second amendment as defined in heller and therefore the state was within its ability to prohibit the types of dangerous and unusual weapons an individual can use .

it is highly likely that these last three questions , which center on the scope of the second amendment , will result in future litigation .

as courts begin to tackle these questions , they may draw from the third circuit's framework or develop their own standards .

for example , since the marzzarella decision , the u.s. court of appeals for the seventh circuit in united states v. skoien rejected a second amendment challenge to 18 u.s.c .

§ 922 ( g ) ( 9 ) — prohibiting persons convicted of misdemeanor crimes of domestic violence from possessing firearms — on the basis that "logic and data" demonstrate "a substantial relation between § 922 ( g ) ( 9 ) and [an important governmental] objective. .

faced with evaluating the same federal provision as in skoien , the u.s. court of appeals for the fourth circuit ( fourth circuit ) in united states v. chester issued a decision to provide district courts in its circuit guidance on the framework for deciding second amendment challenges .

the fourth circuit followed the two - pronged approach delineated in marzzarella , that is , the first , a historical inquiry "seeks to determine whether the conduct at issue was understood to be within the scope of the right at the time of ratification," and second , if the regulation burdens the conduct that was within the scope of the second amendment as historically understood , "then we move up to the second step of applying the appropriate form of means - end scrutiny. .

although the fourth circuit remanded the case to the district court , it noted that § 922 ( g ) ( 9 ) , like § 922 ( g ) ( 1 ) — prohibiting convicted felons from possession — requires the court to evaluate whether a person , rather than a person's conduct , is unprotected by the second amendment , and that "the historical data is not conclusive on the question of whether the founding era understanding was that the second amendment did not apply to felons. .

thus , as in mar zza rella , the fourth circuit assumed , due to lack of historical evidence , that the defendant was entitled to some second amendment protection to keep and possess firearms in his home for self - defense .

for this defendant and other similarly situated persons , the court declared that the government , upon remand , must meet the intermediate scrutiny standard and not strict scrutiny , because the defendant's claim "was not within the 'core right' identified in heller — the right of a law - abiding , responsible citizen to possess and carry a weapon for self - defense — by virtue of [the defendant's] criminal history as a domestic violence misdemeanant. .

 ( emphasis in the original ) .

