the social security administration ( ssa ) oversees programs that touch the lives of millions of american families and are key components of the nation's economic safety net .

the old - age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) program , commonly known as social security , is the most well - known of these programs .

ssa is also responsible for carrying out two cash assistance programs for certain groups of low - income individuals: ( 1 ) supplemental security income ( ssi ) for the aged , blind , and disabled and ( 2 ) special benefits for certain world war ii veterans .

in addition to its core programs , the agency supports the administration of a number of non - ssa programs , such as medicare , and provides and verifies data for a variety of federal and state program purposes .

benefit payments for ssa's core programs are considered mandatory spending , which means that such outlays are controlled by each program's authorizing statute — not by appropriations acts .

however , the resources needed to carry out ssa's core programs , as well as to support the administration of other national priorities , are considered discretionary spending and thus are controlled by the annual appropriations process .

this report provides background on ssa's core programs and related mandatory spending but its focus is on ssa's annual discretionary appropriations for administrative expenses .

this report begins with a brief description of ssa's core programs and then examines its fy2017 projected spending on benefit payments and operating costs .

next , it discusses each component of the fy2017 president's budget request for ssa , including the agency's limitation on administrative expenses ( lae ) account .

lastly , the report examines historical trends in the budget request and appropriation for ssa's lae account .

most of the data presented in this report can be found in ssa's fy2017 budget justification to congress , which is available at https: / / www.ssa.gov / budget / .

ssa's primary purpose is to administer several federal income support programs established under the social security act , namely social security ( oasdi ; title ii of the act ) ; supplemental security income ( ssi ; title xvi of the act ) ; and special benefits for certain world war ii veterans ( title viii of the act ) .

social security is a social insurance program that replaces a portion of an insured worker's income based on the individual's career - average earnings in covered employment .

in contrast , ssi and special benefits for certain world war ii veterans are public assistance programs that provide a guaranteed minimum income to certain groups of individuals who have little or no social security or other income .

all three programs are entitlements , which means that the federal government is obligated to pay benefits to individuals who meet the eligibility requirements specified in each program's authorizing statute .

to conform with data presented in ssa's fy2017 budget justification , this report describes the old - age and survivors insurance and disability insurance components of social security as separate programs .

as shown in figure 1 , in fy2017 , spending on the oasi , ssdi , ssi , and special benefits for certain world war ii programs combined is projected to be more than $1.0 trillion .

this projection includes benefit payments as well as ssa and non - ssa administrative expenses and certain other costs .

benefit payments account for approximately 98.4% of total projected spending .

ssa estimates that the average number of federal beneficiaries of its core programs ( adjusted for double counting ) will be 68.4 million in fy2017 .

as noted earlier , benefit outlays for ssa's core programs are considered mandatory spending and therefore are not controlled by annual appropriations acts .

spending on benefit payments for these programs is determined by the eligibility requirements and payment levels specified in each program's authorizing statute .

table 1 shows administrative outlays for each core program as a percentage of benefit payments and for social security , as a share of trust fund income .

the right column of the table excludes non - ssa administrative expenses and certain other costs , except in the row labeled "total," which includes costs associated with medicare .

administrative outlays as a share of benefit payments are greater for ssa's disability programs compared with the oasi program because the disability programs are more complex to administer and therefore require more resources per applicant or beneficiary .

as a means - tested program , ssi is particularly complex to administer because ssa must verify all sources of income and resources available to an ssi applicant or recipient as well as the individual's living situation .

the high ratio of administrative outlays to benefit payments under the special benefits for certain world war ii veterans program is due primarily to low benefit levels and the steadily decreasing number of individuals in receipt of benefits .

in fy2017 , ssa projects that the program will pay benefits to fewer than 500 individuals on average .

although benefit payments for ssa's programs are considered mandatory spending and thus are not controlled by the annual appropriations process , the agency requires annual discretionary appropriations to carry out its programs and to support the administration of non - ssa programs , such as medicare .

ssa's accounts are traditionally funded via the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( lhhs ) appropriations bill .

this section of the report provides an overview of ssa's appropriations by examining the components of the fy2017 president's budget request for the agency .

the report will be updated to reflect ssa appropriations passed by the house and the senate committees on appropriations as well as the enacted appropriation for the fiscal year .

for more information on the annual appropriations process , see crs report r42388 , the congressional appropriations process: an introduction .

the regular lhhs appropriations bill was passed as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) on december 18 , 2015 .

the total fy2016 appropriation for ssa's lae account was nearly $12.2 billion — 2.8% less than the $12.5 billion requested in the president's budget for that year ( table 5 ) .

as shown in figure 3 , for each year since ssa became an independent agency , the commissioner's budget has exceeded the president's request in nominal ( unadjusted ) dollars .

in all but two of these fiscal years , fy1997 and fy2009 , the final appropriation from congress , taking into account any rescissions , has been less than the commissioner's budget .

only in fy1997 , fy2008 , fy2009 , and fy2014 has the final appropriation exceeded the president's request .

in fy2014 , the president's request included a legislative proposal for a dedicated source of funding for program integrity activities , instead of a request for discretionary cap adjustment funding .

if the funding associated with this legislative proposal is included , then the final appropriation for fy2014 is less than the president's request .

figure 4 shows historical trends in appropriations for ssa's lae account using three measures: nominal dollars , price - indexed dollars , and wage - indexed dollars .

the lower line labeled "nominal dollars" shows a steady increase in the appropriation for the lae account over the last 20 years , although the rate of this increase seems to have slowed since fy2010 .

the middle line labeled "price indexed to 2016 dollars" shows the trend in ssa's lae appropriation adjusted for changes in prices , as measured by the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) .

although the price - indexed line is flatter than the nominal line , there is a noticeable rise in the appropriation for ssa's lae account during the fy2000s .

between fy2010 and fy2013 , however , the value of appropriation declines in real terms , only to increase slightly through fy2016 .

another method for examining historical trends in ssa's lae account is to adjust the annual appropriation for wage growth .

the majority of ssa's administrative budget is obligated for payroll expenses , which include pay raises due to step increases , promotions , and cost - of - living adjustments .

because wages tend to grow faster than prices , annual increases in payroll expenses , which are largely fixed costs , can increase an agency's administrative expenses faster than the rate of inflation .

the top line labeled "wage indexed to 2016 dollars" shows the trend in the appropriation for ssa's lae account adjusted for changes in wages , as measured by ssa's average wage index ( awi ) .

unlike the price - indexed line , the wage - indexed line shows a steady decline in the value of ssa's appropriation for the lae account in real terms starting in fy2010 and continuing through fy2016 .

