the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi , the bureau ) is the lead agency for investigating the federal crime of terrorism , which is defined under law as "an offense that is calculated to influence or affect the conduct of government by intimidation or coercion , or to retaliate against government conduct. .

this includes terrorist acts committed within and outside u.s. national boundaries .

this report provides background on some of the key elements of the fbi terrorism investigative process based on publicly available information .

the september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) terrorist attacks have been called a major security , law enforcement , and intelligence failure .

prior to 9 / 11 , the fbi was largely a reactive law enforcement agency — pursuing suspects after they had allegedly committed crimes .

since 9 / 11 , the bureau has arguably taken a much more proactive posture , particularly regarding counterterrorism .

it now views its role as both "predicting and preventing" the threats facing the nation , drawing upon enhanced resources .

a few basic measures suggest this: post - 9 / 11 legislation — notably the usa patriot act ( p.l .

107-56 ) — dismantled "the wall" between intelligence and criminal investigation and expanded the u.s. government's ability to monitor terrorist suspects , among other changes .

changes in the attorney general's guidelines for domestic fbi operations and the fbi domestic investigations and operations guidelines give the fbi more leeway to engage in proactive investigative work that does not depend on criminal predication ( i.e. , a nexus to past or future criminal activity ) .

since 9 / 11 , a widening of the bureau's counterterrorism operations has occurred as well as closer liaison with agencies outside the department of justice ( doj ) .

this is most evident domestically in the increased number of its joint terrorism task forces ( jttf ) .

these are multi - agency investigative units led by doj and the fbi and are designed to combine the resources of federal , state , and local law enforcement .

they are locally based and comprised of investigators , analysts , linguists , special weapons and tactics ( swat ) experts , and other specialists from dozens of u.s. law enforcement and intelligence agencies .

in 1999 , there were 26 jttfs throughout the united states .

as of january 2014 , there were over 100 .

evidence of growth within the fbi's counterterrorism operations can also be seen in the bureau's increased allocation of agents to terrorism matters .

in april 2011 testimony to congress , then fbi director robert mueller "estimated that before 9 / 11 , there were 10,000 fbi agents on the streets , with 30 percent engaged in national security issues and the rest focused on criminal activity .

since then , mueller said , he has gained 4,000 more agents and the fbi's focus is a 50-50 split between terrorism and other criminal activity like mortgage fraud. .

to further its proactive intelligence - driven counterterrorism mission , the fbi established a national security branch ( nsb ) and a directorate of intelligence ( di ) within the nsb .

moreover , the fbi has reportedly increased its intelligence analyst workforce from approximately 1,100 in october 2001 to more than 3,000 by september 2011 .

the fbi is an intelligence agency as well as a law enforcement agency .

since 9 / 11 , the bureau has taken what it describes as a more forward - leaning , intelligence - driven posture in its terrorism investigations in order to prevent or disrupt terrorist acts , not merely investigate them after they have occurred .

shortly after the attacks , the fbi director wrote a memo to special agents in charge of fbi field offices saying , "while every office will have different crime problems that will require varying levels of resources , the fbi has just one set of priorities: stop the next attack . .

then - deputy attorney general paul mcnulty described the doj's aggressive , proactive , and preventative approach as the only acceptable response from a department of government charged with enforcing our laws and protecting the american people .

awaiting an attack is not an option .

that is why the department of justice is doing everything in its power to identify risks to our nation's security at the earliest stage possible and to respond with forward - leaning – preventative – prosecutions .

the fbi's post - 9 / 11 transformation is particularly evident in four areas: the usa patriot act provided the fbi additional authorities and enhanced investigative tools .

the fbi and doj altered the way the bureau investigated terrorism with the 2008 revision of the attorney general's guidelines for domestic fbi operations .

the fbi expanded operationally via a proliferation of jttfs across the united states .

in so doing , it also increased its cooperation with state , local , and federal agencies .

finally , watershed changes were made in the bureau's intelligence program .

the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks have been called a major intelligence failure .

in response to criticisms of its intelligence capabilities in the aftermath of 9 / 11 , the fbi has introduced a series of reforms intended to transform the bureau from a largely reactive law enforcement agency focused on criminal investigations into a more proactive , agile , flexible , and intelligence - driven agency that can prevent acts of terrorism .

robert mueller , who became the fbi director just prior to 9 / 11 and served until september 2013 , vowed to assert headquarters' control over the fbi's historically fragmented and much - criticized intelligence program .

he signaled his intention to improve the fbi's intelligence program by consolidating and centralizing control over intelligence capabilities , both at fbi headquarters and in the fbi's largely autonomous field offices .

he contended that intelligence had always been one of the fbi's core competencies , organic to the fbi's investigative mission , and he asserted that the organization's intelligence efforts had been and would continue to be disciplined by the intelligence cycle ( i.e. , the development and conduct of intelligence collection requirements , collection , analysis , and dissemination ) .

mueller instituted a number of reforms .

he created a new directorate of intelligence ( di ) at headquarters .

he also acted on a recommendation by the weapons of mass destruction commission and established a national security branch at headquarters which integrated the fbi's counterterrorism and counterintelligence divisions with the di , the weapons of mass destruction directorate , and the terrorist screening center .

more fundamentally , perhaps , mueller established field intelligence groups ( figs ) , which could be viewed as a cornerstone of his reforms , at each of the fbi's 56 field offices in an effort to improve the bureau's intelligence capacity by combining its intelligence and investigative capabilities .

figs are comprised of agents , analysts , linguists , and surveillance specialists .

a fig's principal mission is to identify intelligence gaps , obtain and analyze raw intelligence from fbi investigations and sources , and generate intelligence products and disseminate them to the intelligence and law enforcement communities in order to help guide investigations , programs , and policy .

arguably , the mission of the figs is nothing less than to "drive," or inform the direction of , the fbi's counterterrorism effort by identifying , assessing , and attacking emerging threats "before they flourish. .

intelligence information reports ( iirs ) are a primary component of the fbi's post - 9 / 11 transformation .

figs disseminate iirs .

these reports are formatted as teletype messages and shared electronically with the law enforcement and intelligence communities .

they contain "raw" intelligence — "unevaluated intelligence information , generally from a single source , that has not fully been evaluated , integrated with other information , or interpreted and analyzed. .

these reports include information "extracted" from fbi case files .

the bureau emphasizes that the information in iirs must not be "based solely on the exercise of first amendment protected activities , or on the race , ethnicity , national origin , or religion of the subject. .

in 2010 , the fbi produced over 25,000 iirs , which included counterintelligence , counterterrorism , and criminal information as well as information related to cyber issues and weapons of mass destruction .

in making intelligence a priority , mueller also adopted a strategy management system , establishing a strategic execution team ( set ) to execute organizational changes and to build support and momentum for institutional change across the bureau .

mueller testified in 2008 , "we established strategic execution teams to help us assess our intelligence program , evaluate best practices , decide what works and what does not work , and to standardize it throughout the fbi .

the purpose of the set is to accelerate improvements to our intelligence capabilities , to ensure we are an intelligence - driven organization and to drive a change in mindsets throughout the fbi. .

more specifically , the fbi acted on set recommendations and restructured the figs in each of its field offices to conform to one model , based on best practices from the field , and adapted to the size and complexity of each office .

as a result , according to mueller , fig - headquarter coordination has improved .

in 2008 , mueller told congress that another result of the single - model standardized fig approach is that special agents and analysts are now able to transition more easily and quickly from one field office fig to another .

one observer has described intelligence gathering by the fbi in the post - 9 / 11 context as "driven by a theory of preventive policing: in order to anticipate the next terror attack , authorities need to track legal activities… .

it focuses not on crime , but on the possibility that a crime might be committed at some future date. .

this preventative stance can be seen in a domestic intelligence - gathering operation related to events in libya leading to the fall of muammar al qadhafi .

in 2011 , the fbi interviewed more than 800 libyans residing in the united states to determine if there was any threat of terror attacks against american targets because of u.s. military action in libya .

this proactive posture also involves challenges for the bureau — especially in determining when individuals move from radical activity involving first amendment - protected behavior to violent extremism .

because not all terrorist suspects follow a single radicalization roadmap on their way to executing plots , u.s. law enforcement also faces the task of discerning exactly when radicalized individuals become real threats .

as suggested , timing is everything .

to preemptively stop terrorists , law enforcement requires accurate and timely intelligence .

the fbi generates terrorism cases from a number of sources .

information about terrorist threats or suspicious incidents is brought to the attention of the fbi by the public ; other government agencies ( particularly those in the intelligence community ) ; state and local law enforcement ; ongoing fbi investigations ( including sources , surveillance , financial analysis , and tactical analysis ) ; and fbi legal attachés stationed abroad .

most fbi investigations develop from information or leads generated by pre - existing fbi investigations , or casework and liaison with other federal agencies or international counterparts .

a handful of leads stem from information generated by local or state law enforcement and filtered up to the fbi via intelligence fusion centers .

to counter violent plots , u.s. law enforcement has employed two tactics that have been described by one scholar as the "al capone" approach and the use of "agent provocateurs. .

the capone approach involves apprehending individuals linked to terrorist plots on lesser , non - terrorism - related offenses such as immigration violations .

in agent provocateur cases — often called sting operations — government undercover operatives befriend suspects and offer to facilitate their activities .

as the "al capone" moniker suggests , historically these tactics have been employed against many types of targets such as mafia bosses , white - collar criminals , and corrupt public servants .

while these techniques combined with the cultivation of informants as well as surveillance ( especially in and around mosques ) may be effective in stymieing rapidly developing terrorist plots , their use has fostered concern within u.s. muslim communities .

as discussed , the fbi's diog articulates a need to proactively gather intelligence in counterterrorism investigations and establishes the assessment as a technique to do so .

balancing civil liberties against the need for preventative policing to combat terrorism is a key policy challenge .

the notion of balancing civil liberties against security requirements is not new .

in 1976 , the united states senate select committee to study governmental operations with respect to intelligence activities ( commonly referred to as the church committee after its chair , senator frank church ) noted as much in its investigation of domestic intelligence abuses: a tension between order and liberty is inevitable in any society .

a government must protect its citizens from those bent on engaging in violence and criminal behavior , or in espionage and other hostile foreign intelligence activity.… intelligence work has , at times , successfully prevented dangerous and abhorrent acts , such as bombings and foreign spying , and aided in the prosecution of those responsible for such acts .

but intelligence activity in the past decades has , all too often , exceeded the restraints on the exercise of governmental power that are imposed by our country's constitution , laws , and traditions .

figure 1 suggests how competing elements influence the balance between civil liberties and security — largely defined today in terms of terrorism prevention efforts .

as a historical example , the fbi had developed intrusive domestic intelligence collection measures and counter - radical operations stretching from the late 1930s through the 1960s .

of course , the focus of the fbi's efforts in this period was not counterterrorism .

these decades featured domestic security concerns during world war ii and fears of espionage and communist infiltration of american institutions during the cold war .

the fbi worked to prevent this activity .

for much of this period , a national consensus suggested that serious threats were posed by foreign agents , revolutionaries , or outside agitators operating in the united states .

within this context , the fbi had broad authority for investigation of and intelligence collection regarding domestic subversive activity from presidents harry s. truman and dwight d. eisenhower and attorney general robert f. kennedy .

the bureau developed a number of programs to combat what it saw as internal threats .

during this period , the fbi engaged in what can be described as preventive , covert , intelligence - based efforts to target and contain people , groups , or movements suspected by the bureau to be '"rabble rousers,' 'agitators,' 'key activists,' or 'key black extremists.' .

a hallmark was the fbi's counterintelligence program ( cointelpro ) , which lasted from 1956 to 1971 .

subjects investigated by the fbi under its domestic intelligence programs did not have to be suspected of criminal activity .

instead of bringing criminal cases to court , the bureau acted outside of legal processes and relied on illegal means to curb constitutionally protected activity it deemed threatening to national security .

by the 1970s , as cold war fears ebbed , the balance between civil liberties and prevention tipped in the other direction — favoring concerns over civil liberties .

this is highlighted by the development of the original set of attorney general guidelines .

issued in 1976 and known as the domestic security investigation guidelines , these responded to fbi abuses embodied in programs such as cointelpro .

these first guidelines were intended to prevent the fbi's monitoring of groups that had unpopular or controversial public views and greatly circumscribed the bureau's domestic intelligence gathering capabilities and investigations related to national security - related issues .

since the 1976 guidelines , and especially after 9 / 11 , the balance has shifted in favor of security and terrorism prevention efforts .

as suggested , the mukasey guidelines and fbi diog offer more investigative flexibility to proactively counter terrorist actors .

critics have stated that subsequent guidelines have excessively loosened the constraints on fbi intelligence collection and investigation .

in essence , these critics suggest that concerns over terrorism and security have outweighed fears of systemic abuse by investigators .

philadelphia inquirer reporter and author stephan salisbury describes post 9 / 11 efforts at striking this balance as the "bind" the fbi finds itself in .

"on one hand it is being charged by the justice department to go out and stop this stuff [terrorism] before it happens .

but on the other , it is getting criticized for the techniques it is using to do that. .

the mukasey guidelines and fbi diog address the same competing forces , and , as mentioned , their implementation has spurred concerns among civil liberties groups .

since 9 / 11 , the fbi has been given substantially greater resources to enhance its counterterrorism activities — particularly its intelligence operations .

the bureau over the last decade has also introduced a series of reforms intended to transform it from a largely reactive law enforcement agency focused on criminal investigations into a more proactive , agile , flexible , and intelligence - driven organization .

in its oversight role , congress may wish to examine the extent to which intelligence has been integrated into fbi operations and culture to support its counterterrorism mission and the progress the bureau has made on its intelligence reform initiatives .

congress may also wish to explore the extent to which the fbi has enhanced its collaboration with the department of homeland security , other federal partners , and state and local law enforcement elements .

this is not just an issue of information sharing , but of how the bureau has institutionalized its collaboration in order to tackle complex threats .

finally , congress might ask how the fbi uses strategic intelligence to develop a true understanding of security threats and how they are evolving .

in other words , has the bureau developed effective predictive capacity ? .

fbi intelligence reforms since 9 / 11 have met with a mixed response .

among its intelligence initiatives since 9 / 11 , the fbi has increased its intelligence focus by creating a directorate of intelligence and hiring thousands of new and better - qualified analysts .

another innovation was the establishment of field intelligence groups ( figs ) that are embedded into each of the fbi's 56 field offices .

the fbi says that the figs are responsible for coordinating , managing , and executing all the functions of the intelligence cycle .

in april 2011 , then fbi director mueller testified that "the fbi recently restructured its figs , where each group now has clearly defined requirements for intelligence collection , use , and production .

with this new structure , each office can better identify , assess , and attack emerging threats. .

yet , as the bipartisan senate homeland security and governmental affairs committee ( hsgac ) investigation into the fort hood shootings highlighted , questions remain about the extent to which intelligence has been effectively integrated into fbi investigative operations .

according to the senate hsgac's report , a ticking time bomb: in the hasan case , the fbi did not effectively utilize intelligence analysts who could have provided a different perspective given the evidence that it had .

the fbi 's inquiry focused narrowly on whether hasan was engaged in terrorist activity - as opposed to whether he was radicalizing to violent islamist extremism and whether this radicalization might pose counterintelligence or other threats ( eg , hasan might spy for the taliban if he was deployed to afghanistan ) .

this critical mistake may have been avoided if intelligence analysts were appropriately engaged in the inquiry .

congress may wish to examine the extent to which analysts at the figs have access to case information about specific joint terrorism task force ( jttf ) investigations and the opportunity to provide relevant intelligence to help steer those investigations .

in 2010 , the fbi intelligence analysts association stated that analysts at the fbi continues to be relegated to "support" roles ( i.e. , they react to direction from special agents rather than being full partners in an intelligence - driven investigative operation ) .

they argued that intelligence analysts should have professional parity with special agents to rapidly reform the fbi's institutional culture .

the fbi publicly asserts that "intelligence is an integral part of the fbi's investigative mission .

it is embedded in the day - to - day work of the fbi , from the initiation of preliminary investigations to the development of fbi - wide investigative strategies. .

has the fbi developed a concept of operations that institutionalizes when and how intelligence analysts and intelligence analysis directly influence investigations ? .

congress may also wish to explore the extent to which intelligence analysts outside the figs , such as those at fbi headquarters , impact specific jttf investigations and have the opportunity to provide relevant intelligence for those investigations .

uncovering the impact of the bureau's recent adoption of the "fusion cell" concept for its headquarters intelligence elements may be of interest .

according to the senate hsgac report: in the hasan case , two jttfs ( each located in a different field office ) disputed the significance of hasan's communications with the suspected terrorist and how vigorously he should be investigated .

the jttf that was less concerned about hasan controlled the inquiry and ended it prematurely after an insufficient examination .

two key headquarters units - the counterterrorism division , the "national jttf" ( which was created specifically to be the hub among jttfs ) , and the directorate of intelligence were not made aware of the dispute .

this unresolved conflict raises concerns that , despite the more assertive role that fbi headquarters now plays , especially since 9 / 11 in what historically has been a decentralized organization , field offices still prize and protect their autonomy from headquarters .

fbi headquarters also does not have a written plan that articulates the division of labor and hierarchy of command - and - control authorities among its headquarters units , field offices , and the jttfs .

finally , the fbi has greatly increased its production of intelligence products .

as noted earlier , in 2010 the bureau produced over 25,000 intelligence reports on counterintelligence , counterterrorism , and criminal topics as well as information related to cyber issues and weapons of mass destruction .

it may be of oversight interest to congress to examine the value of these reports , their accessibility within the intelligence and law enforcement communities , and the views of various consumers about them .

