this report discusses rare earth elements used in department of defense ( dod ) weapon systems , current problematic oversight issues , and options for congress to consider .

rare earth elements ( also referred to as rees and by the shorthand term "rare earths" ) include the lanthanide series of 15 elements on the periodic table , beginning with atomic number 57 ( lanthanum ) and extending through element number 71 ( lutetium ) .

two other elements , yttrium and scandium , often occur in the same rare earth deposits and possess similar properties .

these 17 elements are referred to as "rare" because while they are relatively abundant in quantity , they appear in low concentrations in the earth's crust and economic extraction and processing is both difficult and costly .

the united states is a major consumer of products containing rare earth elements .

these elements are incorporated into many sophisticated technologies with both commercial and defense applications .

from the 1960s to the 1980s , the united states was the leader in global production of rare earths .

since that time , processing and manufacturing of the world's supply of rare earths and downstream value - added forms such as metals , alloys , and magnets have shifted almost entirely to china , in part due to lower labor costs and lower environmental standards .

a series of events and ensuing press reports have highlighted the rare earth "crisis," as some refer to it .

one such event occurred in july 2010 , when china's ministry of commerce announced that china would cut its exports of rare earth minerals by about 72% .

in september 2010 , china temporarily cut rare earth exports to japan , apparently over a maritime dispute .

this dispute highlighted the potential for disruption of the world's supply of rare earth materials .

some members of congress are concerned with the potential for a nearly total u.s. dependence on foreign sources for rare earth elements and the implications of this dependence for national security .

congress has been interested in the rare earth issue largely because: the world is almost wholly dependent on a single national supplier — china — for rare earths ; the united states has no production of some heavy rare earths ( terbium to lutetium and yttrium ) ; the united states has little production of rare earth metals , powders , and nefeb magnets ; there may be repercussions if these materials are not available for commercial and defense applications ; and the rare earths supply chain vulnerability question may adversely affect the ability of the united states to plan strategically for its national security needs .

in april 2010 congress required the government accountability office ( gao ) to examine rare earths in the defense supply chain and also required the secretary of defense to assess the defense supply chain and develop a plan to address any shortfalls or other supply chain vulnerabilities , including a specific requirement to present a plan for the restoration of domestic nefeb magnet production .

gao concluded that revamping the defense supply chain could take 15 years or more .

congress has required that the secretary of defense , pursuant to the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fy2011 ( p.l .

111-383 ) , conduct an assessment of the rare earths supply chain issues and develop a plan to address any supply chain vulnerabilities .

dod's report was released in march 2012 .

congress may want answers to at least four important questions on rare earth elements: ( 1 ) are rare earth elements essential to u.s. national security ? .

 ( 2 ) how would a scarcity of rare earths affect the delivery or performance of defense weapon systems ? .

 ( 3 ) is the united states vulnerable to supply disruptions , and if so , are there readily available and equally effective substitutes ? .

 ( 4 ) what are the short - term and long - term options that dod may consider in response to a lack of domestic rare earth element production and china's continued dominance ? .

congress may consider both short - range and long - range options for securing a source for rare earth elements as part of its oversight role in addressing u.s. national security interests .

short - range options potentially include hearings on the "section 843" rare earths report , convening defense suppliers to discuss rare earth material shortages , establishing rare earth material stockpiles for defense purposes , instituting a new critical minerals program , and reconvening the smpb .

long - range options could include reducing dod consumption of rare earth elements by identifying and securing equally effective alternatives to rare earths , establishing partnerships with foreign allies that could potentially offer a diversified source of foreign suppliers outside of china , and providing more financial assistance for rare earth production within the united states .

each of these potential options is discussed below .

congressional insight on these potential actions will largely depend on the findings and conclusions reached in dod's long - overdue self - assessment on the defense rare earth supply chain .

however , it is not clear if or when dod will release its report .

congress could require dod to release the report , and then hold hearings to examine dod's assessment and conclusions .

the report was required to be released within 180 days of the enactment of the act , which would have been on or about july 7 , 2011 .

the reasons for the delay are uncertain .

congress could meet with defense suppliers , at all tiers of the supply chain , to ascertain their knowledge of material shortages and bottlenecks .

while dod purchases the end product ( the weapons system ) from prime contractors and relies on prime contractors to deliver the finished product , rare earth elements are important throughout the supply chain from the prime contractor through successive subcontractor tiers .

some contractors at lower ends of the tiers may be reluctant to signal to dod that there are supply chain issues or challenges .

an issue that warrants further understanding is where there is convergence between the rare earth value supply chain and the defense supply chain .

the rare earth supply chain starts with mining , flows from ore to concentrate , to oxide , to metal , to alloy , and then to the finished product , the magnet .

in contrast , the defense supply chain starts with the prime contractor and moves through a successive number of subcontractors down to the ultimate "first line processor" who purchases a rare earth , value - added product such as metal , alloy , or permanent magnets for incorporation into a defense component .

congress could require dod to convene the strategic materials protection board ( smpb ) .

in its december 2008 report , as discussed above , the smpb defined critical materials in this way: "the criticality of a material is a function of its importance in dod applications , the extent to which dod actions are required to shape and sustain the market , and the impact and likelihood of supply disruption. .

as a result , the smpb defined only one rare earth element , beryllium , as a "strategic material critical to national security. .

congress may convene the board because the present board might determine that some rare earth elements have moved into a position where they are now more critical to national security purposes .

the next smpb might determine that some rare earth elements have moved into a position where they are now more critical to national security .

congress might demand the 2010 statutorily required meeting of the board to commence immediately .

the next smpb will be required to use the new definition of "materials critical to national security" as defined in section 829 of the fy2011 ndaa , which states the following: sec .

829 .

definition of materials critical to national security ( 1 ) the term "materials critical to national security" means materials ( a ) upon which the production or sustainment of military equipment is dependent ; and ( b ) the supply of which could be restricted by actions or events outside the control of the government of the united states .

in the short run , however , creating a stockpile could raise prices even further because of the increased demand .

congress could require a strategic rare earth elements stockpile .

stockpiles might possibly increase the security of the domestic u.s. supply for rare earths .

congress may consider compiling a "virtual" stockpile database , with commitments and contracts with suppliers to buy the items when needed .

one trade association , usmma , advocates for a limited strategic reserve of rare earth alloys , metals , and magnets .

usmma asserts that government action is needed to ensure that there is a downstream domestic manufacturing capability .

this strategic stockpile would ensure our department of defense has ready access to those materials needed to ensure our national security and to incentivize the return of domestic manufacturing .

with defense critical materials such as dysprosium being sourced solely from china , it is critical that the department of defense have access to rare earth oxides from reliable producers and manufacturers in the united states and ally nations to perform value added processes , such as metal , alloy and magnet manufacturing .

once dod and its suppliers identify whether and where material shortfalls exist , congress could determine which stages of the supply chain ( eg , mining or manufacturing ) require federal funding .

with the growing strategic importance of rare earths , and in order to create interest and build additional u.s. leadership in rare earth research and development , congress may consider funding rare earth application sciences in curriculums for military and other government institutes or in national research and development centers designed to train students , scientists , and engineers .

should dod determine that rare earths fall into the classification of critical minerals , congress could institute a new critical minerals program .

in the early 1980s , there existed a critical minerals program aimed at warning congress about potential supply shortages , protecting strategic materials , and keeping an inventory of those minerals on hand in order to mitigate a supply shock .

this program ended in the 1990s as the consensus within congress grew that the market could handle mineral supply disruptions without government intervention .

two decades later , at a 2010 hearing of the house science and technology committee on rare earths , one policymaker suggested that the time has come to revive the program: this is not the first time the committee has been concerned with the competitive implications of materials such as rare earths .

in 1980 — 30 years ago — this committee established a national minerals and materials policy .

one core element in that legislation was the call to support for "a vigorous , comprehensive and coordinated program of materials research and development. .

unfortunately , over successive administrations , the effort to keep that program going fell apart .

now , it is time to ask whether we need to revive a coordinated effort to level the playing field in rare earths .

in particular , i want to learn if there is a need for increased research and development to help address this nation's rare earth shortage , or if we need to re - orient the research we already have underway .

based on my review of the written submissions , it appears that we could benefit from more research both in basic and applied materials sciences .

congress may encourage dod to pursue joint ventures with other nations , as many other nations are seeking alternatives to a near total dependence on rare earths from china .

these partnerships may take place at any stage of the supply chain .

it is critical for dod to consider the implications of sourcing used by these partner nations .

for example , if dod relies on a partner nation for rare earth metals , and that nation procures their oxides from china , this partnership may not provide the requisite security of supply .

some members of congress have introduced rare - earth related bills during the 112 th and 111 th congresses .

some selected measures , related to national defense issues , are described below .

legislation introduced in the 112 th congress p.l .

112-239 ( h.r .

3310 , 112 th congress ) , the national defense authorization act for fy2013 h.r .

4310 was introduced on march 29 , 2012 , passed the house on may 18 , 2012 , and referred to the senate armed services committee on june 19 , 2012 .

the bill has several rare earth - related provisions , as described below .

section 901 .

additional duties of deputy assistant secretary of defense for manufacturing and industrial base policy and amendments to the strategic materials protection .

appoints assistant deputy secretary of defense for manufacturing and industrial base policy as chair of the strategic materials protection board chair ; requires that board's findings be reviewed by the secretary of defense , congressional defense committees of congress , and published in the federal register within 90 days of the board meeting ; broadens the scope of duties assigned to the office of the assistant deputy secretary of defense for manufacturing and industrial base policy to better provide oversight of the defense supply chain , including contractors and strategic materials , to ensure that there are no supply chain vulnerabilities regarding the nation's defense requirements ; specifically , "ensuring reliable sources of materials critical to national security , such as specialty metals , armor plate , and rare earth elements. .

section 160 3 .

national security strategy for national technology and the industrial base .

requires the secretary of defense to develop a national security strategy for the national technology and industrial base , based on a prioritized assessment of risks and challenges to the defense supply chain , and ensuring that the national technology and industrial base is capable of achieving certain national security objectives ; ensuring reliable sources of materials critical to national security , such as specialty metals , armor plates and rare earth elements ; reducing both the presence and risk of counterfeit parts in the supply chain .

s. 3254 , the proposed national defense authorization act for fy2013 , was introduced on june 4 , 2012 , and referred to the senate armed services committee .

while the enacted bill did not include a provision on rare earths , senate rept .

112-173 contained a statement that reflected the committee's view on the role of rare earth materials for defense purposes , as repeated here .

essential role of rare earth materials rare earth materials play an essential role in several critical weapons components and systems such as precision - guided munitions , electric ship drives , command and control centers , and aircraft , tanks , and missile systems .

the committee notes the predominance of unreliable foreign sources for rare earth materials , including china , which provides roughly 94 percent of the world's rare earth oxides and nearly all rare earth metal within the defense - related supply chain and which has repeatedly decreased export quotas and imposed embargoes of these critical materials .

even with the development of the domestic - supply chain there may be continued reliance on production of certain heavy rare earth elements from china .

the importance of rare earth materials for national defense applications necessitates a thorough understanding of vulnerabilities in the rare earth supply chain and the development of pragmatic , actionable risk mitigation plans to reduce the likelihood of supply interruptions .

the committee encourages the department of defense to carefully consider the role of u.s. producers and potential means to develop reliable domestic sources to meet department rare earth materials requirements .

p.l .

1 11-393 , the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fy2011 section 843 of the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fy2011 ( p.l .

111-383 ) and s.rept .

111-201 ( accompanying s. 3454 , the proposed senate national defense authorization act for fy2011 ) required the secretary of defense to conduct an assessment of rare earth supply chain issues and develop a plan to address any vulnerabilities .

section 843 section 843 required the secretary of defense , within 180 days of enactment of the act , to report to congress with an assessment of the supply and demand for rare earth materials in defense applications .

the assessment would identify whether any rare earth materials would be: ( 1 ) critical to the production , sustainment , or operation of significant united states military equipment ; or ( 2 ) subject to interruption of supply , based on actions or events outside the control of the government of the united states .

for every rare earth material identified that would meet these criteria , the secretary of defense would develop a plan for the long - term availability of such materials with the goal of establishing "an assured source of supply of such material in critical defense applications by december 31 , 2015. .

the plan would consider the following: ( 1 ) an assessment of whether the material should be included in the national defense stockpile ; ( 2 ) in consultation with the united states trade representative , the identification of any trade practices known to the secretary that limit the secretary's ability to ensure the long - term availability of such material or the ability to meet the goal of establishing an assured source of supply of such material by december 31 , 2015 ; ( 3 ) an assessment of the availability of financing to industry , academic institutions , or not - for - profit entities to provide the capacity required to ensure the availability of the material , as well as potential mechanisms to increase the availability of such financing ; ( 4 ) an assessment of the benefits , if any , of defense production act funding to support the establishment of an assured source of supply for military components ; ( 5 ) an assessment of funding for research and development ( 6 ) any other risk mitigation method determined appropriate by the secretary that is consistent with the goal of establishing an assured source of supply by december 31 , 2015 ; and , ( 7 ) for steps of the rare earth material supply chain for which no other risk mitigation method , as described in paragraphs ( 1 ) through ( 6 ) , will ensure an assured source of supply by december 31 , 2015 , a specific plan to eliminate supply chain vulnerability by the earliest date practicable .

h.r .

4402 , the national strategic and critical minerals production act h.r .

4402 , the national strategic and critical minerals production act of 2012 , was introduced on apri19 , 2012 , passed the house on july 12 , 2012 , and was referred to the senate on july 16 , 2012 .

the bill would have required both the secretary of the interior and the secretary of agriculture to more efficiently develop domestic sources of the minerals and materials of strategic and critical importance to u.s. economic and national security , and manufacturing competitiveness .

h.r .

3449 , defense supply chain and industrial base security act h.r .

3449 was introduced by representative paul ryan on november 16 , 2011 , and referred to the house armed services committee .

the bill would have required the secretary of defense to develop a defense supply chain and industrial base strategy , and subsequent plan , designed to secure the supply chain and industrial base sectors that the secretary judges critical to u.s. national security .

h.r .

2184 , rare earth policy task force and materials act h.r .

2184 was introduced by representative mike coffman on june 15 , 2011 .

the bill would establish a rare earth policy task force for a period of 10 years within the department of the interior for the purpose of developing a plan to ensure the long - term supply of rare earth materials .

the task force would be directed to assist federal agencies in reviewing laws , regulations , and policies that discourage investment in , exploration for , and development of , domestic rare earths .

the task force would also be required to submit an annual report that would provide a plan for research , development , demonstration , and commercial application to ensure the long - term , secure , and sustainable supply of rare earth materials sufficient to satisfy the national security , economic well - being , and industrial production needs of the united states ( based on specific criteria ) .

the bill was referred to the committee on natural resources and to the committee on science , space , and technology .

h.r .

2090 , energy critical elements advancement act of 2011 h.r .

2090 was introduced by representative randy hultgren on june 2 , 2011 , and was referred to the subcommittee on energy and the environment .

the bill would require the secretaries of energy and interior to establish a research program to advance basic materials science , chemistry , physics , and engineering associated with energy critical elements .

h.r .

2011 , national strategic and critical minerals policy act of 2011 h.r .

2011 was introduced on may 26 , 2011 , by representative doug lamborn and referred to the house committee on natural resources , subcommittee on energy and mineral resources .

on july 20 , 2011 , the committee ordered the bill to be reported , as amended .

on october 14 , 2011 , the bill was amended by the committee on natural resources and placed on the union calendar .

the bill would require the secretary of the interior to ( 1 ) conduct an assessment of the united states' capability to meet current and future demands for the minerals critical to domestic manufacturing competitiveness , economic , and national security in a time of expanding resource nationalism ; ( 2 ) conduct an assessment of the current mineral potential of federal lands , and an evaluation of mineral requirements to meet current and emerging needs for economic and national security , and u.s. industrial manufacturing needs ( such an assessment would address the implications of any potential mineral shortages or supply disruptions , as well as the potential impact of u.s. dependence on foreign sources for any minerals ) ; and ( 3 ) conduct an inventory of rare earth elements and other minerals deemed critical based on the potential for supply disruptions , including an analysis of the supply chain for each mineral .

finally , the bill would set policy goals for federal agencies to coordinate responsibilities for: facilitating the availability , development , and production of domestic mineral resources to meet national needs ; promoting the development of economically sound and stable policies for domestic industries that promote mining , materials , and metals processing ; creating a mechanism for assessing the u.s. mineral demand , supply , and needs ; and minimizing duplication and delays in administering federal and state laws , regulations , and permit issuance and authorizations necessary to explore , develop , and produce minerals , and build and operate mineral - related facilities .

h.r .

2284 , responsible electronic recycling act h.r .

2284 was introduced by representative gene green on june 22 , 2011 , and on june 29 was referred to the subcommittee on energy and the environment .

this bill would include the establishment of a rare earth materials recycling initiative , designed to assist in and coordinate the development of research in the recycling of rare earth materials found in electronic devices .

h.r .

1875 , building our clean energy future now act of 2011 h.r .

1875 was introduced by representative david cicilline on may 12 , 2011 , and referred to the house committees on ways and means , transportation and infrastructure , energy and commerce , and science , space , and technology .

on may 26 , 2011 , the bill was referred to the subcommittee on energy and environment .

the bill seeks to lower gas prices by making investments in cleaner energy technologies and infrastructure .

h.r .

1388 , the rare earths supply chain technology and resources transformation act of 2011 .

h.r .

1388 was introduced by representative mike coffman on may 6 , 2011 , and referred to the house committee on science , space , and technology , subcommittee on energy and the environment , and the committees on natural resources and armed services .

the bill is also referred to as the restart act of 2011 .

the bill seeks to reestablish a competitive domestic rare earths supply chain within dod's defense logistics agency ( dla ) .

h.r .

1540 , the national defense authorization act for fy2012 h.r .

1540 was introduced by representative howard mckeon on april 14 , 2011 .

section 835 would require the dla administrator for strategic materials to develop an inventory of rare earth materials to support defense requirements , as identified by the report required by section 843 of the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fy2011 ( p.l .

111-383 ) .

also , amendment #87 to h.r .

1540 would require the secretary of defense to report back to congress on the feasibility and desirability of recycling , recovering , and reprocessing rare earth elements , including fluorescent lighting used in dod facilities .

h.r .

1540 ( h.rept .

112-78 ) passed the house , may 26 , 2011 .

on june 6 , 2011 , it was received in the senate and referred to the senate committee on armed services .

s. 734 , the advanced vehicle technology act of 2011 s. 734 was introduced by senator debbie stabenow on april 5 , 2011 , and referred to the committee on natural resources .

the proposed bill would create a basic and applied research program , within the department of energy ( doe ) , focused on the development and engineering of new vehicle technologies .

doe is to promote , among many other goals , the exploration of substitutes and recycling of potential critical materials , including rare earth elements and precious metals .

the senate committee on energy and natural resources held a hearing on may 19 , 2011 .

h.r .

1367 , the advanced vehicle technology act of 2011 h.r .

1367 was introduced by representative gary peters on april 5 , 2011 , and referred to the committee on science , space and technology .

on april 7 , 2011 , the bill was referred to the subcommittee on energy and environment .

s. 734 and h.r .

1367 are similar .

h.r .

1314 , the resource assessment of rare earths ( rare ) act of 2011 h.r .

1314 was introduced by representative henry johnson on april 1 , 2011 , and on april 6 was referred to the house natural resources committee , subcommittee on energy and mineral resources .

the bill would direct the secretary of the interior , through the director of the u.s. geological survey , to examine the need for future geological research on rare earth elements and other minerals and determine the criticality and impact of a potential supply restriction or vulnerability .

h.r .

952 , the energy critical elements renewal act of 2011 on march 8 , 2011 , representative brad miller introduced the energy critical elements renewal act of 2011 .

the bill was referred to the committee on science , space , and technology .

the bill would develop an energy critical elements program , amend the national materials and minerals policy research and development act of 1980 , establish a temporary program for rare earth material revitalization , and serve other purposes .

s. 383 , the critical minerals and materials promotion act of 2011 on february 17 , 2011 , senator mark udall introduced the critical minerals and materials promotion act of 2011 .

one june 9 , 2011 , the bill was referred to the committee on energy and natural resources , subcommittee on energy .

the bill was referred to the committee on energy and natural resources .

the bill would require the secretary of the interior to establish a scientific research and analysis program to assess current and future critical mineral and materials supply chains , strengthen the domestic critical minerals and materials supply chain for clean energy technologies , strengthen education and training in mineral and material science and engineering for critical minerals and materials production , and establish a domestic policy to promote an adequate and stable supply of critical minerals and materials necessary to maintain national security , economic well - being , and industrial production with appropriate attention to a long - term balance between resource production , energy use , a healthy environment , natural resources conservation , and social needs .

h.r .

618 , the rare earths and critical materials revitalization act of 2011 on february 10 , 2011 , representative leonard boswell introduced the rare earths and critical materials revitalization act of 2011 .

the bill was referred to the committee on science , space , and technology .

the bill seeks to develop a rare earth materials program and amend the national materials and minerals policy , research and development act of 1980 .

if enacted , it would provide for loan guarantees to revitalize domestic production of rare earths in the united states .

s. 1113 , the critical minerals policy act of 2011 on may 26 , 2011 , senator lisa murkowski introduced the critical minerals policy act of 2011 , which was referred to the committee on energy and natural resources .

on june 9 , 2011 , the subcommittee on energy held a hearing .

the bill generally defines what critical minerals are but would request that the secretary of the interior establish a methodology ( in consultation with others ) that would identify which minerals qualify as critical .

the secretary of the interior would direct a comprehensive resource assessment of critical mineral potential in the united states , including details on the critical mineral potential on federal lands .

s. 1113 would establish a critical minerals working group to examine the permitting process for mineral development in the united states and facilitate a more efficient process , specifically , a draft performance metric for permitting mineral development and report on the timeline of each phase of the process .

the doi would produce an annual critical minerals outlook report that would provide forecasts of domestic supply , demand , and price for up to 10 years .

doe would lead research and development on critical minerals and workforce development that would support a fully integrated supply chain in the united states .

title ii of the bill recommends mineral - specific action ( led by doe ) for cobalt , helium , lead , lithium , low - btu gas , phosphate , potash rare earth elements , and thorium .

title iii would , among other things , authorize for appropriation $106 million .

legislation introduced in the 111 th congress in the 111 th congress , two bills were enacted that contain provisions affecting rare earth policy .

the first was p.l .

111-84 ( h.r .

2647 ) , the national defense authorization act for fy2010 .

section 843 of p.l .

111-84 required gao to examine rare earths in the defense supply chain , and it also required the secretary of defense to assess the defense supply chain and develop a plan to address any shortfalls or other supply chain vulnerabilities .

the second bill was p.l .

111-383 , the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fy2011 , which contains a provision ( section 843 ) that requires the secretary of defense to undertake an assessment of the supply chain for rare earth materials and determine which , if any , rare earths are strategic or critical to national security and to develop a plan to address any supply chain vulnerabilities .

other legislative provisions are listed below .

h.r .

4866 , the rare earths supply - chain technology and resources transformation act of 2010 on march 17 , 2010 , representative mike coffman introduced the rare earths supply - chain technology and resources transformation act of 2010 ( restart ) .

the bill was referred to three committees: the house armed services committee , the house ways and means subcommittee on trade , and the house financial services committee .

the bill sought to create a new interagency initiative on rare earth supply chain issues .

h.r .

4866 would have established a federal government - wide interagency working group , at the assistant secretary level , from the departments of commerce , defense , energy , the interior , and state , with participants from the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) and white house office of science and technology policy .

the working group would have assessed the rare earth supply chain to determine which rare earths were critical to national and economic security .

based on a critical designation , rare earth elements would have been stockpiled by the defense logistics agency ( dla ) as part of the national defense stockpile .

the dla would have made , if necessary , a commitment to purchase rare earth raw materials for processing and refining , including purchases from china .

stockpiling would have been terminated when the working group agencies determined that rare earths were no longer critical to u.s. national security or economic well - being .

h.r .

6160 , the rare earths and critical materials revitalization act of 2010 on september 22 , 2010 , representative kathleen dahlkemper introduced the rare earths and critical materials revitalization act of 2010 .

the bill sought to develop a rare earth materials program and amend the national materials and minerals policy , research and development act of 1980 .

if enacted , the bill would have provided for loan guarantees to revitalize domestic production of rare earths in the united states .

the bill was passed by the house on september 29 , 2010 , and forwarded to the senate committee on energy and natural resources .

s. 3521 , the rare earth supply technology and resources transformation act of 2010 s. 3521 was introduced by senator lisa murkowski on june 22 , 2010 .

congress held a hearing on the bill before the senate committee on energy and natural resources , subcommittee on energy , on september 30 , 2010 .

the text of the bill offered a "sense of the congress" statement that ( 1 ) the united states faces a shortage of key rare earth materials that form the backbone of both the defense and energy supply chains ; ( 2 ) the urgent need to reestablish a domestic rare earth supply chain warrants a statutory prioritization of projects to support such reestablishment ; ( 3 ) there is a pressing need to support innovation , training , and workforce development in the domestic rare earth supply chain ; and ( 4 ) the departments of energy , of the interior , of commerce , and of defense should each provide funds to academic institutions , federal laboratories , and private entities for innovation , training , and workforce development in the domestic rare earth supply chain .

s. 4031 , the rare earths supply - chain technology and resources transformation act of 2010 s. 4031 was introduced by then - senator evan bayh on december 15 , 2010 , and referred to the senate committee on energy and natural resources .

the bill would have promoted exploration and development of a domestic supply of rare earths , and reestablished a u.s. competitive rare earth supply chain for rare earths in the united states and in the countries of foreign allies .

