non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) have been active in north korea since the 1990s .

their work has raised debates about what role ngos should play in countries ruled by repressive regimes like north korea's .

ngos and other providers of aid face an ethical dilemma in such countries: how does one provide assistance to a population without inadvertently supplying aid to groups such as the north korean military or others who will try to profit from it ? .

in the north korean case , ngos have been viewed by many as providing aid , technical advice , and resources at little or no cost to a despotic regime .

many ngos as well as other relief and development providers believe that aid should go to those in the greatest need and should be non - political .

at the same time , the ngos insisted on transparent delivery of aid .

north korean officials have failed to comply with requirements for transparency and have diverted significant amounts of humanitarian aid .

on the other hand , there is evidence that several ngos have had successes , albeit limited , in a wide range of activities , from providing food aid to sponsoring informal diplomacy .

by the late 1990s , several ngos had set up programs geared toward enhancing capacity and boosting agricultural production in north korea .

relief agencies offered projects that ranged from alternative types of farming including wider use of greenhouses and hydroponics , hospital renovations , mobile diagnostic clinics , water and sanitation projects , to disaster management training .

in food assistance programs , according to several sources , in spite of initial north korean efforts to hamper ngos by limiting movements by their staff and refusing to allow korean speakers to accompany them , over time some ngos have obtained as good or better access and monitoring than much larger international organizations .

many ngos felt this gave them some assurance that aid was reaching the right recipients .

congress may wish to consider the role of ngos in north korea as part of its oversight of the u.s. - north korean relationship , and also because of their potential role in delivering humanitarian assistance .

recently , the obama administration has been considering whether to restart an earlier aid program begun under the bush administration in 2008 .

the south korean and u.s. governments have received several requests from north korea for large - scale food aid since late 2010 .

in february 2011 , the spokesperson for the department of state stated that future food aid would depend on a needs assessment , and whether the u.s. government could ensure that the program would be effectively managed to ensure that no aid would be diverted from its targets .

in march , the u.s. special envoy for north korea policy , ambassador stephen bosworth , also noted that the united states would "provide food aid when we see a perceived need and in a situation in which we can monitor. .

it is possible that the administration could use ngos for aid delivery , as the bush administration did from 2008 to 2009 .

some have argued that through the implementation of their work ngos may have promoted at least some degree of transparency and a measure of accountability for the aid recipients .

it is , however , difficult to assess such effects , given north korea's isolation .

as of 2010 , a few ngos have remained active in north korea , most from european aid agencies .

other active but non - resident ngos include the mennonite central committee ( canada ) , first steps ( canada ) , the eugene bell foundation ( united states / south korea ) , christian friends of korea ( united states ) , the canadian food grains bank , and the hanns seidel and the friedrich naumann foundations ( germany ) .

several european ngos can expect consular protection from embassies based in pyongyang , except for canada , france , and ireland which have embassies in seoul .

u.s. ngos rely on the swedish embassy in pyongyang .

south korea has cut off nearly all bilateral food and fertilizer aid and curbed south korean ngo contacts with north korea since the election of president lee myung - bak in december 2007 .

the south korean government imposed especially tight restrictions after sinking of the south korean naval corvette cheonan in march 2010 and north korea's shelling of a south korean island in november 2010 .

both incidents resulted in the loss of south korean lives .

many south korean ngos criticized the lee government's restrictions .

several ngos , among them the korean sharing movement and good friends , asked the government to allow them send food to north korea .

these offers were rejected .

in 2010 , the south korean and u.s. governments made small donations of aid , some of which ngos distributed .

in january 2010 , south korea donated 10,000 tons of food through the south korean red cross .

in march 2010 , south korea sent 20 tons of milk powder .

in september 2010 , u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) made $600,000 available to fund flood assistance via samaritan's purse , global resource services and mercy corps .

ngos have offered programs oriented to build capacity in agriculture and health , sponsoring projects on water and sanitation , seed improvement , animal husbandry , and land management .

other ngos have promoted programs for study abroad , and courses in english language , banking , and trade .

specific examples include founding a digital library at a north korean university ; establishing of a u.s. - dprk scientific engagement consortium ; creating a privately run foreign university in pyongyang , sponsoring exchange programs on economics , urban development , and technology ; and establishing a reference laboratory for the diagnosis and treatment of multidrug resistant tuberculosis .

one of the fundamental problems in dealing with the north korean regime is its deep isolation , which makes traditional diplomatic exchanges difficult .

some ngos have sought to organize track ii exchanges — that is , sponsoring informal communications between north korean scientists , academics , military officers and private citizens , and their counterparts in the united states or overseas .

the creation of the u.s. - north korean tb project , the kim chaek - syracuse digital library project and the u.s. - dprk scientific engagement consortium owe much to track ii diplomacy .

other ngos seek to address political issues of the korean peninsula directly .

some ngos that have sponsored track ii exchanges include the korea society , stanford university , syracuse university , the national committee for american foreign policy , the university of california ( the northeast asia cooperation dialogue ( neacd ) ) , and the asia society .

track ii dialogues often rely on the participation and reputation of retired diplomats or government officials .

for example , the korea society , the national committee on american foreign policy , and the asia society played roles in engaging north korean diplomats during moments when the six - party talks appeared to be deadlocked .

the center for international security and cooperation at stanford university and the university of california's northeast asia conflict dialogue ( neacd ) have also held meetings with officials participating in six - party talks .

north korean diplomats last attended a neacd session in 2009 .

diplomats from both the north korean permanent mission to the united nations and the ministry of foreign affairs in pyongyang , rather than academics or scientists , have attended .

by virtue of their experience as either past negotiators with north korea or their expertise , some u.s. representatives have also opened doors for diplomacy , for example former president jimmy carter , former new mexico governor bill richardson , and retired director of los alamos national laboratory dr. siegfried hecker .

some observers oppose public exchanges that involve prominent figures , because the north korean regime frequently uses such events for its own propaganda purposes .

others believe they are relatively "low - cost" tools of diplomacy , in which the north korean regime sometimes is encouraged to make concessions in exchange for the opportunity to publicize a visit .

within the last decade , south korean activists and north koreans who successfully defected to south korea have developed independent radio broadcast organizations .

some of these organizations have managed to smuggle cell phones to north korean citizens as a means to gain information .

ngos have received some funding from the national endowment for democracy , as well as the u.s. department of state .

south korean and north korean defectors have been broadcasting via short - and medium - wave radio since 2004 .

the broadcasts include news briefs , particularly about the korean peninsula , interviews with north korean defectors , and international commentary on events occurring in north korea .

defectors interviewed in south korea confirmed that they were able to listen to these broadcasts after doctoring radios that are locked onto official frequencies by north korean authorities .

the u.s. broadcasting board of governors cited a recent survey in which defectors interviewed in china and south korea indicated that they had listened to foreign media .

one representative of radio free chosun suggested that the transmissions offered hope , saying: "radios must let north korean people know that , if personal farming , market[s] are legalized , [the] economy opened and cooperation with south korea , china , and the united states start , the north korean economy can revive , and their hunger can end. .

crs report r40095 , foreign assistance to north korea , by [author name scrubbed] and mary beth nikitin crs report r41259 , north korea: u.s. relations , nuclear diplomacy , and internal situation , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report rs22973 , congress and u.s. policy on north korean human rights and refugees: recent legislation and implementation , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41438 , north korea: legislative basis for u.s. economic sanctions , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41481 , u.s. - south korea relations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41363 , the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis , and malaria: u.s .

contributions and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed .

