chapter 9 of the u.s. bankruptcy code provides a legal mechanism through which municipalities may be protected from their creditors as they attempt to develop and negotiate a plan to adjust their debts .

although chapter 9 was enacted as part of the bankruptcy code pursuant to congress's power under article i , § 8 , clause 4 , municipal bankruptcies are different from the bankruptcies of individuals and businesses .

there is no provision for liquidation of a municipality's assets to satisfy creditors , there is no "bankruptcy estate," and the bankruptcy court has limited authority over the conduct of the municipality during the pendency of the case .

furthermore , creditors do not have the ability to file a petition for the municipality — an "involuntary case. .

many of these limitations are in the code to preserve the states' autonomy under the tenth amendment to the u.s. constitution .

the recent recession has caused fiscal distress for states and municipalities as well as for individuals and businesses .

in 2009 , there were more filings by municipalities under chapter 9 of the bankruptcy code than in 2007 and 2008 combined .

despite this seemingly dramatic increase in chapter 9 filings , chapter 9 is , and has been , a relatively seldom used provision of the bankruptcy code , generally averaging fewer than 10 filings per year .

many of those filings have been by small government agencies such as municipal utilities , school districts , or single - purpose entities ( eg , a hospital or convention center ) .

reports of significantly decreased revenues and increased expenses in both cities and states as well as predictions of a significant number of municipal bond defaults in the coming years have sparked interest in municipal bankruptcy , as well as calls for allowing states to use the bankruptcy code as a means of adjusting their own debts .

under the current bankruptcy code , there is no provision that would allow states to file for bankruptcy protection ; however , less than 100 years ago , municipalities were not eligible to file for bankruptcy protection .

a brief legislative history is provided in the appendix .

only municipalities may file under chapter 9 of the bankruptcy code , and it is the only chapter under which a municipality may file even if that municipality is incorporated .

not all municipalities can file .

a municipality must be specifically authorized by its state to file under chapter 9 .

the municipality must be insolvent and must be willing to negotiate a plan to adjust its debts .

it generally must also show that it has negotiated in good faith with its creditors .

challenges to an entity's eligibility to file under chapter 9 are a prime area for litigation by creditors following a chapter 9 filing .

the municipality carries the burden of proving that it is eligible to file under chapter 9 .

if it is not , then the case will be dismissed .

litigation of challenges to chapter 9 eligibility can be a time - consuming process .

most people , hearing the term "municipality," probably think of cities and towns .

however , under the bankruptcy code , the term encompasses a broader variety of entities .

section 101 ( 40 ) of the bankruptcy code states that the term "means political subdivision or public agency or instrumentality of a state. .

thus , although states are not included in the definition , counties are , since counties , like cities , towns , villages , etc. , are political subdivisions of a state .

public agencies or instrumentalities of a state include such entities as school districts , water districts , and highway authorities .

since 1994 , municipalities have only been eligible to file under chapter 9 if they were specifically authorized to do so by their states .

not all states authorize their municipalities to file under chapter 9 .

georgia law explicitly prohibits the state's municipalities from filing .

iowa restricts chapter 9 authorization to those municipalities that become insolvent as a result of an involuntarily incurred debt .

in 14 states , municipalities must get approval from a state authority before filing a chapter 9 petition .

twenty - three states have no law addressing authorization to file under chapter 9 ; therefore , unless a specific law were passed by the state explicitly authorizing their filing , municipalities in those states would be unable seek protection under chapter 9 .

simply being a municipality that is authorized by its state to file under chapter 9 is not sufficient for being an eligible chapter 9 debtor .

the municipality must also be insolvent .

insolvency in a municipal bankruptcy is determined on a cash flow basis rather than being defined as the condition where liabilities exceed assets ; section 101 ( 32 ) ( c ) defines "insolvent" as the financial condition of either generally not paying undisputed debts as they become due or the inability to pay debts as they become due .

however , fiscal distress is not sufficient if the municipality has the means of either increasing revenue or reducing costs .

to be eligible for chapter 9 protection , an insolvent municipality must be filing for such protection in good faith .

although a municipality is no longer required to submit a plan of adjustment with its bankruptcy petition , it must evidence a desire to implement a plan of adjustment rather than filing under chapter 9 in an attempt to either evade or delay payments to its creditors .

unless it has reason to believe that a creditor may attempt to get an avoidable transfer , the municipality generally must show that it has negotiated with its creditors in good faith or that it is impractical to do so prior to filing the petition .

as stated before , municipalities rarely file for bankruptcy protection .

although new york city experienced significant financial difficulty in 1975 , it did not file for bankruptcy .

instead , the state created a financial watchdog: the new york city emergency financial control board , which held veto power over the city's budget until 1986 .

in 1991 , the city of bridgeport , ct , filed under chapter 9 , but its case was dismissed after its eligibility to file was challenged by creditors .

the court found that state law authorized the city to file , but found that it was not insolvent .

in recent years , there have been two notable chapter 9 filings: orange county , ca ; and the city of vallejo , ca .

on march 1 , 2011 , boise county , id , filed a chapter 9 petition .

reportedly the impetus for the filing was a judgment against the county for $4 million .

the annual budget for the county , which does not include the city of boise , is less than $9.5 million .

the judgment came as the result of a suit by alamar ranch , llc , which asserted that its efforts to obtain a conditional use permit had been improperly blocked .

taxpayers in the county had opposed the proposed development — a residential treatment facility for 72 boys .

ultimately , the county was found to have violated the fair housing act .

after the judgment , the county attempted to negotiate a lower amount that it could afford , but was unsuccessful .

harrisburg considered filing under chapter 9 , but ultimately its mayor , who opposed bankruptcy , chose to pursue a state - offered program for distressed cities .

december 15 , 2010 , harrisburg , pa , was accepted into the state's "distressed cities" program , also known as act 47 .

the program was started in 1987 .

harrisburg is the 20 th municipality in the program .

many have remained in the program for more than a decade .

the city qualified for the program after missing $10.5 million in payments for bonds related to an incinerator project .

it also had a junk - bond credit rating and lawsuits to force it to postpone paying operating expenses ( including payroll ) in favor of meeting debt obligations as well as a more than $19 million projected deficit in 2015 .

some believe that chapter 9 would be a better alternative for the city than the state program and are considering appealing the state's decision to admit the city into its program .

jefferson county , al , is the most populous county in alabama .

most of the city of birmingham is within its boundaries .

it has been experiencing financial difficulties for several years .

while there has been speculation about its filing for bankruptcy , it has not done so .

if it does , it is believed that it would be the largest municipal bankruptcy in history .

jefferson county's financial troubles are due in part to the recession , but also due to a $3.2 billion debt load attributable to sewer bonds with a floating interest rate and a downgrading of those bonds to junk status in 2008 by both moody's investors service and standard and poor's due to the projected inability of the county to meet interest payments on the debt .

most recently , the county has lost a source of revenue after the alabama supreme court found the county's occupational tax unconstitutional for lack of sufficient notice .

in 1934 , legislation was enacted as "emergency temporary aid" for insolvent municipalities whose revenues had dropped during the great depression .

the provisions were modified slightly by legislation enacted in april 1936 and were extended to january 1 , 1940 .

two years and one day after the original legislation was enacted , the u.s. supreme court , in a 5 to 4 opinion , found it to be unconstitutional .

the next year , 1937 , new legislation was enacted that established a new chapter of the bankruptcy code .

the legislation expanded the definition of "municipality," but continued to require the entity to have the power to tax .

the constitutionality of the new law was challenged , but the u.s. supreme court found the provisions to be constitutional , noting that a federal provision for municipal bankruptcy was needed because adequate relief could not be provided by the states due to the constitutional prohibition on enacting any law that would impair contracts .

this legislation was also enacted as a temporary provision and was due to expire on june 30 , 1940 .

it was extended for two years in 1940 and for four more years in 1942 .

in 1946 , the provisions were amended and made permanent .

among the changes made in 1946 was the removal of "taxing" as an adjective in the lengthy definition of "municipality. .

this change allowed the definition of "municipality" to include public agencies that were authorized to either construct or acquire revenue - producing utilities and that issued bonds to finance those public improvements — revenue bonds , whose source of repayment was revenue from the utility that had been constructed or acquired .

in the wake of new york city's 1975 financial crisis , the provisions for municipal bankruptcy were again revised .

the existing provisions were believed to contain procedural obstacles that made them inadequate for the reorganization of a major municipality .

in 1976 , chapter ix of the bankruptcy act of 1898 ( as amended ) was amended to revise sections 81 through 83 and add sections 84 through 98 .

the revisions eliminated the need to have a plan of adjustment approved by the majority of creditors before the petition could be filed .

filing of the petition then triggered the automatic stay , providing protection from litigation of creditors' claims against the debtor .

the revisions also extended to municipal debtors some provisions available to other debtors and allowed them to reject executory contracts with the approval of the court .

two years later , when congress enacted the bankruptcy reform act of 1978 , establishing the current bankruptcy code , the 1976 revisions were incorporated into chapter 9 .

since 1978 , congress has amended chapter 9 several times .

in 1988 , congress passed amendments generally concerned with the definition of municipal "insolvency" ; the rights of creditors as general obligation bondholders and special revenue bondholders ; and the status of municipal financing leases .

section 109 ( c ) ( 2 ) of the bankruptcy code was amended in 1994 to require that municipalities be "specifically authorized" by state law to be a debtor under chapter 9 .

previously , the authorization under state law needed only to be general .

the primary way in which the bankruptcy prevention and consumer protection act of 2005 changed chapter 9 directly was by amending § 901 to make applicable in chapter 9 several additional sections from chapter 5 of the bankruptcy code , most of which involved exceptions to the automatic stay .

an additional subsection from chapter 11 was also added to the sections of chapter 11 that are applicable in chapter 9 .

