thermoelectric generating plants and many manufacturing facilities withdraw large volumes of water for use in production and , especially , to absorb waste heat from their industrial processes .

water withdrawals by electric generating plants , used primarily for cooling , are the largest category by sector in the united states — 201 billion gallons per day ( bgd ) — while water withdrawals by industrial facilities , used both for production and cooling , are 18 bgd .

together , water withdrawals by manufacturers and electricity generators represent more than one - half of the 410 billion gallons of water withdrawn daily for various uses in the united states .

withdrawing water from streams , rivers , lakes , and coastal waters is a necessity for most electricity generating and manufacturing facilities , but facilities that require water for cooling also present special problems for aquatic resources .

for example , the direct release of heated water after circulation through a power plant or manufacturing facility can harm aquatic life in a stream or lake .

and the process of drawing surface water into the plant or facility can simultaneously pull fish , shellfish , and tiny organisms into the plant , generally killing them .

in recognition of such impacts , congress included section 316 in the 1972 federal water pollution control act ( the law is commonly known as the clean water act , or cwa ) specifically to address the potential problems of heat discharges and cooling water intake structures .

cooling water intake structures ( cwis ) can cause two types of adverse environmental impacts .

first , impingement occurs when fish , invertebrates , and other aquatic life are trapped on equipment such as screens at the entrance to the cwis .

the force of the intake water traps the organisms against the screen , and they are unable to escape .

second , entrainment occurs when small aquatic organisms , eggs , and larvae pass through the intake screening system and are drawn into the cooling mechanism , travel through the cooling system pumps and tubes , and then are discharged back into the source water .

impingement and entrainment injure or kill large numbers of aquatic organisms at all life stages .

in turn , reducing impingement and entrainment mortality rates is likely to increase the number of fish , shellfish , and other aquatic organisms in affected waters .

effects of these manmade stressors on local biota may contribute to or compound the local impact of cwis impingement and entrainment mortality .

cwa section 316 ( b ) authorizes regulation of cwis in order to protect such organisms from being harmed or killed .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has been engaged in regulatory efforts to implement section 316 ( b ) for more than 35 years .

in march 2011 , epa proposed national requirements to be implemented through cwa discharge permits to minimize adverse environmental impact of cooling water intake structures at existing electricity generating and manufacturing facilities .

even before release , the proposed regulations were highly controversial among stakeholders and some members of congress .

the issue for congress has been whether a stringent and costly environmental mandate could jeopardize reliability of electricity supply in the united states .

many industry stakeholders feared , while environmental groups hoped , that epa would require installation of technology called closed - cycle cooling that most effectively minimizes impingement and entrainment , but also would be the most costly technology option .

however , as discussed in this report , the epa proposal declined to mandate closed - cycle cooling universally and instead proposed a less costly , more flexible regulatory option .

epa's recommended option would require uniform impingement mortality standards at all affected facilities and case - by - case determination of entrainment controls for all facilities .

based on its review of public comments and additional data , in june 2012 , the agency announced that it was considering certain changes to the impingement standards in the proposed rule ( see " impingement " below ) .

under the original court - ordered schedule , epa was to issue a final rule on july 27 , 2012 .

epa did not meet that deadline , which was extended six times before epa announced the final rule on may 19 , 2014 .

delays reportedly resulted from time needed to assess possible changes to the proposal and consultation with federal wildlife services for an endangered species act ( esa ) review of the rule .

in the remainder of this report , provisions of the final rule are highlighted in text boxes that are titled "final rule. .

the primary goal of the cwa is "to restore and maintain the chemical , physical , and biological integrity of the nation's waters. .

to further this goal , the act prohibits the "discharge of any pollutant by any person" unless a statutory exception applies ; the primary exception is procurement of a cwa permit .

under the law , epa or an authorized state agency can issue a permit for the discharge of any pollutant provided that the discharge complies with the conditions of the cwa .

the act requires technology - based solutions to minimize adverse environmental impacts of pollutant discharges , and sections 301 and 306 require epa to develop technology - based effluent limitation guidelines for existing sources and performance standards for new sources , respectively , that are used as the basis for restrictions specified in discharge permits .

section 316 , the provision concerned with thermal discharges and cooling water intake structures , cross - references both sections 301 and 306 .

section 316 ( b ) provides in full — any standard established pursuant to section 301 or section 306 of this act and applicable to a point source shall require that the location , design , construction , and capacity of cooling water intake structures reflect the best technology available for minimizing adverse environmental impact .

epa's efforts to implement section 316 ( b ) have a long and complicated history , including legal challenges at every step by industry groups and environmental advocates ( for details , see the appendix ) .

in summary , however , cwis regulation involves three rulemaking phases .

these regulatory requirements are applied to individual facilities through discharge permits issued by epa or an authorized state agency .

phase i , issued in 2001 , covers cwis at new facilities , phase ii , issued in 2004 , covers large existing electric generating plants , and phase iii , issued in 2006 , covers certain existing facilities ( manufacturing facilities and small electric generating plants ) and new offshore and coastal oil and gas extraction facilities .

epa's march 2011 proposal stemmed from legal challenges to the phase ii rule ( including a supreme court ruling in 2009 ) and the phase iii rule .

eventually , epa determined that the most efficient regulatory approach would be to consolidate the regulations for existing facilities in a single proposal .

in november 2010 , epa signed a settlement agreement with environmental group plaintiffs regarding rulemaking dates for establishing cwis technology - based standards for existing facilities .

epa agreed to propose standards by march 14 , 2011 , and to take final action by july 27 , 2012 .

epa proposed the regulations on march 28 , 2011 .

as noted above , epa and environmental litigants agreed to several extensions of the initial deadline for a final rule , which epa announced on may 19 , 2014 .

it was published in the federal register on august 15 , 2014 , with an effective date of october 14 , 2014 .

congressional interest in epa's cwis proposal has been evident within the broad context of legislators' concerns over potential impacts , individually and cumulatively , of epa regulatory proposals involving air quality , climate change , and water quality on electric generating facilities and other sectors of the economy .

several recent legislative proposals have sought to restrict or prohibit epa's and other agencies' regulatory authority in a number of areas , such as requiring more frequent and detailed regulatory analyses and consideration of regulatory alternatives .

some suggest that upcoming epa rules should be more attentive to costs , for consistency with president obama's executive order 13563 , which provides for a retrospective review of existing significant regulations by agencies "to quantify anticipated present and future benefits and costs as accurately as possible. .

in december 2010 , representative fred upton , chairman of the house energy and commerce committee , wrote to then - epa administrator lisa jackson about the possible direction of epa's cwis proposal , since potential retrofit costs , if epa were to mandate cooling towers everywhere , could be substantial , he said .

he asked the administrator to take all necessary time to "produce a well - reasoned , well - supported proposal" and to allow generous time for the public to comment on the proposal .

in response , the administrator said that the proposal , when released , would be intended to reasonably accommodate site - specific circumstances while minimizing adverse environmental impacts , and would not be a "one - size - fits - all federal mandate. .

she wrote to chairman upton , "i do not want epa to spend another five years litigating over cooling water intake structures. .

viewed exclusively on a strict cost / benefit basis , none of the options in epa's 2011 cwis proposal would be justified .

under all of the options that epa considered in its proposal , and under the final rule announced on may 19 , 2014 , estimated costs greatly exceed estimated economic benefits , even when allowing for conservative estimation of benefits .

the differences are based on a comparison of a partial measure of benefits , due to data and other limitations , with a more complete measure of costs ; therefore , epa believes that the results must be interpreted cautiously .

however , epa determined that costs do not outweigh total benefits when both monetized and nonmonetized benefits are considered .

overall , epa believes that the benefits of the final rule justify its costs , taking into account quantified and qualitative benefits and costs .

the cwa does not require that the benefits of regulation exceed or even equal the costs .

moreover , the supreme court , in its ruling on the use of cost / benefit analysis in the development of 316 ( b ) regulations , said that epa has the discretion to consider costs , but is not required to do so .

in the 2011 proposal , the agency clearly did consider costs , preferring a flexible , less costly regulatory option than a more costly one that would provide greater reduction in i&e mortality ( and greater economic benefits of reducing i&e mortality ) .

even so , critics argued that the costs of the rule were underestimated and were wholly disproportionate to its benefits .

the final rule , with its additional flexibility regarding impingement mitigation and other requirements , reflects still more modification in response to concerns by regulated industries about compliance costs and technology options .

for example , after commenters questioned the costs and feasibility of monitoring provisions in the 2011 proposal , epa made a number of changes in the final rule to significantly reduce those requirements .

stakeholder groups differed in their evaluation of the proposed rule .

environmental advocates supported the uniform requirements of the proposed impingement standards , but criticized epa for not requiring uniformity in the entrainment portion of the rule in order to protect aquatic resources and provide for timely permitting .

industry groups were pleased that epa did not propose closed - cycle cooling for all existing facilities — as many in industry had feared — so they focused their critiques on the impingement standards and urged epa to revise the rule to provide greater flexibility that would be more cost - effective .

states were somewhat divided in their responses , with many favoring more flexibility in the rule to lessen the administrative burden on permitting authorities , but some advocating a more prescriptive approach regarding entrainment , rather than one calling for site - specific determinations , as in epa's preferred option in 2011 .

stakeholder groups again differ in evaluating the final rule , but their views diverge from those on the 2011 proposal .

environmental groups , who had advocated that epa include stringent closed - cycle cooling as a uniform requirement representing bta , said that they were extremely disappointed with the final rule and likely would challenge it in federal court .

they contend that the rule is substantially weaker than the phase iii rule that epa promulgated in 2006 , which a federal court remanded to the agency for revision in 2007 .

on the other hand , representatives of the electric power industry indicated their overall approval: "based upon our initial review of the rule , we are pleased that epa has avoided imposing a categorical one - size - fits - all approach to compliance ; has embraced significant elements of flexibility ; and has acknowledged the importance of weighing costs with environmental protection. .

the statement also observed that implementation of the rule presents operational and compliance challenges that will depend in part on how much flexibility will be provided by permitting authorities .

some state agencies and environmental groups are concerned that the site - specific entrainment determinations in the final rule will create additional administrative burdens on already extended permitting authorities .

for example , the rule would require permitting authorities to consider such factors as land availability , remaining useful plant life , and social costs and benefits , and it allows consideration of additional factors such as water consumption , thermal impacts , and local energy reliability .

while flexibility is widely desired and supported , providing flexibility can result in increased decisionmaking time and resources needed by permitting authorities to deliver on a flexible regulatory process .

epa agrees that site - specific entrainment has potential to create additional burdens for states and responded in the final rule by trying to limit the information collection requirements compared with the proposed rule .

it is also likely that evaluating the multiple compliance alternatives provided in the final rule for impingement control — even though several involve "pre - approved technologies" — will similarly increase administrative burdens on permitting authorities .

following publication of the final rule in the federal register on august 15 , environmental groups filed legal challenges in three u.s. courts of appeals ( 1 st , 2 nd , and 9 th circuits ) , seeking review of whether the final rule complies with the cwa .

the american petroleum institute also filed a legal challenge ( 7 th circuit ) , as did the electric power industry ( 5 th circuit ) , despite their initial generally positive statements about the flexibility of the final rule .

other lawsuits by industry groups or states could be filed , as well .

the judicial panel on multi - district litigation will decide whether to consolidate the cases and , if so , to which court to transfer the cases .

since release of the final rule , some members of congress argue that the rule's costs threaten the affordability and reliability of electricity .

senator jim inhofe characterized the final rule as "degrading the backbone of the electric power grid" and pledged to bring the rule to an up - or - down vote under procedures in the congressional review act .

whatever the outcome of possible congressional consideration of the final rule , the fact that it has now been challenged in federal court means that the already long and complicated history of federal efforts to regulate cooling water intake structures is likely to be unresolved for months or longer , yet again .

efforts to regulate cooling water intake structures have a lengthy regulatory and judicial history , spanning several decades , since congress enacted cwa section 316 ( b ) in 1972 .

epa first promulgated a rule to implement the provision in 1976 .

that regulation was challenged by utility companies , and in 1977 a federal court determined that the agency had failed to adhere to the procedural requirements of the administrative procedure act , thus invalidating the rule without reaching the merits of the regulations themselves .

epa withdrew the remanded portions of the rule , but left intact those unremanded portions that required each permitting authority to use its best professional judgment to determine the best technology available for regulating cooling water intake structures .

the agency published draft guidance for use in implementing 316 ( b ) 's requirements through case - by - case , site - specific permit decisions .

this draft guidance did not establish national standards based on the best technology available for minimizing adverse environmental impact of cooling water intake structures .

rather , it left decisions on the appropriate location , design , capacity , and construction of each facility to the appropriate permitting authority ( epa or a state ) .

this regulatory regime remained in effect but was challenged in 1993 by a coalition of individuals and environmental groups that sued epa for failing to promulgate regulations under 316 ( b ) .

in 1995 , epa entered into a consent decree which , as subsequently amended , set a multiphase timetable for regulations , first for new facilities and later for existing facilities .

phase i in the first phase , in december 2001 , epa promulgated a rule governing certain new , large cooling water intake structures .

this rule , called phase i , apply to new facilities with water - intake flow greater than 2 million gallons per day ( mgd ) , at least 25% of which is used for cooling .

new facilities with smaller water - intake systems are regulated by permitting authorities on a site - by - site basis , not by epa standards .

for the largest new facilities , those with water - intake flow greater than 10 mgd , the phase i rule require that their inflow be restricted to a level commensurate with what can be attained by a closed - cycle cooling water system .

in addition , new facilities with water - intake flow between 2 mgd and 10 mgd may alternatively comply by reducing the volume and velocity of water removal to certain levels , and all new facilities may alternatively comply by demonstrating that the technologies employed will reduce adverse environmental impacts to a level comparable to a closed - cycle cooling system .

this rule was challenged but were largely upheld in 2004 .

however , the court invalidated a provision of the rule that would have allowed facilities to use "restoration measures" or other mitigation such as restocking with fish bred in a hatchery , reclamation ( for example , improving the habitat surrounding the intake structure ) , and migration barrier removal , as part of demonstrating that alternative technologies are comparable to closed - cycle systems .

"restoration measures correct for the adverse environmental impacts of impingement and entrainment , they do not minimize those impacts in the first place," the court said .

phase ii next , in july 2004 epa promulgated the phase ii rule .

it applied to existing facilities whose primary activity is the generation and transmission ( or sale for transmission ) of electricity , and whose water - intake flow is more than 50 mgd , at least 25% of which is used for cooling purposes .

over 500 facilities , accounting for approximately 53% of the nation's electric - power generating capacity , were covered by the phase ii rule .

the phase ii rule identified five compliance alternatives to meet the performance standard .

epa expressly declined to mandate adoption of closed - cycle cooling systems or equivalent reductions in impingement and entrainment , as it had required for new facilities under the phase i rule .

as justification , epa cited the generally high costs of converting existing facilities to closed - cycle operations and the availability of other technologies approaching closed - cycle performance .

instead , the rule required phase ii facilities to reduce impingement and entrainment by specified ranges ( eg , 80% to 95% ) from baseline , and the rule allowed issuance of site - specific variances from the national performance standards if a facility could demonstrate either that the costs of compliance would be significantly greater than costs considered by epa in setting the standards , or would be significantly greater than the benefits of complying with the applicable performance standards .

the phase ii rule allowed use of restoration measures to demonstrate compliance with the standards — even though a similar provision in the phase i rule had been invalidated by a federal court .

multiple parties challenged the phase ii rule .

in 2007 , the u.s. second circuit court of appeals — in an opinion authored by then - circuit court judge sonia sotomayor — ruled the cost - benefit variance provision of the regulations to be unlawful .

the court held that , while cost could be considered to determine benchmark technology or to engage in cost - effectiveness analysis , section 316 ( b ) does not permit the use of cost - benefit analysis .

the court also found that epa had exceeded its authority by permitting existing plants to meet national performance standards by using restoration measures .

utility companies appealed this ruling to the supreme court , and the court agreed to review the single question of whether section 316 ( b ) authorizes use of cost - benefit analysis in determining best technology available for cooling water intake structures .

the court's ruling , in 2009 , held that it is permissible to apply a cost - benefit analysis in determining the best technology available to minimize adverse environmental impacts and in providing for cost - benefit variances from those standards as part of the phase ii rule .

the court held that epa has the discretion to consider costs and benefits under 316 ( b ) but is not required to do so .

in september 2009 , the second circuit granted the government's request to remand the phase ii rule for further review in light of the supreme court's ruling .

phase iii concurrent with the judicial consideration of the phase ii rule , in june 2006 epa promulgated the final required 316 ( b ) rule .

the phase iii rule applied to existing power plants whose water - intake flow is between 2 mgd and 50 mgd and existing industrial facilities ( including paper , chemical , petroleum , aluminum , and steel manufacturers ) whose water - intake flow is greater than 2 mgd .

for these existing facilities , epa determined that uniform national performance standards would not be the most effective way to address cooling water intake structures , so the phase iii rule continue to rely on case - by - case decisions by permitting authorities .

phase iii also applies to new offshore oil and gas extraction facilities that had been expressly excluded from phase i .

the rule specified requirements for new offshore oil and gas extraction facilities with water - intake flow of more than 2 mgd , at least 25% of which is used for cooling purposes ; those not meeting that threshold also would continue to be authorized via case - by - case permitting .

challenges to the phase iii rule were filed in several federal courts of appeals and were consolidated in the fifth circuit , but proceedings were stayed during the supreme court's consideration of the phase ii rule in entergy v. riverkeeper .

after that decision , the government and environmental plaintiffs jointly asked the fifth circuit court of appeals to remand the existing facilities provisions of the phase iii rule to epa , for consideration along with the remanded phase ii rule for existing large facilities , in light of the entergy decision .

the court approved this request in july 2010 .

separately , environmental groups also had filed a challenge related to the existing facilities provisions of the phase iii rule in the same federal court that in 1995 had approved the consent decree providing for the multiphase promulgation of the 316 ( b ) rules .

to settle that litigation , in november 2010 epa entered into a consent decree that provides a schedule for proposing and promulgating combined phase ii and phase iii existing facilities regulations .

in december 2010 , the court approved a schedule that established a march 14 , 2011 , deadline for the agency to propose a revised cooling water intake rule .

on march 15 , epa announced that parties to the litigation had agreed to epa's request to delay release of the proposed rule until march 28 .

the resulting proposal is discussed in this report .

under the settlement agreement , epa was required to promulgate a final rule by july 27 , 2012 .

as described previously in this report , after several delays , epa announced the final rule on may 19 , 2014 .

after 1977 and prior to promulgation of the phase i rule in 2001 , applicable cwis requirements for all facilities were developed on a case - by - case bases by permitting authorities , using best professional judgment .

as a result of litigation involving all three phases of rulemaking since 2001 and court - ordered and government - requested remands , only certain facilities are subject to technology - based standards in epa cwis rules that remain in effect — new facilities with water - intake flow greater than 2 mgd ( phase i rule ) and new offshore oil and gas facilities ( phase iii ) .

until epa promulgation of revised rules , existing facilities of all sizes have continued to be subject to requirements developed on a case - by - case basis by permitting authorities .

additionally , new facilities with water - intake flow of less than 2 mgd also are subject to case - by - case permitting , under provisions of the phase i rule unchanged since 2001 .

