mentor - protégé programs are designed to assist small business development , focusing on enhancing the protégé's capacity to serve as either a prime contractor or a subcontractor in federal contracts .

these programs typically seek to pair new businesses and more experienced businesses in mutually beneficial relationships .

protégés may receive financial , technical , or management assistance from mentors in obtaining and performing federal contracts or subcontracts , or serving as suppliers under such contracts or subcontracts , whereas mentors may receive credit toward subcontracting goals , reimbursement of certain expenses , or other incentives for assisting protégés .

four federal agencies have sba - approved mentor - protégé programs: department of energy , department of homeland security ( dhs ) , national aeronautics and space administration , and u.s. small business administration ( sba ) .

two federal agencies have mentor - protégé programs that do not require sba's approval because their programs are not covered by the small business act: department of defense ( dod ) and federal aviation administration .

three federal agencies have mentor - protégé programs that , in 2018 , were awaiting sba's approval: department of health and human services , department of transportation , and department of the treasury .

mentor - protégé programs seek to assist small businesses in various ways .

for example , the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program assists "small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals" participating in the sba's minority small business and capital ownership development program ( commonly known as the 8 ( a ) program ) in obtaining and performing contracts with executive - branch agencies ; the sba's all small business mentor - protégé program is "a government - wide mentor - protégé program for all small business concerns , consistent with the sba's mentor - protégé program for participants in the sba's 8 ( a ) business development program. .

the dod mentor - protégé program assists various types of small businesses and other entities in performing as subcontractors or suppliers on dod contracts ; and other agency - specific mentor - protégé programs , such as that of the dhs , provide mentor firms incentives to subcontract agency prime contracts with small businesses .

congressional interest in small business mentor - protégé programs has increased in recent years , in part because of reports that large businesses serving as mentors have improperly received federal contracting assistance intended for small businesses .

the sba's suspension ( and later reinstatement ) of a mentor in the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program for possible fraud , as well as reports of other fraud in several of the sba's contracting programs , has also contributed to congressional interest .

during the 111 th congress , p.l .

111-240 , the small business jobs act of 2010 , authorized the sba to establish mentor - protégé programs for small businesses owned and controlled by service - disabled veterans , small businesses owned and controlled by women , and small businesses located in a hubzone "modeled" on the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program .

p.l .

111-240 also required the government accountability office ( gao ) to assess the effectiveness of mentor - protégé programs generally .

gao's findings were reported on june 15 , 2011 .

during the 112 th congress , p.l .

112-239 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 , authorized the sba to establish a mentor - protégé program for "all" small businesses that is generally "identical" to the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program .

in an effort to promote uniformity , the act , with some exceptions , prohibits agencies from carrying out mentor - protégé programs that have not been approved by the sba .

based on the authority provided by these two laws , the sba published a proposed rule in the federal register on february 5 , 2015 , "to establish a government - wide mentor - protégé program for all small business concerns , consistent with sba's mentor - protégé program for participants in the sba's 8 ( a ) business development program in order to make the mentor - protégé rules for each of the programs as consistent as possible. .

the sba decided that it would not implement additional mentor - protégé programs for service - disabled veteran - owned and - controlled small businesses , women - owned and - controlled small businesses , and hubzone small businesses because they "would be necessarily included within any mentor - protégé program targeting all small business concerns. .

the sba also announced that "having five separate small business mentor - protégé programs could become confusing to the public and procuring agencies and hard to implement by the sba. .

the sba estimated at that time that approximately 2,000 small businesses could become active in the proposed mentor - protégé program for small businesses .

on july 25 , 2016 , the sba published a final rule in the federal register establishing , effective august 24 , 2016 , the new , government - wide mentor - protégé program for all small businesses .

the final rule also modified the sba's 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program in an effort to make the two programs as consistent as possible .

as a result , 8 ( a ) small businesses may participate in either program .

the sba began to accept applications for the all small business mentor - protégé program on october 1 , 2016 .

the sba noted in the final rule that because its new small business mentor - protégé program will apply to all federal small business contracts and federal agencies , "conceivably other agency - specific mentor - protégé programs would not be needed. .

in recognition that one or more agency - specific mentor - protégé programs may be discontinued and that several of these programs provide incentives in the contract evaluation process to mentor firms that provide significant subcontracting work to their protégés , the sba allows procuring agencies , in appropriate circumstances , to provide subcontracting incentives to mentor firms participating in its mentor - protégé programs as well .

this report provides an overview of the federal government's various small business mentor - protégé programs .

as is discussed below , while all these programs are intended to assist small businesses in performing as contractors , subcontractors , or suppliers on federal or federally funded contracts , the programs differ in their scope and operations .

table a - 1 in the appendix provides an overview of key differences among the programs .

the sba administers three mentor - protégé programs , one for firms participating in the 8 ( a ) program , another for firms in its small business innovation research ( sbir ) and small business technology transfer ( sttr ) programs , and one for all small businesses .

congress authorized a pilot mentor - protégé program for dod in 1990 .

the program's purposes are to ( 1 ) enhance the capabilities of disadvantaged small business concerns to perform as subcontractors and suppliers under department of defense contracts and other contracts and subcontracts ; and ( 2 ) increase the participation of such business concerns as subcontractors and suppliers under department of defense contracts , other federal government contracts , and commercial contracts .

dod's mentor - protégé program began on october 1 , 1991 , and was the first federal mentor - protégé program to become operational .

originally scheduled to expire in 1994 , it has been repeatedly extended , most recently through fy2018 for the formation of new agreements , and fy2021 for the reimbursement of incurred costs under existing agreements .

dod's mentor - protégé program differs from the sba's 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program and all small business mentor - protégé program in that its primary focus is upon small businesses performing subcontracts and as suppliers on federal contracts , not upon small businesses performing federal contracts .

in addition , mentors in the dod program may provide assistance to their protégés that is somewhat different than that which mentors may provide to protégés in the 8 ( a ) and new small business mentor - protégé programs .

notably , such assistance may include advance payments , which federal agencies are generally prohibited from making , and progress payments , which are generally discouraged under federal procurement law .

mentors may also ( 1 ) award subcontracts on a noncompetitive basis to their protégés even if they are otherwise subject to "competition in subcontracting" requirements ; ( 2 )  make investments in protégé firms in exchange for an ownership interest in the firm ( not to exceed 10% of the total ownership interest ) : ( 3 ) lend money ; and ( 4 ) provide assistance in general business management , engineering and technical matters , etc .

other agencies , like dhs , have established independent mentor - protégé programs to encourage their large prime contractors to work with small business subcontractors when performing agency contracts .

because these programs are not based in statute , unlike the sba and dod programs discussed above , they generally rely upon existing authorities ( eg , authorizing use of evaluation factors ) or publicity to incentivize mentor participation .

such programs generally supplement the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program , in that firms in the 8 ( a ) program may also participate in agency - specific programs .

however , small businesses that are not 8 ( a ) firms and other entities may also be eligible to participate .

dhs's mentor - protégé program is discussed here as a representative example of such programs .

several other agencies have similar programs , which are described in table 1 .

note that while this report describes these programs as they presently exist , certain changes may be made to these programs in light of the requirements of the national defense authorization act for fy2013 ( p.l .

112-239 ) .

this legislation generally requires that agency - specific mentor - protégé programs be approved by the sba pursuant to regulations that would require such programs to address , among other things , ( 1 ) eligibility for program participants , ( 2 ) the types of developmental assistance provided to protégés , ( 3 ) the length of mentor - protégé relationships , ( 4 ) the benefits that may accrue to the mentor as a result of program participation , and ( 5 ) the reporting requirements during and following program participation .

congressional interest in small business mentor - protégé programs has increased in recent years for a variety of reasons , including reports that these programs are being used by large businesses to perform federal contracts , in violation of small business procurement laws and regulations and contrary to the intent of the mentor - protégé programs .

the sba's suspension ( and later reinstatement ) of a mentor in the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program for fraud , as well as reports of fraud in several of the sba's contracting programs , has also contributed to congressional interest .

in addition , gao found in 2011 that the sba "has not been able to properly oversee [the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé] program," and the sba issued new regulations for the 8 ( a ) program generally , and for the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program in particular , to better ensure that its benefits "flow to the intended recipients" and "help prevent waste , fraud and abuse. .

gao has also recommended that federal agencies collect and maintain protégé post - completion information "to help ensure that small businesses are benefiting from participation in the programs as intended. .

given these developments , and sba's recent addition of a mentor - protégé program for non - 8 ( a ) small businesses , it seems likely that mentor - protégé programs will remain subject to congressional oversight or proposed legislation during the 115 th congress .

effective august 24 , 2016 , federal agencies sponsoring an agency - specific mentor - protégé program must report annually to the sba specific information , such as the number and type of small business participants , the assistance provided , and the protégés' progress in competing for federal contracts .

this information could prove useful to congress as it conducts oversight of these programs .

in addition , congress could specify additional information that the sba , and other federal agencies , must maintain and report annually to congress concerning their mentor - protégé programs .

for example , dod has historically been required to report the following information regarding its mentor - protégé program: ( 1 ) the number of mentor - protégé agreements entered into during the fiscal year ; ( 2 ) the number of mentor - protégé agreements in effect during the fiscal year ; ( 3 ) the total amount reimbursed to mentor firms during the fiscal year ; ( 4 ) each mentor - protégé agreement , if any , approved during the fiscal year that provided a program participation term in excess of three years , together with the justification for the approval ; ( 5 ) each reimbursement of a mentor firm in excess of the program's limits made during the fiscal year , together with the justification for the approval ; and ( 6 ) trends in the progress made in employment , revenues , and participation in agency contracts by protégé firms participating in the program during the fiscal year and protégé firms that completed or otherwise terminated participation in the program during the preceding two fiscal years .

