the massive tohoku earthquake and tsunami of march 11 , 2011 , caused extensive damage in northeastern japan , including damage to the fukushima dai - ichi nuclear power installation , which resulted in the release of radiation .

some have called this incident the biggest manmade release ever of radioactive material into the oceans .

concerns arose about the potential effects of this released radiation on the u.s. marine environment and resources .

the north pacific current is formed by the collision of the kuroshio current , running northward off the east coast of japan in the eastern north pacific , and the oyashio current , running southward from russia ( figure 1 ) .

as it approaches the west coast of north america , the north pacific current splits into the southward california current and the northward alaska current .

although these currents have the potential for bringing radiation from japan's fukushima dai - ichi nuclear accident to u.s. waters , their flow is slow , and no radiation above background levels has yet been detected in marine waters under u.s. jurisdiction .

regardless of the slow flow , radioactive contaminants with long half - lives ( eg , cesium - 137 , with a half - life of about 30 years ) could still pose concerns if transported over long distances by ocean currents .

seawater was monitored by the tokyo electric power company ( tepco ) near the discharge points of the fukushima dai - ichi plant following the march 2011 events .

water with a dose rate of greater than 1,000 millisievert per hour was confirmed by tepco on april 2 , 2011 , in a pit located next to fukushima dai - ichi's unit 2 seawater inlet point .

a cracked sidewall of this pit was leaking water from the pit directly into the ocean .

analyses of seawater taken from near the discharge from fukushima dai - ichi units 1-4 yielded readings of 130,000 becquerels / liter ( bq / l ) of iodine - 131 ( half - life of about 8 days ) , 32,000 bq / l of cesium - 137 ( half - life of about 30 years ) , and 31,000 bq / l of cesium - 134 ( half - life of about 2 years ) .

although the leak in the cracked sidewall was stopped after several days , the total amount of radioactive contaminants that entered the ocean was unknown , and discharges , both accidental and deliberate , continued for several weeks .

radioisotope concentrations at offshore sampling points decreased with time ; by early april 2011 , at sampling points about 30 km east of fukushima dai - ichi , concentrations were between 5 and 18 bq / l for iodine - 131 and between 1 and 11 bq / l for cesium - 137 .

the highest concentrations , found closest to the coast , were about 38 bq / l for iodine - 131 and 4.5 bq / l for cesium - 137 .

the occurrence of cesium - 137 is of greater concern because of its much longer half - life .

the natural radioactivity of seawater is 13 or 14 bq / l , of which 95% comes from potassium - 40 .

experts cite this incident as the largest recorded accidental release of radiation to the ocean .

atmospheric transport ( i.e. , wind ) also is capable of transporting radiation eastward , where it may settle or precipitate into u.s. marine waters ( figure 2 ) .

the u.s. department of energy and the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) monitor atmospheric radiation .

in early april 2011 , epa monitors in california , idaho , and minnesota detected trace amounts of radioactive iodine , cesium , and tellurium in rainwater , consistent with the japanese nuclear incident ; to date , concentrations have been far below any level of concern .

one study estimated a total atmospheric release of 35.8 petabecquerels of cesium - 137 , with the highest release from march 12 to 19 and about 79% of subsequent deposition over the north pacific ocean .

it is unknown whether marine organisms that migrated through or near japanese waters to locations where they might subsequently be harvested by u.s. fishermen ( possibly some tuna or salmon in the north pacific ) might have been exposed to radiation in or near japanese waters , or might have consumed prey that had accumulated radioactive contaminants .

two minke whales harvested by japanese whalers off the coast of hokkaido in may 2011 were found to have slightly elevated radioactive cesium - 137 levels .

in august 2011 , bluefin tuna off the coast of california were found to have slightly elevated levels of cesium - 137 and cesium - 134 .

a british scientist reportedly stated that , "given the scale of the pacific — the world's vastest body of water — radioactivity in the sea at fukushima will be flushed out beyond the local area by tides and currents and dilute to very low levels .

it [radioactive contamination] will get into the ( ocean ) food chain but only in that vicinity .

should people in hawaii and california be concerned ? .

the answer is no. .

although not at harmful levels , significant radiation from cesium - 137 was reported to be detected 400 miles offshore of japan three months after the tsunami .

there is also the possibility that there could be bioaccumulation of longer - half - life radioactive elements by fish whose migratory habits subsequently may take them far from japanese waters .

scientists at the woods hole oceanographic institution advised that radiation levels in seafood should continue to be monitored , but stated that radiation in the ocean very quickly becomes diluted and should not be a problem beyond the coast of japan .

the same is true of radiation carried by winds around the globe .

radioactive contaminants from fukushima appear to have become sufficiently dispersed over time that they will not prove to be a serious health threat elsewhere , unless they bioaccumulate in migratory fish or find their way directly to another part of the world through food or other commercial products .

however , there remains the slight potential for a relatively narrow corridor of highly contaminated water leading away from japan and a very patchy distribution of contaminated fish — extensive monitoring will determine the exact dispersion of these radioactive contaminants .

it does not appear that nuclear contamination of seafood will be a food safety problem for consumers in the united states .

among the main reasons are that damage from the disaster limited seafood production in the affected areas , radioactive material would be diluted before reaching u.s. fishing grounds , and seafood imports from japan are being examined before entry into the united states .

according to the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) , because of damage from the earthquake and tsunami to infrastructure , few if any food products were being exported from the affected region .

for example , according to the national federation of fisheries cooperative associations , the region's fishing industry stopped landing and selling fish .

furthermore , a fishing ban has been enforced within a 2-kilometer radius around the damaged nuclear facility .

u.s. fisheries are unlikely to have been affected because radioactive material that entered the marine environment would be greatly diluted before reaching u.s. fishing grounds .

however , some have advocated vigilance , especially for seafood from areas near the damaged nuclear facility .

it has been suggested that cesium - 137 could move up the food chain and become concentrated in fish muscle or that radiation hot spots could occur .

another potential concern is related to accumulation of strontium - 90 in fish bone , because its chemical properties are similar to those of calcium .

radioactive contaminants have been collecting in sediments in coastal areas near the damaged nuclear facility and exposing bottom - dwelling fish , shellfish , and other organisms to relatively high contaminant levels .

the japanese ministry of health , labor , and welfare has reported fish samples from fukushima prefecture that are above the provisional regulation values for cesium - 134 and cesium - 137 .

contaminated fish samples have included greenling , several types of flounder , common skate , rock fish , japanese seabass , and brown hakeling .

the most common foods imported from japan include seafood , snack foods , and processed fruits and vegetables .

in 2011 , the united states imported 40.1 million pounds of seafood from japan with a value of $268.3 million .

the fda has primary responsibility for the safety of all domestic and imported seafood , under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , as amended ( 21 u.s.c .

§301 et seq. ) .

the ffdca requires that all foods be safe , wholesome , and accurately labeled .

fda's general approach to ensuring the safety of seafood imports is based on identifying risks from the production process , from specific types of seafood , and from certain countries or firms .

on march 22 , 2011 , fda issued an import alert for food products from four japanese prefectures .

the alert has been updated periodically since then to reflect changing conditions with regard to food items and areas ( prefectures ) covered .

fda's import tracking system is being used to identify all shipments of fda - regulated products from japan , with special attention to shipments from companies within the affected area .

as of march 2012 , fda field examinations and tests of food products had not found any radionuclide contamination above the established derived intervention level .

fda has divided all food products from japan into the following four categories .

category 1 — products that are not allowed entry to the united states .

consists of products that the government of japan has restricted for sale or export .

category 2 — products that may be detained under import alert 99-33 and may be released if the importer can show the products are safe .

consists of products from fukushima , ibaraki , and tochigi prefectures that the government of japan has not banned from sale or export .

category 3 — products from fukushima , ibaraki , and tochigi prefectures that are not covered by the fda's import alert .

these products are examined and may be sampled and tested as needed .

category 4 — all other fda - regulated food products from japan that are not listed on the import alert and not included in the other three categories .

these products are monitored by standard procedures .

the only seafood item included on the import alert is sand lance ( a small fish ) from fukushima prefecture , which is also listed under category 1 and is not allowed entry to the united states .

since radiation has been detected reaching various u.s. locations by atmospheric transport , rainfall is likely to already have introduced radioactive elements from the fukushima dai - ichi accident into u.s. marine waters .

transport by ocean currents is much slower , and additional radiation from this source might eventually also be detected in north pacific waters under u.s. jurisdiction , even months after its release .

regardless of slow ocean transport , the long half - life of radioactive cesium isotopes means that radioactive contaminants could remain a valid concern for years .

if only low levels of radiation are detected , continued monitoring of the situation will be the likely response .

in the unlikely event that higher levels of radiation are detected , measures ( eg , removal of contaminated products from commerce ) are to be taken to prevent or minimize human exposure to the contaminated media .

for background information on radiation and its potential for harm , see crs report r41728 , the japanese nuclear incident: technical aspects , by jonathan medalia .

based on computer modeling of ocean currents , debris from the tsunami produced by the tohoku earthquake of march 11 , 2011 , was projected to spread eastward from japan in the north pacific subtropical gyre .

initial models suggested that in a year , debris would reach the northwestern hawaiian islands marine national monument ; in two years , the remaining hawaiian islands could see this debris ; in three years , the debris plume likely would reach the u.s. west coast , dumping debris on california beaches and the beaches of british columbia , alaska , and baja california .

an animation of the projected movement of the marine debris is available at http: / / iprc.soest.hawaii.edu / users / nik o la i / 2011 / pacific_islands / simulation_of_debris_ from_march_11_2011_japan_tsunami.gif .

although much of the radioactive release from fukushima dai - ichi is believed to have occurred after the tsunami , there is the possibility that some of the tsunami debris might have been contaminated with radiation from fukushima dai - ichi .

more recent observations indicate that some debris could be traveling faster than predicted .

although much of the debris sank quickly , the initial debris field was estimated to contain possibly 1.5 million tons of debris and to be approximately 3,700 kilometers long and 1,800 kilometers wide .

subsequently , the debris has become widely dispersed as it moved further offshore , and a coherent debris field is no longer apparent .

in mid - november 2011 , canadian ocean modelers predicted that initial debris from the tohoku earthquake and tsunami , especially large debris more subject to wind effects , would soon begin appearing on pacific northwest beaches .

fishing vessels and other large pieces of debris could pose hazards to navigation .

items that some believe might have been initial debris from the tsunami began to be reported on pacific northwest beaches in early december 2011 .

a derelict 150-foot japanese fishing vessel , spotted off the british columbia coast in march 2012 , was sunk by the u.s. coast guard as a hazard to navigation .

a 165-ton dock grounded on an oregon beach in early june 2012 .

the majority of the debris is still not anticipated to reach u.s. shores before 2013 .

in light of concerns about arriving debris , members of congress requested additional action from the administration .

a joint federal - state - provincial tsunami debris information center has been established to coordinate planning on how to manage arriving debris .

in addition , noaa has established a website to coordinate efforts to deal with the debris and requests that reports of significant debris sightings be e - mailed to [email address scrubbed] for compilation .

maps of reported tsunami debris are available at http: / / marinedebris.noaa.gov / tsunamidebris / debris_sightings.html .

noaa has announced $250,000 in grant funds available to five pacific coastal states for debris removal activities .

legislation in the 112 th congress ( h.r .

1171 , h.r .

6251 , and s. 1119 ) to reauthorize the marine debris research , prevention , and reduction act ( 33 u.s.c .

1951 et seq. ) .

may promote a discussion of how this program might be modified to better deal with emergency issues such as tsunami debris .

the 188-ton dock that grounded on an oregon beach in early june 2012 was encrusted with marine life from japan , presenting the potential for invasive species becoming established .

marine life noted on this dock include more than 90 species of barnacles , starfish , urchins , anemones , amphipods , worms , mussels , limpets , snails , tunicates , sponges , and algae .

most marine debris lacks the dense fouling communities of marine life that occurred on this dock .

volunteers removed about 1.5 tons of marine life from the dock and buried this material above high tide and storm surge .

the dock was then cleansed with flames to sterilize the surface .

this is one of three similar docks that were dislodged by the tsunami at misawa , japan , and had not been accounted for .

