on april 19 , 2012 , the senate appropriations committee reported s. 2322 , a bill appropriating funds for the departments of transportation and housing and urban development and related agencies for fy2013 ( s.rept .

112-157 ) .

the bill recommends $3.210 billion for activities funded under the community development fund account .

the account includes funding for hud's community development block grant program , section 108 loan guarantees , the administration's sustainable communities initiative , and section 4 capacity - building activities .

on february 13 , 2012 , the president released the administration's federal budget request for fy2013 .

the administration's budget proposal of $1.3 trillion for discretionary spending for fy2013 includes $3.143 billion for activities funded under the department of housing and urban development's community development fund account .

the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program , administered by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , is the federal government's largest and most widely available source of financial assistance supporting state and local government - directed neighborhood revitalization , housing rehabilitation , and economic development activities .

these formula - based grants are allocated to approximately 1,176 entitlement communities ( metropolitan cities with populations of 50,000 , principle cities of metropolitan areas , and urban counties ) ; the 50 states ; puerto rico ; and the insular areas of american samoa , guam , the virgin islands , and the northern mariana islands .

grants are used to implement plans intended to address housing , community development and economic development needs , as determined by local officials .

during the second half of 2011 , congress considered and debated the administration's budget recommendations for fy2012 .

the fy2012 budget debate was undertaken with an eye on reducing federal spending in an effort to address the federal deficit .

congress's challenge was to balance concern about controlling and reducing federal spending while focusing on funding federal activities that support private sector job creation in an effort to combat a national unemployment rate that remained high and a u.s. economy that continued to be mired in a so - called "jobless recovery. .

during consideration of the fy2012 budget , supporters of cdbg touted the program's support of state and local government community economic development and private sector job creation and vowed to continue defending the program against cuts in funding .

on april 15 , 2011 , the president signed into law p.l .

112-10 , the department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act for fy2011 .

the measure , which passed the house and senate on april 14 , 2011 , after months of intense budget negotiations , included a provision appropriating $3.508 billion for the community development fund ( cdf ) .

the act included a mandatory across - the - board rescission of 0.2% and a 1% discretionary transfer to the department's transformation initiative , which granted the secretary of hud the authority to reduce the cdf account's total appropriation to $3.501 billion .

this was approximately 16% below the amount appropriated for fy2010 .

the cdf , which includes the formula - based community development block grant program , was one of several accounts targeted for significant budget reductions in an earlier version of a consolidated appropriations bill , h.r .

1 , that passed the house , but not the senate .

h.r .

1 would have reduced funding for cdbg activities by 62.5% below the amount appropriated for fy2010 .

funding for hud's community development fund , which includes the cdbg program , is among the programs that were initially targeted for reduction as part of congressional efforts to reduce the federal budget deficit .

on february 19 , 2011 , the house - passed h.r .

1 , a bill providing continuing annual appropriations for fy2011 .

the house - passed version of h.r .

1 would have reduced total funding for discretionary programs by $61 billion below the amount requested by the obama administration .

included among the programs and accounts targeted for cuts by the house - passed version of the h.r .

1 was the cdf account , which includes the formula - based cdbg program .

the bill , as passed by the house , failed to win senate approval .

an alternative measure , s.amdt .

149 , introduced in the senate , also failed to win senate approval .

this led to renewed negotiations between the obama administration and house and senate leadership to resolve the fy2011 budget impasse .

the fy2011 appropriations for the formula - based components of the cdbg program ( entitlement communities and states , and excluding insular areas ) totaled $3.296 billion , which was approximately 16.4% ( $647 million ) less than the $3.943 billion appropriated for fy2010 .

for fy2012 , the cdbg allocations awarded to entitlement communities and states totaled $2.942 billion .

this represented a decline of 10.7% ( $354 million ) less than the amount allocated in fy2011 .

the reductions in funding for formula grant activities from fy2010 to fy2012 have resulted in the average grant amount for entitlement communities declining from $2.4 million in fy2010 to $1.7 million in fy2012 .

this is a 29.1% reduction in the average grant amount awarded to entitlement communities .

the decline in average funding is a result of both lower appropriations and an increase in the number of communities qualifying for entitlement status ( table 4 ) .

the average state allocation declined by 25.4% , from $23.2 million in fy2010 to $17.3 million for fy2012 .

although the reductions in cdbg funding represent a decline in resources available to support local community and economic development activities , they are less than the 62.5% reduction proposed in h.r .

1 .

according to the u.s. conference of mayors and other organizations representing state and local governments , the proposed reduction in funding included in h.r .

1 would have significantly impacted the long - term community and economic development plans of the states and local governments , forcing them to postpone or terminate activities that support private sector economic development and job creation efforts , public facilities , and public services .

the proposed funding reduction included in h.r .

1 also would have undercut the resources of non - profit organizations serving as cdbg sub - grantees .

these entities are involved in managing a range of cdbg - funded public services , facilities , and activities , including homeless shelters , public safety activities , and job counseling .

supporters of the cdbg program contend that the reduction in funding disproportionately affects low and moderate income households given the statutory requirement that communities allocated at least 70% of the program's funds to activities principally benefitting low and moderate income persons .

the fy2012 appropriations for the formula component of the cdbg program are the lowest amount appropriated in more than a decade .

 ( see table 6 . ) .

the reduction in funding for entitlement communities will result in entitlement communities delaying some projects and reducing support for others , including activities undertaken by community - based organizations acting as sub - grantees .

of the amounts appropriated each fiscal year to carry out cdbg eligible activities , 70% is allocated to cities and urban counties meeting required minimum population thresholds .

these communities are identified collectively as "entitlement communities. .

the remaining 30% of funds appropriated for cdbg formula distribution is allocated among the 50 states and puerto rico for distribution to small or so - called "nonentitlement communities. .

cdbg funds awarded to eligible entitlement communities and states are allocated using the highest yield from one of two statutorily based formulas .

for each of the two categories of eligible entitlement communities ( metropolitan cities and urban counties ) , formula a , the original formula created with the initial passage of the housing and community development act of 1974 , p.l .

93-383 , allocates funds based on each metropolitan city and urban county's share of the following weighted factors: population relative to the total population for all metropolitan cities or urban counties ( 0.25 ) ; poverty relative to total person in poverty for all metropolitan cities or urban counties ( 0.50 ) ; and overcrowded housing relative to the total number of persons living in overcrowded housing conditions for all metropolitan cities or urban counties ( 0.25 ) .

the second formula , formula b , enacted with the passage of the housing and community development amendments of 1977 , p.l .

95-128 , allocates funds to metropolitan cities and urban counties using the following weighted factors: a population growth lag factor intended to measure the extent that a community's population has lagged behind the national average for all metropolitan cities and urban counties since 1960 ( 0.20 ) ; each community's share of poverty relative to the total persons living in poverty for all metropolitan cities or urban counties ( 0.30 ) ; and housing built before 1940 relative to the total number of housing units built before 1940 for all metropolitan cities or urban counties ( 0.50 ) .

the distribution of cdbg funds to states is also governed by a two formula system , with formula a using each state's relative share of population , poverty , and overcrowded housing in nonentitlement areas to allocate funds , and formula b using each state's relative share of poverty housing built before 1940 , and in persons living in poverty in all nonentitlement areas .

this section of the report is a review of the cdf account's funding history from fy2000 to fy2011 .

it includes a discussion of the three primary components of the cdf account: cdbg formula grants ; cdbg - related set - asides and earmarks ; and cdbg - linked supplemental or special appropriations .

figure 1 is a graphic representation of the distribution of the primary components of cdf account since fy2000 .

from fy2000 to 2010 , total appropriations for the cdf account — excluding special and supplemental appropriations for disasters , mortgage foreclosures , and economic recovery — fluctuated between a high of $5.112 billion for fy2001 and a low of $3.772 billion for fy2007 ( see table 6 ) .

the fy2011 appropriation for cdf activities are the lowest appropriated in more than a decade .

during recent appropriations cycles the funding level for the cdbg - formula component of the cdf account has been the focus of debate .

supporters of the program have pressed for increased funding , contending that the program's appropriations have declined in both current and constant dollars .

supporters noted that this decline or near stagnation in funding has been compounded by the increased number of communities gaining entitlement status and thus eligibility for a direct allocation of a share of the 70% of funds dispersed to so - called "entitlement communities. .

entitlement communities have been forced to share an ever - shrinking or stagnant slice of the cdbg formula pie with an ever - increasing number of eligible grant recipients .

critics of the program have argued that increased funding has not been justified based on the program's part score and , more recently , the need to reduce domestic discretionary spending as part of a larger effort to reduce federal budget deficit and the national debt .

as noted in table 7 , during the period from fy2000 to fy2010 , the average grant amount allocated to cdbg entitlement communities declined by 26.7% from a high of $3 million in fy2002 to a low of $2.1 million in fy2008 .

the total amount appropriated declined annually from fy2001 to fy2008 and has been increasing from fy2009 to fy2010 , but the average allocation had been steadily declining .

however , since fy2008 , the average allocation had increased by 9% , from $2.2 million to $2.4 million in fy2010 .

however , the fy2011 estimated average allocation of $1.9 million is a reversal of that recent trend .

for fy2011 , the average allocation is 34.5% less than the amount appropriated in fy2000 .

the decline in the average grant amount is both a function of fewer dollars appropriated and an increase in the number of entitlement communities as more cities and counties achieve the population threshold necessary to be designated an entitlement community .

from fy2000 to fy2011 , the number of jurisdictions receiving a direct allocation as cdbg entitlement communities increased by 155 , from 1,012 to 1,167 ( see table 7 ) .

the fluctuations in the average annual grant amount awarded to states were less pronounced .

in fy2010 , $1.183 billion was allocated among the 50 states and puerto rico for distribution to nonentitlement communities .

this was 7.4% ( $88 million ) less than the $1.271 billion made available to states in fy2000 , but 7.6% ( $90 million ) more than allocated to states for fy2009 .

during this period the average state allocation declined from a high of $25.5 million in fy2002 to $21.1 million in fy2008 before rebounding to $23.2 in fy2010 .

however , the fy2011 average state allocation of $19.1 million reverses that upward trend .

the fy2011 estimated average allocation is 23.3% less than the fy2000 amount and 17.7% less than the fy2010 average state allocation .

when measured in inflation - adjusted constant dollars , program funding declined by 40% during this period , from $4.235 billion in fy2000 to $2.545 billion in fy2011 .

as figure 2 illustrates , appropriations for cdbg formula grants have fluctuated between $3.5 billion and $4.3 billion in current ( non - inflation adjusted ) dollars during the last decade .

in addition to the cdbg formula program , the cdf is also populated by a number of other programs with smaller appropriation levels , narrower objectives , and fewer direct recipients .

some set - asides included in the account are intended to complement the activities of the larger formula grant program .

others are intended to meet other agency objectives and still others are earmarked for specific activities or projects .

some observers have contended that a number of these programs have been funded at the expense of the larger cdbg formula grant program , particularly those projects funded as earmarks .

from fy2000 to fy2011 , the number and appropriations for set - aside programs included in the cdf account have fluctuated significantly .

in fy2001 congress appropriated $647 million for cdf set - asides , but only $61 million in fy2007 .

in fy2007 , congress eliminated all earmarks in the cdf account .

in fy2010 , congress appropriated $509 million in cdf set - aside activities , with a significant portion of that amount targeted to the earmark accounts of economic development initiative ( edi ) and neighborhood initiative ( ni ) .

most recently , for fy2011 congress eliminated funding for the edi and ni earmarked accounts .

the broad swing in the amounts appropriated for cdf set - asides was a result of congress's decisions to move several categorical grant programs into or out of the cdf account , including deciding to no longer fund a program or to transfer selected programs to another account ; to reduce funding for specific programs ; and to fund , and at what amount , two programs that have been the vehicles for congressional earmarks , edi and ni programs .

see table a - 1 in the appendix for a detailed listing of programs included as set - asides in the cdf account during the period from fy2000 to fy2011 .

from fy2000 to fy2008 , cdbg - related set - asides and earmarks declined by 59.4% when measured in constant fy2000 dollars , but rebounded in fy2009 and fy2010 before declining significantly in fy2011 .

 ( see figure 3 . ) .

with the exception of fy2011 and fy2007 ( when there were no earmarks ) , and fy2010 ( when the obama administration introduced its sustainable communities initiative ) , congressional earmarked projects funded by the edi and ni programs were the dominant elements of cdbg - related set aside appropriations .

these two programs are used exclusively for congressionally earmarked projects .

the issue of earmarks has been the source of debate during recent congresses .

during the fy2007 appropriations cycle congress removed all earmarks from the cdf account .

subsequently both houses of congress have instituted new rules governing disclosure of earmark requests .

since fy2007 , edi and ni earmarks have been included in subsequent legislation appropriating funds for cdf activities .

in fy2008 and fy2009 , edi and ni earmarks were the dominant components of cdbg - linked set asides programs .

as figure 4 illustrates , the combined appropriations for edi and ni in fy2008 and fy2009 were twice the amount appropriated for other set - aside activities combined .

for fy2011 congress did not fund ni and edi earmarks .

when events have warranted , congress has used the cdbg program's administrative framework and rules to provide supplemental or special appropriations ( see figure 1 ) .

these supplemental funds have been used to support local and state government disaster relief , recovery , and mitigation activities following such events as the terrorist attacks of 9 / 11 and the gulf coast hurricanes of 2005 ; assist local and state governments in reducing the inventory of abandoned and foreclosed properties ( caused by the recent and ongoing mortgage foreclosure crisis ) by providing funds to states and selected communities to be used to acquire , rehabilitate , and resell foreclosed properties under the neighborhood stabilization program ( nsp ) ; and assist local and state governments in supporting private sector job creation in response to the economic recession that began in december 2007 , as part of a larger federal effort under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) .

with the exception of cdbg - arra funds , which were allocated to all eligible cdbg entitlement communities , disaster relief and nsp funding were allocated only to states or communities meeting specific criteria or eligibility thresholds .

in the case of cdbg disaster funding , only communities designated as disaster areas by a presidential declaration have received funds , at the discretion of congress .

each congress decides if the magnitude of the disaster warrants supplemental cdbg funds beyond funds typically made available by the federal emergency management administration ( fema ) .

in the case of the first and third rounds of the neighborhood stabilization program , known as nsp - 1 and nsp - 3 , funds were allocated to states based on the relative number and percentages of mortgage foreclosures , subprime loans , and mortgage delinquencies and defaults .

congress established a minimum grant amount to be awarded to each state of 0.5% of the amount appropriated .

of the amounts allocated to each state under nsp - 1 and nsp - 3 , congress required each state to dispense a portion of these funds to local governments experiencing high rates of mortgage foreclosures , subprime loans , and mortgage delinquencies and defaults allowing these communities to directly administer these funds .

it further limited the direct allocation of nsp to communities whose allocation met a minimum threshold of $2 million for nsp - 1 and $1 million for nsp - 3 funds .

as a result 309 communities qualified for administration of nsp - 1 funds while 268 communities met or exceeded the nsp - 3 threshold .

nsp - 2 funds were awarded competitively to states , local governments , and non - profit organizations .

for - profit entities are also allowed to participate as partners with any of the three primary grant recipients of nsp - 2 funds .

on march 1 , 2011 , representative gary miller introduced the neighborhood stabilization termination act , h.r .

861 , which would rescind the $1 billion in nsp - 3 funds appropriated under the wall street reform act .

on march 2 , 2011 , the house financial services committee's subcommittee on insurance , housing , and community opportunity conducted a hearing on nsp and three federal foreclosure mitigation programs .

on march 9 , 2011 , the house financial services committee considered , marked up , and ordered reported h.r .

861 .

during the markup the committee approved by voice vote an amendment requiring hud to publish a notice of termination of the nsp program on its website .

the notice is to be posted within five days following the bill's enactment and is to include language directing citizens to contact their congressional representatives and locally elected officials if they are concerned about the impact of foreclosures on their communities .

during the march 2 , 2011 , subcommittee hearing and the march 9 , 2011 , markup session by the house financial services committee , representative miller , sponsor of h.r .

861 , characterized the program as ineffective and a waste of taxpayers' dollars .

he argued that , given the need to address the larger issue of reducing the federal debt and deficit , funding for nsp - 3 should be rescinded .

in addition , he argued that the program was a giveaway to banks and speculators .

other members countered that the program has been successful in assisting communities to combat the negative impacts of the mortgage foreclosure crisis on neighborhoods , property values , and local revenues generated by property taxes .

during the march 2 hearing , hud's assistant secretary for community planning and development , mercedes m. márquez , offered written testimony stating that hud expects "nsp will impact 100,000 properties in the nation's hardest - hit markets," with 36,000 units already under construction .

in addition , the assistant secretary's testimony stated that "based on nsp1 activity budgets , the department estimates that nsp will support more than 93,000 jobs nationwide. .

members also argued that the program helps reduce the supply of abandoned , blighted , and foreclosed housing stock .

the measure passed the house on march 16 , 2011 , by a vote of 242 to 182 .

a companion bill to h.r .

861 has not been introduced in the senate .

