the security situation in central america has deteriorated over the past decade .

gangs , drug traffickers , and other criminal groups have expanded their activities , contributing to escalating levels of crime and violence that have alarmed citizens and overwhelmed governments .

violence is particularly intense in the "northern triangle" countries of el salvador , guatemala , and honduras , which have some of the highest homicide rates in the world .

citizens of those nations now rank crime as the top problem facing their countries , and an increasing number have sought refuge abroad .

crime and violence also take an economic toll on the countries of the region , which is estimated to range from 2.5% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) in costa rica to 10.5% of gdp in honduras .

while some analysts argue that the growth of organized crime in central america poses challenges to u.s. strategic interests and may present a greater threat to regional security than the civil conflicts of the 1980s , u.s. policymakers have only recently begun to offer increased attention and financial support to the region .

during the 1980s , u.s. economic and military assistance to central america averaged nearly $1.4 billion ( inflation - adjusted 2013 dollars ) annually to prevent potential soviet allies from establishing political or military footholds in the region .

u.s. attention to the region declined significantly in the early 1990s , however , as the civil wars ended and cold war concerns faded .

the u.s. government continued to provide central american nations with some assistance for narcotics interdiction and institutional capacity building , but the funding levels were comparatively low .

u.s. security assistance to the region did not increase substantially until fy2008 with the introduction of the mérida initiative , a counterdrug and anticrime assistance program that focused primarily on mexico but also included some funding for central america .

in fy2010 , congress and the obama administration re - launched the central america portion of the mérida initiative as the central america regional security initiative ( carsi ) .

whereas most u.s. security efforts in central america since the 1990s have focused on preventing illicit narcotics from reaching the united states , carsi is designed to address a broader array of security concerns .

while it continues to support immediate law enforcement and interdiction operations , it also aims to strengthen the capacities of communities and governmental institutions to address security challenges and the underlying conditions that contribute to them .

since fy2008 , congress has appropriated nearly $1.2 billion for the seven nations of central america through the mérida initiative and carsi .

although more than seven years have passed since congress first appropriated funding for the initiative , central america continues to face significant security challenges .

as congress evaluates budget priorities and considers additional assistance for the region , it may examine the scope of the security challenges in central america , the current efforts being undertaken by the governments of central america to address those challenges , and how the united states has supported central american efforts .

this report provides background information about these topics and raises potential policy issues regarding u.s. - central america security cooperation that congress may opt to consider , such as the strategy and funding levels necessary to achieve u.s. objectives , how best to promote and protect human rights , and how u.s. domestic policies impact security conditions in the region .

as in neighboring mexico , the countries of central america — particularly the northern triangle countries of el salvador , guatemala , and honduras — are dealing with escalating homicides and generalized crime committed by drug traffickers , gangs , and other criminal groups .

while drug trafficking - related violence in mexico has captured u.s. policymakers' attention , the even more dire security situations in many central american countries have received considerably less focus or financial support from the united states .

in 2013 , the homicide rate per 100,000 people in mexico stood at 18.9 , a rate exceeded by those of el salvador ( 39.8 ) , honduras ( 84.3 ) , and — according to local sources — guatemala ( 39.3 ) ( see table 1 ) .

common crime is also widespread .

according to 2014 polling data , nearly a fifth of salvadorans , hondurans , nicaraguans , and guatemalans had been victims of a crime within the past year ( see figure 2 ) .

multiple studies have found that those who have been victims of crime or who perceive that crime is increasing in their countries express less support for the political system and the rule of law than other citizens .

in extreme cases , some people — including on - and off - duty police — have carried out vigilante killings of those suspected of committing crimes .

recent killings of suspected gang members in el salvador appear to be one recent manifestation of that phenomenon .

confronting the increasing threats posed by both domestic and transnational organizations has become a central concern of governments throughout central america .

governments in the northern triangle countries have tended to adopt more aggressive approaches than those in the rest of the region , enacting tough anti - gang laws and deploying military forces to help police perform public security functions .

in general , such policies have been put in place in reaction to rising violence rather than formulated as part of proactive , forward - looking strategies to strengthen citizen security .

they have failed to stave off rising crime rates and have had several negative unintended consequences .

experts have urged central american governments to adopt more holistic approaches , leading some countries to experiment with alternative policies , such as gang truces , and to place more emphasis on modern policing techniques and crime and violence prevention programs .

while national strategies have diverged , central american governments have continued to pursue closer regional coordination .

given the geographic proximity of central america , the united states has long been concerned about potential security threats from the region and has provided central american nations with assistance to counter those threats .

central america was a major focus of u.s. policy during the cold war , but attention to the region waned in the 1990s following the dissolution of the soviet union and the end of the region's civil conflicts .

u.s. - central american engagement has increased again over the past decade , as u.s. policymakers have become concerned by rising levels of violence and increasing emigration from the region .

the principal component of this renewed engagement , until recently , has been the central america regional security initiative .

although more than seven years have passed since congress first appropriated funding for carsi , central america continues to face significant security challenges .

as congress continues to oversee the implementation of carsi and considers additional funding for the initiative , there are a number of issues it might opt to examine .

these include the strategy and funding levels necessary to achieve u.s. objectives in central america , how best to promote and protect human rights , and how u.s. domestic policies impact security conditions in the region .

the seven nations of central america face significant security challenges .

well - financed and heavily armed criminal threats , fragile political and judicial systems , and persistent social hardships such as poverty and unemployment contribute to widespread insecurity .

from fy2008 to fy2015 , congress appropriated nearly $1.2 billion under what is now known as the central america regional security initiative ( carsi ) to support security efforts in the region .

while some carsi programs have contributed to improved security conditions in certain communities , there is little information available about other carsi - funded efforts .

country - level security indicators remain poor in several central american nations , and the obama administration now asserts that a broader u.s. effort , including substantially more resources , will be necessary to improve conditions in the region .

as congress evaluates budget priorities and debates the form of assistance to central america , it might take into consideration the opinion of many analysts that improving security conditions in the region will be a difficult , multifaceted endeavor .

central american leaders will need to address long - standing issues such as incomplete institutional reforms , precarious tax bases , and the lack of opportunities for young people .

international donors will need to provide extensive support over an extended period of time .

and all of the stakeholders involved will need to better coordinate their efforts to support comprehensive long - term strategies that strengthen institutions and address the root causes of citizen insecurity .

absent such efforts , conditions are likely to remain poor in several central american countries , contributing to periodic instability that — as demonstrated by the increasing number of migrants , asylum seekers , and refugees from the region arriving at the u.s. border — is likely to affect the united states .

fy2008 appropriations when announcing the mérida initiative , the bush administration originally requested $50 million for the countries of central america .

all of the funds were requested in the incle account and were designated to be used for public security and law enforcement programs .

members of congress , some of whom expressed considerable disappointment that they were not consulted as the plan was being formulated , dedicated additional funds to central america and broadened the focus of the initiative .

through the fy2008 supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

110-252 ) , congress appropriated $60 million for central america and divided the funds among the incle , esf , nadr , and fmf accounts .

congress allotted $25 million in esf funds for the creation of an economic and social development fund for central america , $20 million of which was to be administered by usaid and $5 million of which was to be administered by the state department to support educational and cultural exchange programs .

congress also allotted $1 million to support the international commission against impunity in guatemala .

the act required the state department to withhold 15% of the incle and fmf assistance appropriated for the countries of central america until the secretary of state could report that the central american governments were taking steps to improve respect for human rights , such as creating police complaints commissions , reforming their judiciaries , and investigating and prosecuting military and police forces that had been credibly alleged to have committed human rights violations .

fy2009 appropriations in the fy2009 omnibus appropriations act ( p.l .

111-8 ) , congress provided $105 million in funding for central america .

it required that at least $35 million of the funds appropriated for the region be used to support judicial reform , institution building , anti - corruption , and rule - of - law activities .

the explanatory statement to the act directed that $70 million of the funds for the region be provided through the incle account , that $15 million of the fmf funds support maritime security programs , and that $12 million in esf aid support usaid's economic and social development fund for central america .

the fy2009 funds were subject to the same human rights conditions as the funds provided through the fy2008 supplemental .

fy2010 appropriations in the fy2010 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

111-117 ) , congress appropriated "up to" $83 million for the countries of central america "to combat drug trafficking and related violence and organized crime , and for judicial reform , institution building , anti - corruption , rule of law activities , and maritime security. .

after consultations with congress , the state department allocated an additional $12 million in esf from funds appropriated to its western hemisphere regional account to crime and violence prevention programs administered by usaid .

the state department later reprogrammed an additional $76 million in incle funding to the region , bringing total fy2010 carsi funding to $171 million .

the conference report to the act ( h.rept .

111-366 ) split central america funding from the mérida initiative and placed it under a new central america regional security initiative ( carsi ) .

the obama administration embraced the change as a way to focus more attention on the situation in central america and u.s. efforts in the region .

in addition to subjecting carsi funds to the same human rights conditions as previous years , the conference report to the act directed the secretary of state to submit a report within 90 days of enactment detailing regional threats or problems to be addressed in the region , as well as realistic goals for u.s. efforts and actions planned to achieve them .

fy2011 appropriations after a series of continuing resolutions , the fy2011 department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act ( p.l .

112-10 ) was signed into law on april 15 , 2011 .

the legislation had no accompanying report and did not designate a funding level for carsi .

it did , however , direct the obama administration to report back to congress within 30 days on its proposed allocations of the appropriated funds .

after consultations with congress , the department of state allocated $101.5 million for carsi in fy2011 .

the funds were subject to the same human rights conditions as previous years .

fy2012 appropriations president obama signed the consolidated appropriations act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) into law on december 23 , 2011 .

although the legislation did not designate a funding level for carsi , the accompanying report ( h.rept .

112-331 ) noted the conferees' support for the obama administration's budget request , which was $100 million .

the report also directed the secretary of state to submit a spending plan for carsi noting "activities that were conducted with prior year appropriations , achievements associated with the expenditure of such funds , and activities that will be funded in fiscal year 2012 , including goals to be met. .

the state department submitted the fy2012 carsi spending plan to congress in june 2012 .

according to the spending plan , carsi funding for fy2012 was increased to $135 million .

neither the legislation nor the accompanying report included the human rights provisions from previous years that required the department of state to withhold a portion of carsi funding until certain conditions were met .

the legislation did include a new honduras - specific provision , however , that required the department of state to withhold 20% of the funds for honduran military and police forces until the secretary of state could report that the honduran government was ( 1 ) implementing policies to protect freedom of expression and association , and due process of law ; and ( 2 ) investigating and prosecuting military and police personnel who are credibly alleged to have violated human rights .

the provision did not apply to assistance intended to promote transparency , anti - corruption , and the rule of law within the military and police forces .

fy2013 appropriations after enacting a six - month continuing resolution ( p.l .

112-175 ) in september 2012 , congress approved the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 ( p.l .

113-6 ) on march 21 , 2013 .

signed into law by the president on march 26 , 2013 , the act provided funding for federal programs through the end of fy2013 .

the act did not include a specific funding level for carsi .

nor did it include any restrictions on carsi aid .

however , it did maintain the human rights conditions on security assistance for honduras that were enacted in fy2012 .

after consulting with congress , the state department allocated $145.6 million for carsi in fy2013 .

the state department later reprogrammed an additional $600,000 in incle funding to the region , increasing total fy2013 carsi funding to $146.2 million .

fy2014 appropriations after an appropriations lapse that resulted in a 16-day u.s. government shutdown and two short - term continuing resolutions ( p.l .

113-46 and p.l .

113-73 ) , the president signed into law the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) on january 17 , 2014 .

the joint explanatory statement accompanying the act stipulated that $61.5 million in esf aid and $100 million in incle assistance should be provided through carsi in fy2014 .

the act did not include broad restrictions on carsi aid .

it did , however , alter the restrictions on security aid to honduras ( originally enacted in fy2012 ) by increasing the withholding requirement from 20% to 35% , increasing the number of human rights conditions that need to be certified by the state department , and slightly broadening the exception so that the withholding requirement does not apply to border security funding .

fy2015 appropriations president obama signed into law the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) on december 16 , 2014 .

the explanatory statement accompanying the act stipulated that $100 million in esf aid and $160 million in incle assistance should be provided through carsi in fy2015 .

after consultations with congress , the state department increased incle funding for carsi to $170 million .

the act maintained restrictions on security aid to honduras ( originally enacted in fy2012 ) , but reduced the withholding requirement from 35% to 25% and broadened the exception so that the withholding requirement does not apply to programs related to maritime security or human trafficking .

the explanatory statement directed the administration to use carsi funding to implement a "strategy to address the key factors in the countries in central america contributing to the migration of unaccompanied , undocumented minors to the united states. .

it stipulated that esf - funded programs should "improve prosperity in the region by focusing on education , vocational training , and employment opportunities , and should seek to strengthen families , including by reducing child abuse and neglect and facilitating foster care and adoption. .

it also stipulated that incle funding should support "enhanced border security initiatives , anti - trafficking and anti - gang programs , and counternarcotics and law enforcement activities. .

