one of the main congressional concerns related to the budget process in recent years has been the amount of time it requires .

the current process , which provides for consideration of various budget questions in the form of a concurrent resolution on the budget , reconciliation measures , tax measures , public debt measures , authorizations , regular appropriations , continuing appropriations , and supplemental appropriations , has been faulted as repetitive and inefficient .

this , in turn , has fueled interest in the idea that the congressional budget process could be better structured to promote a more efficient use of congress's limited time .

despite the perceived or actual permanence of much federal spending , the process of formulating , enacting , and executing the federal budget has remained characteristically annual .

this annual budget cycle poses both an opportunity and a dilemma for congress — although the annual review of spending legislation can afford congress the opportunity to maximize its influence concerning the funding and operation of various programs and policies , many members have expressed concern with the high percentage of the congressional workload that is devoted to budgetary matters .

the annual completion of the budget cycle is dependent on the timely enactment of budgetary legislation .

consideration of certain types of budgetary legislation is often closely linked to the consideration of other types , so that delays in consideration of one measure may have an impact on the timing of all subsequent budgetary legislation .

in recent years , final action occurred on appropriations measures an average of about 104 days after the start of the fiscal year on october 1 ( see table 1 ) .

the result has been frustration with the budget process and a desire to reduce the number or frequency of budget measures that need to be considered .

the budget process has also been criticized as being unnecessarily repetitive , with some questions being debated in various forms several times each year .

defense policy , for example , may be debated in terms of its priority within the overall budget in the context of the budget resolution , in terms of policy in an authorization measure , and in terms of funding levels on an appropriations bill , only to have it all repeated the following year .

rather than promote efficient consideration , critics contend , this repetition has contributed to the complexity of the budget process , as well as to inefficiency and delay .

a number of possible reforms , such as automatic continuing resolutions , joint budget resolutions , or merging the authorization and appropriations processes , have been advanced , at least in part , in the hope that they could make the budget process operate in a more timely fashion .

for example , advocates of an automatic continuing resolution have argued that it could reduce deadline pressures in the appropriations process ; those in favor of a joint budget resolution suggest that it would promote early agreement on budget priorities between congress and the president ; and some argue that a merged authorization - appropriations process could reduce the volume of legislation that needs to be considered in any given session of congress .

as a result , some see these and other proposed reforms as offering the potential to make the timely enactment of budget legislation more likely .

another possible approach to addressing this concern is to change the budget cycle from one year to two years , also known as "biennial budgeting. .

because budgeting for the federal government encompasses a number of types of measures , biennial budgeting can have several meanings .

biennial budgeting can involve two - year budget resolutions , two - year appropriations , and other changes in the timing of legislation related to revenue or spending .

typically , biennial budgeting proposals have included at least the first two aspects .

biennial budgeting proposals may focus on enacting budgetary legislation for either a two - year period or two succeeding one - year periods in a single measure .

in addition , biennial budget proposals typically require that executive branch planning and performance reviews be revised so that they are based on a two - year cycle .

this report provides background on options , issues , and previous congressional action related to biennial budgeting .

biennial budgeting as a concept has many permutations , and may include a requirement for two - year budget resolutions , two - year appropriations , and also affect the timing of consideration for other types of legislation related to revenue and spending .

the overall time frame contained in previous biennial budgeting proposals has typically taken either a "stretch" or "split sessions" approach .

the stretch approach would extend the current budget process timetable to two full years .

advocates of this approach often argue that it allows for less hurried and more thorough consideration of budgetary legislation .

in contrast , the split sessions approach is based on the expectation that all budgetary legislation would be considered in a single year or session of congress ( typically the first ) , while consideration of non - budgetary matters would occur primarily in the other year or session .

advocates of this approach often assert that limiting the time frame during which congress may consider budgetary matters to every other year or session will encourage greater levels of agency and program oversight during the other .

biennial budgeting proposals have also varied with respect to the time frame for appropriations .

"biennial appropriations" may refer to all appropriations being enacted for a two - year period , all appropriations being enacted for two succeeding one - year periods in a single measure .

in addition , the consideration of the 12 regular appropriations bills might occur in stages , so that some are enacted during the first year of the biennium and the others are enacted during the second year of the biennium .

because of the variety of approaches discussed above , biennial budgeting may have different meanings for different people .

this section provides an overview of the options and selected issues related to two - year budget resolutions , two - year appropriations acts , and other possible changes in the timing of other types of legislation that might be associated with biennial budgeting .

it is important to note , however , that this section does not discuss all possible outcomes and there is likely to be variance in what would occur if biennial budgeting were adopted , depending on the context and framework that was implemented .

whether these implications are viewed positively or negatively depends on the observer's assessment of the probable consequences of switching to a biennial budget , as well as the normative value placed on those consequences .

aside from issues concerning how particular aspects of biennial budgeting might work in practice , a number of arguments have been made for and against its overall utility .

these arguments are primarily drawn from congressional hearings , analyses of biennial budgeting by governmental committees and commissions , and scholarly articles and reports issued by think tanks analyzing various budget process reform proposals .

note that some of these arguments are based upon the potential implications discussed in the previous section .

while these arguments are not an exhaustive list of all reasons why biennial budgeting proposals have been supported or opposed , and their applicability is heavily dependent upon the type of biennial budgeting being considered , they are representative of the debate that has developed over the past 30 years .

perhaps because many representatives and senators have government experience at the state level , state practices are often cited in deliberations on budget process reform .

in particular , 19 states operate under a two - year budget cycle ( see table 2 ) , and this experience has been cited by many in discussing the applicability of biennial budgeting to the federal government .

however , the state experience does not provide any single answer concerning biennial budgeting .

some states that operate under an annual cycle have significant portions of their budget enacted on a two - year cycle .

for example , missouri enacts its operating budget on an annual cycle , but its capital budget on a biennial cycle , whereas kansas budgets for some regulatory agencies two years at a time within the overall context of an annual budget .

conversely , some states with biennial cycles do a significant portion of their budgeting on an annual basis .

for example , virginia and oregon both enact a biennial budget that is routinely amended during the session when the budget is being executed .

minnesota considers both its operating and capital budgets on two - year cycles , but in different years .

as a result , supporting examples can be found both for and against adopting a two - year cycle at the federal level .

one argument of opponents of a two - year cycle has been that the trend among states has been to shift from biennial to annual budget cycles , particularly in those states with larger populations .

this trend , opponents have suggested , demonstrates that biennial budgeting represents a way of budgeting less applicable to modern circumstances .

in support of this , they have pointed out that , while 44 states operated with biennial budget cycles in 1940 , this was because most state legislatures at that time tended to meet every other year .

as of 2011 , with the prevalence of annual sessions , 31 states use annual cycles , including 7 of the 10 most populous states .

however , not all states have made changes in favor of annual budgeting .

at least three states ( hawaii in 1967 , nebraska in 1987 , and connecticut in 1991 ) have switched to biennial budgeting after extended periods in which they used an annual cycle , while several others ( indiana , minnesota , and wisconsin ) returned to biennial cycles after brief experiments with annual budgets .

as discussed above , one of the main arguments made by opponents of biennial budgeting has been that it would inevitably lead to greater authority for the president .

again the experience at the state level is inconclusive .

both annual and biennial budget cycles have been coupled with varying degrees of executive branch discretion and authority .

for example , maine , with a biennial budget , has far stricter limits on the governor's authority to transfer funds or cut spending unilaterally than does south dakota , with an annual budget .

the natural tension between the desire for longer planning horizons and the increasing inaccuracy of budget projections when stretched over longer periods has not been solved at the state level .

this is because the same basic system of funding stability and incremental budget changes that characterizes federal budgeting also operates in the state context .

few state programs are subject to sweeping changes in any given year , regardless of the budget cycle .

this might suggest that both the assertions of a need for a longer budget cycle to ensure better planning and fears related to the inadequacy of long - term forecasts of budgetary needs might be overstated .

almost from the time the congressional budget act was enacted in 1974 , budget process reform has been a topic of congressional interest and biennial budgeting has been discussed at least since the 95 th congress ( 1977-1978 ) .

hearings on the subject of budget process reform have often included testimony concerning biennial budgeting .

in addition , on several occasions , both house and senate committees have conducted hearings specifically on the topic of biennial budgeting .

congressional interest in biennial budgeting has also been demonstrated by survey findings and by the level of cosponsorship of biennial budgeting proposals .

biennial budgeting has also been considered by a number of federal committees and commissions organized to study possible procedural or structural reforms to congress , the budget process , or both .

in addition to the gore commission the national economic commission , and the study group on senate practices and procedures ( also known as the pearson - ribicoff commission ) recommended a form of biennial budgeting .

in 1993 , both the senate and house members of the joint committee on the organization of congress included proposals for a two - year budget cycle in recommendations to their respective chambers ( s.rept .

103-215 , vol .

1 , and h.rept .

103-413 , vol .

1 ) .

in recent years , house jurisdiction over budget process reform generally has been shared jointly by the committee on rules and the committee on the budget ; both have considered the issue of biennial budgeting .

in the senate , prior to the 109 th congress , jurisdiction over the budget process was shared jointly by the committee on governmental affairs and the committee on the budget , under a standing order of the senate ( first agreed to august 4 , 1977 , and discontinued as of january 2005 ) .

jurisdiction over the budget process is currently held by the senate budget committee .

congressional action related to biennial budgeting first occurred in 1982 with hearings on s. 2008 , the budget and oversight reform act of 1981 ( 97 th congress ) .

additional action , outlined below , occurred with respect to biennial budgeting during the 100 th , 101 st , 102 nd , 103 rd , 104 th , 105 th , 106 th , 107 th , 108 th , 109 th , 112 th , and 113 th congresses .

none of these proposals were ultimately enacted .

in the 112 th congress , the house rules committee subcommittee on the legislative and budget process held a hearing on h.r .

114 , the biennial budgeting and appropriations act of 2011 ; no further action occurred during that congress .

in the 113 th congress , the senate adopted an amendment ( s.amdt .

136 ) to the fy2014 budget resolution ( s.con.res .

8 ) that created a deficit neutral reserve fund for the establishment of a biennial budget and appropriations process .

additionally , the house budget committee reported h.r .

1869 , the biennial budgeting and enhanced oversight act of 2014 , with an amendment ( h.rept .

113-382 ) .

s. 2008 , the budget and oversight reform act of 1981 , was introduced on january 25 , 1982 .

this bill would have amended the congressional budget act to provide for a biennial budget cycle .

the measure was jointly referred to the senate committee on the budget and committee on governmental affairs .

the committee on the budget held hearings on the measure on september 14 , 16 , 21 , and 23 , 1982 .

s. 2008 was not reported out of committee .

on may 6 , 1987 , during consideration of s.con.res .

49 , the budget resolution for fy1988 , an amendment ( s.amdt .

186 to s.amdt .

174 ) was offered on the floor of the senate to express the sense of the congress that biennial budget process should be enacted into law that year .

the amendment was tabled , 53-45 .

s. 2478 , the biennial budget act of 1988 , was introduced on june 7 , 1988 .

the measure was jointly referred to the senate committee on the budget and committee on governmental affairs .

the committee on governmental affairs held hearings on the measure on june 7 , 1988 .

s. 2478 was reported by the committee on governmental affairs on august 25 , 1988 , with amendments ( s.rept .

100-499 ) .

no further action was taken .

s. 29 , the biennial budget act , was introduced on january 25 , 1989 .

the measure was jointly referred to the senate committee on the budget and committee on governmental affairs .

the committees on budget and governmental affairs held joint hearings on the measure on october 18 , 1989 .

s. 29 was reported by the committee on governmental affairs on march 21 , 1990 ( s.rept .

101-254 ) .

no further action was taken .

on may 4 , 1989 , during consideration of s.con.res .

30 , the senate budget resolution for fy1990 , an amendment ( s.amdt .

88 ) was offered on the floor of the senate to express the sense of the senate that congress should enact legislation to establish a biennial budget process .

the amendment was agreed to by a voice vote and was included in the senate substitute amendment to h.con.res .

106 , the vehicle for the fy1990 budget resolution .

this provision was ultimately removed in conference ( h.rept .

101-50 ) .

h.r .

1889 , the budget simplification and reform act of 1991 , was introduced on april 17 , 1991 .

this budget process reform bill included provisions establishing a biennial budget .

the measure was jointly referred to committee on governmental operations ( and subsequently referred to the subcommittee on legislation and national security ) and the committee on rules ( and subsequently referred to the subcommittee on the legislative process ) .

the subcommittee on the legislative process held hearings on the measure on september 18 and 25 , 1992 .

h.r .

1889 was not reported out of committee .

h.r .

3801 , the legislative reorganization act of 1994 , was introduced on february 3 , 1994 .

this bill included provisions establishing a biennial budget .

the measure was jointly referred to the committees on government operations , house administration , and rules ( and subsequently referred to the subcommittee on the rules of the house and subcommittee on the legislative process ) .

the committee on house administration held hearings on the measure on june 14 , 30 , and july 14 , 1994 .

the subcommittee on the rules of the house held hearings on march 9 , 10 , 16 , 24 , and april 13 , 1994 .

the subcommittee on legislative process held hearings on february 25 and march 2 , 1994 .

no further action was taken .

s. 1824 , the companion measure to h.r .

3801 , was introduced on february 3 , 1994 .

the measure was referred to the committee on rules , which held hearings on february 10 , 24 , march 10 , 17 , and april 28 ( s.hrg .

103-488 ) .

the bill was reported with an amendment on july 1 , 1994 ( s.rept .

103-297 ) .

no further action was taken .

s. 261 , the biennial budgeting and appropriations act , was introduced on february 4 , 1997 .

the measure was jointly referred to the committee on the budget and committee on governmental affairs .

the committee on the budget held a hearing on february 13 , 1997 .

the committee on governmental affairs held a hearing on april 23 , 1997 ( s.hrg .

105-138 ) .

the bill was reported by the committee on governmental affairs with an amendment in the nature of a substitute on september 4 , 1997 ( s.rept .

105-72 ) .

no further action was taken .

s. 92 , the biennial budgeting and appropriations act , was introduced on january 19 , 1999 .

the measure was jointly referred to the committee on the budget and committee on governmental affairs .

the committees on the budget and governmental affairs held a joint hearing on january 27 , 1999 .

the bill was reported by the committee on governmental affairs with an amendment in the nature of a substitute on march 10 , 1999 ( s.rept .

106-12 ) .

no further action was taken .

s. 93 , the budget enforcement act of 1999 , was introduced on january 19 , 1999 .

this bill included provisions providing for a biennial budget .

the measure was jointly referred to the committee on the budget and committee on governmental affairs .

the committees on the budget and governmental affairs held a joint hearing on january 27 , 1999 .

no further action was taken .

on may 16 , 2000 , during consideration of h.r .

853 , an amendment ( h.amdt .

708 ) was offered on the floor of the house to add a new title establishing a biennial budget process .

the amendment was rejected , 201-217 .

h.r .

981 , the budget responsibility and efficiency act of 2001 , was introduced on march 13 , 2001 .

this bill would have amended the congressional budget act to provide for a biennial budget cycle .

the measure was jointly referred to the committee on the budget , committee on rules , and committee on government reform .

the committee on the budget reported the measure with an amendment on september 5 , 2001 ( h.rept .

107-200 , part i ) .

the committee on rules reported the measure with an amendment on november 14 , 2001 ( h.rept .

107-200 , part 2 ) .

no further action was taken .

during house consideration of h.r .

4663 , the spending control act of 2004 , an amendment ( h.amdt .

621 ) was offered that sought to replace the text of the bill with the "family budget protection act of 2004," a budget process reform proposal containing provisions to provide for a biennial budget .

the amendment was rejected , 88-326 .

s. 3521 , the stop over spending act of 2006 , was introduced on june 15 , 2006 .

this bill contained provisions providing for a biennial budget cycle .

the measure was referred to the committee on the budget , which reported the measure with an amendment on july 14 , 2006 ( s.rept .

109-283 ) .

no further action was taken .

h.r .

114 , the biennial budgeting and appropriations act of 2011 , was introduced on january 5 , 2011 .

the measure was jointly referred to the committees on the budget , oversight and government reform , and rules ( and subsequently referred to the subcommittee on the legislative and budget process ) .

the subcommittee on the legislative and budget process held a hearing on january 24 , 2012 .

no further action was taken .

during senate consideration of s.con.res .

8 , the fy2014 budget resolution , an amendment was offered that created a deficit neutral reserve fund for the establishment of a biennial budget and appropriations process ( s.amdt .

136 ) .

the amendment was adopted , 68-31 .

the resolution passed the senate , 50-49 , but final action on resolving differences did not occur before the end of the congress .

h.r .

1869 , the biennial budgeting and enhanced oversight act of 2014 , was introduced on may 8 , 2013 .

the measure was jointly referred to the committees on the budget , oversight and government reform , and rules .

the committee on the budget reported the measure with an amendment on march 21 , 2014 ( h.rept .

113-382 ) .

after the measure was discharged from the committee on oversight and government reform on march 21 , 2014 , and the committee on rules on december 11 , 2014 , no further congressional action occurred .

