the national institutes of health ( nih ) is the primary agency of the federal government charged with performing and supporting biomedical and behavioral research .

it has major roles in training biomedical researchers and disseminating health information .

the nih mission is "to seek fundamental knowledge about the nature and behavior of living systems and the application of that knowledge to enhance health , lengthen life , and reduce illness and disability. .

as of fy2018 , nih was the largest single public funder of biomedical research in the world .

congress maintains a high level of interest in nih for a variety of reasons .

nih funds extramural researchers in every state , and widespread constituencies contact congress about funding for particular diseases and levels of research support in general .

nih is the largest and most visible contributor to the federal biomedical research effort ; it represents about half of federal spending for non - department of defense research and development ( r&d ) and about one - fifth of total federal r&d funding .

it has the largest budget of the eight health - related agencies that make up the public health service ( phs ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

in fy2018 , discretionary appropriations to nih constituted about 40% of all hhs discretionary budget authority .

nih - funded research has contributed to major scientific advances .

to date , 156 nih - funded researchers have received nobel prizes for their work .

nih - funded research has led to major medical innovations such as treatments for heart disease , cancer , and hiv / aids .

such advances have been credited with helping increase life expectancy and prevent millions of deaths .

however , in light of the high cost of new medical innovations , some question whether nih priorities are too focused on research that leads to new treatments rather than on disease prevention or improving the value of medical care .

the allocation of nih research dollars is a major source of debate .

nih has seen periods of both low and high funding growth .

from fy1998 to fy2003 , congress doubled the nih budget over a five - year period , from $13.7 billion to $27.1 billion .

the agency then saw low funding growth or cuts from fy2004 to fy2015 .

from fy2016 through fy2019 , congress provided nih with funding increases of over 5% each year , increasing funding from $30.3 billion in fy2015 to $39.3 billion in fy2019 .

under president trump's budget request for fy2020 , nih would be provided a program level of $34.3 billion — a 12.6% reduction from the fy2019 program level .

some members of the scientific community have cited funding variability and uncertainty as a hindrance for advancing biomedical research .

they have called for steady and predictable funding growth to support the multiyear nature of research .

others have questioned whether universities and other research institutions are too reliant on nih funding and if institutions should diversify their funding sources or use institutional funds to pay for research .

aside from funding , other potential issues of for many in congress and the research community may include allocating funding across disease types , areas of human health , and types of research ; addressing congressional priorities and concerns , while ensuring the scientific merit and quality of nih - funded research ; helping new and early - stage investigators obtain their first independent research grants ; maintaining the united states' role as a leader in biomedical research ; balancing the public and private sectors' relative roles in biomedical research .

this report provides background and analysis on nih organization , mission , budget , and history ; outlines the agency's major responsibilities ; and discusses some of the issues facing congress as it works to guide and monitor the nation's investment in medical research .

nih research spans all fields of biomedical and behavioral research , from basic investigation of biological mechanisms to testing new therapeutics in clinical research .

the ics sponsor two categories of research: extramural research , performed by nonfederal scientists using nih grant or contract money , and intramural research , performed by federal nih scientists in the nih - operated laboratories and clinical center .

in both the extramural and intramural programs , the research projects are largely investigator - initiated .

nih also supports a range of extramural and intramural research training programs to prepare young investigators for research careers , and it engages in a number of information dissemination activities to reach various audiences .

funding for research makes up most of nih spending .

figure 1 shows the breakdown of nih obligations by mechanism .

displaying budget data by mechanism reveals the balance between extramural ( eg , research grants , research centers , and r&d contracts ) and intramural funding , as well as the relative emphasis on support of individual investigator - led research ( eg , research grants and intramural research ) versus funding of contracted projects ( eg , r&d contracts ) .

at $39 billion for fy2019 , nih's budget is much larger than those of other phs agencies such as the food and drug administration ( fda ) , centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , indian health service ( ihs ) , and the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) .

about 40% of all discretionary hhs funding is provided to nih .

moreover , nih represents about half of federal spending for non - department of defense research and development ( r&d ) and about one - fifth of total federal r&d funding .

nih has seen periods of high and low budget increases .

prior to 2004 , congress had doubled the nih program level over a five - year period from its fy1998 base of $13.7 billion to the fy2003 level of $27.1 billion .

subsequently , nih experienced a decade of stagnant growth in the agency's budget .

congress provided budget increases generally around 1% - 3.2% from fy2004 to fy2015 , often lower than the rate of inflation for biomedical research , which resulted in reduced purchasing power for the agency .

in some years , ( fy2006 , fy2011 , and fy2013 ) funding for the agency decreased in nominal dollars .

starting in fy2016 through fy2019 , congress provided nih with funding increases of over 5% each year , increasing the program level from $30.3 billion in fy2015 to $39.3 billion in fy2019 .

in inflation - adjusted fy2019 dollars , the nih program level remains 9% below the 2003 level .

under president trump's fy2020 budget request , nih would be provided a program level of $34.3 billion — a 12.6% reduction from the fy2019 program level .

in inflation - adjusted fy2020 dollars , this proposed fy2020 program level would be 22.6% below the peak 2003 level .

see figure 4 for a visualization of nih budget trends from fy1994 to fy2020 .

nih funds research on hundreds of diseases , conditions , and areas of human health .

nih funding is highly competitive — 20.9% of all grant applications were funded in fy2018 .

nih and congress face trade - offs in allocating funding in a fair manner that balances the scientific merit of proposals with meeting the diverse health needs of the population .

funding decisions are especially difficult because science is a process of discovery — even experts cannot always predict which proposals will lead to breakthroughs .

historic tensions have included whether to designate funding for specific diseases and areas of research or to allow untargeted funding for the most meritorious proposals identified through the peer review process ; balancing funding for basic scientific research with applied research ; whether funding should go to certain ethically contentious research areas , such as embryonic stem cell research ; how to fund research on the most pervasive diseases and conditions while also funding research on rare diseases ; and how to allocate funding among established and successful scientists while enabling new scientists to enter the field .

historically , congress allowed nih ics , for the most part , to fund research based on their own internal prioritization process , which involves scientific experts , patient advocates , and others .

in recent years , congress has provided more direction to nih funding in both appropriations report language and legislation .

the following sections summarize ( 1 ) congressional involvement in nih research priorities , including recent major efforts , legislation , and research restrictions , and ( 2 ) nih internal processes for setting research priorities through strategic planning and advisory groups .

nih is not the only federal agency that supports biomedical and health - related research .

the department of defense ( dod ) and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) and others also support medical research programs .

in fy2019 , the nih program level was $39.3 billion , the va appropriation for medical research was $779 million , and the dod's defense health program's research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) account received $2.18 billion , including $1.47 billion for the congressionally directed medical research program ( cdmrp ) .

a 2016 national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine ( nasem ) report examined duplication and coordination of research funded by nih , dod , and va .

the report found that some formal mechanisms helped reduce duplication , such as interagency coordinating committees , common grant portals , and assessing other funding sources in grant application review .

however , the agencies each lack comprehensive information about the other agencies' activities , which "limits their ability to identify potential areas of duplication. .

in addition , other agencies support health - related research , such as the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and the agency for healthcare quality and research ( ahrq ) .

although the below discussion focuses on research priorities at nih , congress may consider how to prioritize and coordinate funding for medical and health - related research across the federal government .

because of variation in annual appropriations , nih cannot support the same number of research projects from year to year .

in years of large funding increases , the agency may proportionally increase research awards .

when funding is cut the agency may limit the number of research grants awarded .

given that most grants are multiyear grants that have "non - competing" status during the duration of the project , much of nih funding is committed even before appropriations are finalized ( though these grant renewals remain "subject to appropriations" ) .

reductions in nih purchasing power may lead to reductions in "competing" grants awarded , or grants for new research projects — potentially creating a more competitive environment for new nih awards .

figure 5 shows nih research project grant ( rpg ) numbers and success rates for new grant applications annually from fy2003 to fy2018 .

nih supported about the same total number of rpgs each year from fy2003 to fy2008 , but it supported fewer rpgs after fy2008 and has only started to increase the annual number of rpgs awarded in fy2016 .

concurrently , the average cost of an rpg has increased from $337.8 thousand in 2003 to $518.0 thousand in 2018 .

to maintain existing funding commitments , nih mostly maintained the number of noncompeting grants from year to year , while cutting back on awarding competing project grants from fy2009 to fy2015 — grants that fund new research projects .

success rates for grant applications , or the percentage of applications that received funding , has also varied from year to year — likely due to a combination of decreased purchasing power as well as an increasing pool of applicants .

as shown in figure 5 , the success rate for new grant applications was 30% in fy2003 , fell to a low of 17% in fy2013 , and rose to 21% in fy2018 .

the decrease in purchasing power — 22% lower in fy2013 than in fy2003 — may have curtailed nih's ability to support new projects , and therefore reduced the proportion of grant applicants who received funding .

in addition , though the number of competing grants awarded by nih in fy2016 returned to above fy2007 levels , the success rate for applicants was lower in fy2016-fy2018 than prior to fy2007 .

the decline in success rates therefore also reflects a growing pool of investigators who are competing for nih funding .

in fy2003 , nih received 34,710 applications for rpgs , which rose to 49,581 applications in fy2013 and then to 54,834 in fy2018 .

the number of applications rose by 58% between fy2003 and fy2018 .

the average success rate at nih reflects varying success rates for applications to different ics .

success rates for the various ics in fy2018 range from 10.3% for the national institute of nursing research ( ninr ) and 10.7% for the national institute on minority health and health disparities ( nimhd ) , at the low end , to 34.8% for the national center for advancing translational sciences ( ncats ) and 33.3% for the national institute on drug abuse ( nida ) , at the high end .

science editor - in - chief , jeremy berg argues that variation in funding from year to year may affect scientific progress: such fluctuations have important consequences .

outstanding applications that would have been funded one year go unsupported the next year , so that potentially ground - breaking research may be missed for arbitrary reasons of timing .

low success rates result in scientists spending more time writing and reviewing proposals instead of conducting research .

investigators , particularly those at vulnerable career stages , can become demoralized by the apparently capricious nature of funding decisions .

members of the scientific community have called for steady , predictable annual growth in nih funding ; a long - term strategy for federal research investment ; and greater increases in federal funding for biomedical research .

some argue that research institutions and universities have become too reliant on nih funding .

in 2017 , federal dollars made up about 60% of all funding to higher education institutions for "biological and biomedical sciences research," and 53% of all funding for "health sciences" research .

one commentary , published in 2018 , explored how universities rely on nih funding for researchers' salaries and laboratory facilities .

during the doubling period of nih funding from 2000 to 2004 , universities rapidly increased square footage of laboratory space and hired more scientists — possibly assuming future increases in nih funds to support their growth .

the growth in laboratories heightened the need and competition for nih grants .

according to the author , universities have switched to mostly financing researchers' salaries with grant funds in the past few decades .

in the 1970s , universities paid about 75% of researchers' salaries ; in 2014 , many researchers received , on average , 65% of their salary from grants ( based on available evidence ; many universities do not share salary data ) .

as a result of reliance on competitive grant funding , researchers are spending increasing amounts of their time writing grant applications rather than conducting science .

the author argues that universities should commit more of their "hard money," or institutional funds , for research salaries and facilities to ensure the sustainability of biomedical research .

nih director francis collins alluded to this issue in a january 2010 interview , stating that universities are "becoming too reliant on nih money , allowing faculty members to obtain all their income from federal research grants. .

dr. collins indicated that when faculty members run multiple research projects at the same time , "that turns that investigator into a grant - writing machine perhaps more than a doing - of - science machine. .

however , he said , any new restrictions on nih grants "would have to be phased in over a fairly long period of time because many universities and faculty members would find that quite disruptive. .

president trump's fy2018 , fy2019 , and fy2020 budget proposals have included initiatives designed to "stretch available grant dollars. .

the fy2018 budget proposal would cap the indirect costs that could be covered by nih grants ( facilities and administrative — or f&a — costs ) at 10% of the total grant award to reduce the overall cost of an rpg .

over the previous 10 years , approximately 28% of grants were used to cover f&a costs .

both the house and senate appropriations committees rejected the proposal to cap f&a costs .

the report accompanying h.r .

3358 ( h.rept .

115-244 ) stated that the trump administration's proposed cap on indirect ( f&a ) costs was "misguided and would have a devastating impact on biomedical research across the country. .

the fy2019 budget request proposed capping the percentage of an investigator's salary that can be paid with grant funds at 90% .

it also proposed capping investigator salaries at $152,000 , a 19% reduction from the current $187,000 limit .

in the report accompanying h.r .

6470 , the house appropriations committee stated that it did not include the general provision in the budget request to limit the percentage of a researcher's salary that may be paid for using nih grant funds , as the impact of such a change is unclear .

the report stated , "the committee requests an analysis of the projected impact of such a policy change on the number and average cost of nih grants , as well as on academic institutions , in the fiscal year 2020 congressional justification" the fy2020 budget request , again , included the proposal to cap the percentage of an investigator's salary that can be paid with grant funds at 90% .

in the requested analysis published in the fy2020 congressional justification , nih stated that "no previous research examines the impact of reducing the salary cap on the number of grants and the average cost per grant. .

nih noted that a salary cap reduction in fy2011 did not reduce the average cost of nih grants and that the number of nih grants awarded decreased , though other factors may have affected grant numbers and average costs .

nih also noted that an unintended consequence of the policy could be that institutions will have to make up for the rest of researchers' salaries , which "may limit the number of applicants with sufficient resources to participate in federally - funded research. .

nih is concerned about retaining and attracting new scientists for biomedical research careers .

in the past two decades , early - stage scientists have received a declining percentage of nih grants and have spent more time in low - paid postdoctoral training positions .

the number of traditional faculty positions in biomedical research has declined , while the number of postdoctoral positions has increased , creating a highly competitive and pessimistic outlook for obtaining traditional academic research positions .

a 2018 national academies of sciences , engineering and medicine ( nasem ) report stated that , "these obstacles to success have created a research career path that is increasingly unattractive in terms of pay , duration , culture , risk - taking , and future job prospects. .

a relatively large portion of nih funding goes to older and more established researchers .

between 1998 and 2014 , the proportion of nih - funded investigators over the age of 65 increased from 5% to 12% , while those younger than 50 declined from 54% to 39% .

the average age at which an investigator first obtained an independent grant increased by more than five years between 1990 and 2016 .

during that time , the average age at which a new investigator first obtained a r01 grant ( independent research project grant ) increased from 36 years for phds and 38 years for mds , to 42 years for phds and 45 years for mds , respectively .

another analysis from the nih office of extramural research also found that the percentage of the nih workforce made up of new investigators and early - stage investigators had declined between 2009 and 2016 .

in addition , the success rate for new investigators fell from 40% in 1962 to 27% in 2013 .

a 2018 gao analysis found that "extramural investigators who had received at least one large nih research grant during fiscal years 2013 through 2017 were more likely to receive such grants in subsequent application cycles than investigators who had not yet received such grants. .

according to a 2017 study , a minority of highly funded researchers have received an increasing percentage of nih grants in recent years .

in 2015 , the top 10% of nih grant winners by total award received 37% of nih funding , an increase from the 32% received in 1985 , but down from a peak of 40% of total funding in 2010 .

in contrast , the bottom 40% of principal investigators received 12% of total funding in 2015 , down from 16% in 1985 .

of note , 2010 and 2015 were years of low funding growth , and therefore nih might have been expected to make fewer new grant commitments to new investigators in these years , in order to sustain funding for ongoing research .

in addition , the authors of the study described a lack of mobility for investigators .

they concluded that researchers who start at the top tend to remain there , while researchers receiving a lower portion of funding remain poorly funded .

scientists in the top 20% of funding have more publications and citations , which may help explain grant success .

as previously mentioned , the 21 st century cures act ( p.l .

114-255 ) established the next generation of researchers initiative ( ngri ) within the office of the nih director .

this initiative is intended to provide opportunities for earlier independence while enhancing workforce diversity .

superseding previous policy on early - stage investigators , it requires the nih director to develop new policies and programs that promote opportunities for new researchers to receive funding , enhance training , and encourage workforce diversity .

nih has faced challenges in attempting to implement ngri .

in may 2017 , nih proposed to cap funding for highly funded investigators through a measure termed the grant support index ( gsi ) to free up funding to early - stage investigators and others who receive less funding .

some members of the scientific community strongly opposed the gsi , arguing that it represented a move away from a merit - based system of allocating funding , would discourage collaboration and training , and was based on flawed analysis .

others argued that the highly funded researchers and institutions who would be affected by the policy could afford to diversify their funding sources .

ultimately , nih cancelled the proposal after facing criticism at a council of councils meeting .

as an alternative to gsi , in august 2017 nih announced the official policy for the ngri , which called on ics to prioritize awards that fund early stage investigators ( esi ) and early established investigators ( eeis ) .

the policy defined esis as those who had completed training within 10 years and were gaining their first independent research award , and eeis as those who had completed training within 10 years and who were at risk of losing nih support or were supported only one active award .

through ngri , nih would free up "substantial funds" from its base budget to support esis and eeis .

nih announced the program would start with $210 million in fy2017 and increase to $1.1 billion in five years , pending funding availability .

ngri was established to complement existing grant award opportunities that support esis and eeis , such as the new innovator award and the early independence award .

under ngri , ics would develop evidence - based strategies to increase and retain esis / eeis , and nih would track their outcomes .

nih again faced criticism that the program would prioritize esis and eeis at the expense of established investigators , and that the rules for who qualified to be an esi or eei were too strict .

nih revised the policy to eliminate the eei category , instead prioritizing investigators at risk of losing funding regardless of age , and to be "flexible" in designating who qualified for esi status .

nih has established a working group to advise nih on ngri policy development .

despite apparent challenges , nih director francis collins stated at an august 2018 congressional hearing that the agency expects to fund more early - stage investigators than ever — 1,100 researchers — with their first grant in 2018 as a result of ngri .

the fy2020 budget request included further details about nih plans for ngri .

nih stated that it regularly collects data and evaluates outcomes on nih - funded trainees and their transition to an independent career .

in addition , the fy2020 budget request would provide $100 million in dedicated funding for ngri , and the request stated: in response to an advisory committee recommendation and a recent report from the national academy of sciences , nih is creating a new pathway for applications from early - stage investigators that does not require preliminary data and continues to provide a separate review of applications .

nih is also lengthening the window for early - stage eligibility to 11 years with additional flexibility due to significant life events .

as referred to in the above quote , in 2018 , nasem published a report that identified policy reforms to better support the next generation of biomedical researchers .

nih was directed to fund the report through the fy2016 lhhs appropriations act ( p.l .

114-113 , division h ) , and is required by the cures act to consider its recommendations and submit a report on actions taken to congress in 2020 .

in the 2018 report , the nasem committee found that while reductions in nih purchasing power have constrained grant funding available to early - stage investigators , universities and research institutions have been slower to make reforms and less responsive to the needs of early - stage investigators than nih .

for instance , many universities and research institutions may provide inadequate career counseling or job opportunities for new researchers .

the nasem committee therefore recommended policies that hold universities and research institutions accountable alongside the nih in supporting esis , and preparing them for diverse and nonacademic careers .

the committee also made recommendations for congress to create a council on ongoing challenges in biomedical research , and for nih to strengthen its programs for esis , among many others .

while the united states remains the lead funder of research and development , other countries — particularly china — have increased public funding for research in recent years .

a 2015 study compared investment in biomedical research in the united states and in other developed countries .

it found that u.s. government research funding declined from 57% ( 2004 ) to 49% ( 2011 ) of the global total , as did that of u.s. companies ( 50% to 41% ) , with the total u.s. ( public plus private ) share of global research funding declining from 57% to 44% .

asian countries ( china , japan , south korea , india and , singapore ) increased investment from $28 billion ( 2004 ) to $52.4 billion ( 2011 ) .

china , in particular , almost quadrupled funding on medical research , from $2 billion in 2007 to $8.4 billion in 2012 .

globally , the united states continues to be the top supporter of research and development .

nih is the top nonindustry ( governmental or philanthropic ) single funder of health research in the world .

the growth in international biomedical research can lead to certain benefits shared globally — such as a larger pool of scientists across the world contributing to new knowledge and medical innovations .

however , more research and development in other countries also means more competition for u.s. industries .

in 2011 , the united states led the world in publication of biomedical research articles — accounting for 33% of articles published .

however , in 2011 , china was the leader in life science patent applications — filing 30% of such patents globally .

the united states followed with 24% of life science patents .

academic scientists often seek partnerships with colleagues or recruit students from other countries to advance their work .

yet , as new discoveries are translated to commercial products , such partnerships could complicate the economic development goals of public investment in research .

some members of congress have expressed concern over the investments being made by other countries in biomedical research .

in section 809 , "policy statement on medical discovery , development , delivery and innovation," h.con.res .

27 found that the "united states leadership role is being threatened , however , as other countries contribute more to basic research from both public and private sources" and that the "organisation for economic development and cooperation [sic] predicts that china , for example , will outspend the united states in total research and development by the end of the decade. .

the growth in global biomedical research funding has contributed to a surge in research produced outside of the united states , as well as increasing collaboration between u.s. and international institutions .

a study of articles published from 2004 to 2013 in pubmed ( a database of biomedical research literature based at the u.s. national library of medicine ) found that published research funded by non - u.s. government sources had increased significantly during that period .

publications authored by european and asian authors had increased at a higher rate than those by american authors .

collaboration between u.s. and international institutions has also grown in the past few decades .

a study of cardiovascular research publications found that cross - border collaboration increased from 1992 to 2012 , with the united states having the highest number of cross - border collaborations .

nih actively encourages international collaboration through some of its grant opportunities .

a congressional hearing in august 2018 raised the issue of undue foreign influence in u.s. biomedical research .

nih director francis collins announced an investigation of research institutions for undue foreign influence in three key areas: first , failure by some researchers at nih - funded institutions to disclose substantial contributions of resources from other organizations , including foreign governments , which threatens to distort decisions about the appropriate use of nih funds .

second , diversion of intellectual property and grant applications [that] are produced by nih - supported biomedical research to other entities , including other countries .

and third , failure by some peer reviewers to keep information on grant applications confidential , including in some instances disclosure to foreign entities or other attempts to influence funding decisions .

dr. collins also announced a working group of university leaders to develop methods and policies that mitigate undue foreign influence .

despite the presence of bad actors , collins stressed the important role that foreign scientists have played in u.s. - funded research and reasserted the nih's commitment to "preserve the vibrancy of the diverse workforce. .

in a december 2018 report , the working group identified a chinese research training program that facilitates the transfer of u.s. intellectual property to the chinese government .

some participants from the program have received nih funding , though they represent a small portion of foreign researchers in the united states .

the report makes recommendations to educate institutions about disclosing and monitoring international ties , and to enhance cybersecurity to prevent information breaches .

other federal agencies , such as the department of state , department of justice ( doj ) , and federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , are also actively monitoring , investigating , and issuing guidance and / or new policies related to foreign theft of intellectual property from u.s. academic and research institutions .

with over $39 billion in funding for fy2019 , nih is a significant contributor to the u.s. and global biomedical research enterprise .

congress may consider how to allocate funding , introduce reforms , and provide oversight to nih in a way that maximizes benefits to taxpayers through science - driven improvements to health , quality of life , and medical care .

nih has well - established internal processes for allocating research funding through scientific peer review and advisory committees .

congress may consider how to oversee these internal mechanisms ; address gaps , duplication , and needs in the research portfolio ; and provide funding in a manner that maintains the sustainability and productivity of research .

finally , congress may consider how to help nih support new and early - stage scientists , maintain its role as a global leader in biomedical research , and balance the public and private sector's role in research and innovation .

