the fiscal health of many states has been severely strained by the prolonged economic slowdown following the recent recession , even after the official end of the recession in june 2009 .

state and local tax revenues have declined , expenditures for social insurance programs have increased , and federal assistance has begun to recede as federal aid related to the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) expires .

further , state and local governments are required to balance current operating budgets either annually or biennially .

state and local governments have used a combination of rainy day fund withdrawals , tax increases , spending reductions , and in some instances , borrowing to meet these balanced budget requirements .

congress has become increasingly concerned that financial difficulties may lead state and local governments to take actions that could have an adverse impact on the economic recovery and that they may need additional federal government assistance .

part of this concern has focused on debt issued by state and local governments .

this report will describe state and local government debt and analyze how debt is incorporated into state and local budgets .

the report will also analyze the role the federal government has in state and local government debt structure .

other issues of interest to congress include bond default risk and public pension underfunding .

bond default risk and underfunding public pensions are both integral parts of state and local finance , though somewhat beyond the scope of this report .

clearly , during economic downturns , the risk of bond default rises .

in particular , those bonds secured by specific revenue streams and not the general obligation of the issuing jurisdiction are at greatest risk .

even so , municipal default has been relatively rare , only 54 defaults from 1970 to 2009 , and has yet to become a significant issue in municipal finance .

as for public pensions , debt is rarely used to finance future obligations and is generally discouraged by public finance professionals .

nonetheless , some states have used debt to fund pensions .

the fed and the united states census bureau ( census ) publish information on state and local government debt outstanding .

both sources exhibit the relative importance of long - term debt .

the fed data are more current whereas the census reports detailed data for both state and local government debt , albeit less current .

the fed reports that , as of the third quarter of 2011 , $2.99 trillion of state and local government debt was outstanding .

of this total , long - term debt composed 98.4% .

the census reports that for fy2009 , the latest year available , total state and local government outstanding debt was $2.68 trillion ( $1.05 trillion in state debt and $1.64 trillion in local debt ) .

the census further reports that in fy2009 state long - term debt was 99.3% of state total outstanding debt and local long - term debt was 98.3% of local total outstanding debt .

the amount of state and local government debt outstanding provides an indication of the relative magnitude of government borrowing .

the government issuer , however , is not obligated to repay all of this debt ; much of this debt is issued through debt vehicles called revenue bonds .

revenue bonds commit ( or are secured by ) a specified revenue stream , not the full faith and credit of the issuer .

from 1996 through november 2011 , roughly one - third of state and local government debt issued was general obligation debt and two - thirds was specific revenue - secured debt .

by comparison , total corporate and foreign bonds held by u.s. residents was $11.4 trillion at the close of the third quarter of 2010 , and u.s. treasury debt just recently reached $14.1 trillion .

most corporate debt and all federal debt is backed by the full faith and credit of the issuer .

some policymakers have suggested that the level of state and local government debt may grow faster given the need to close current operating budget gaps .

these gaps may be closed with an increased reliance on debt .

the budget gaps are relatively large from a historical perspective , though state definitions of "deficit" vary considerably .

the national conference of state legislatures ( ncsl ) reported that states successfully closed a "cumulative budget gap of $91 billion" for fy2012 .

they also report that for the first time in many years , states are beginning work on the fy2013 budget ( which for most states begins on july 1 , 2012 ) without having to spend time closing gaps in the current fiscal year .

states are generally reluctant to address gaps in the operating budget by reducing general fund spending that could be included in state capital budgets , which are financed primarily with debt .

there is evidence at the state level , however , to suggest that some states may have used this budget for financial flexibility .

for example , despite the economic slowdown , state capital spending increased 4.7% in fy2009 , and was estimated to have grown 5.5% in fy2010 .

this additional spending was financed with additional debt and federal funds .

in addition , the nasbo reports that 32.5% of spending on state capital projects in fy2009 was financed with bonds .

other non - general fund sources , such as dedicated fees and fund surpluses , composed another 35.1% of capital spending .

general fund financing of capital projects represented 5.9% and federal funds the remaining 26.5% .

these levels reflect a change in the mix of funding sources .

general fund financing of capital projects decreased by 35.9% , whereas federal fund financing increased 15.3% and bond - financed spending increased 10.6% .

the implication is that in recent years states may have relied more on debt financing of capital projects that in the past were paid with general fund revenues .

many states , some researchers contend , may suffer from a so - called "fiscal illusion" that makes debt ( or federal grants ) appear to be "cheaper" than using general fund revenues .

as a result , they argue , states spend more than they otherwise would if the spending were financed exclusively with general fund revenues .

in times of budget stress , the incentives for using debt are even greater .

following is a brief discussion of research that has examined the tradeoff between financing spending with debt , federal aid , or current general fund revenues .

some have suggested that post - employment pensions for government workers are underfunded and compelling states to devote more revenue to shoring up pension funds .

recent reports have suggested that the amount needed to fully fund promised benefits could be as high as $1 trillion .

for example , an analysis by the pew center on the states found that "at the end of fiscal year 2008 , there was a $1 trillion gap between the $2.35 trillion states and participating localities had set aside to pay for employees' retirement benefits and the $3.35 trillion price tag of those promises. .

in an update to that report , pew estimated that the underfunding grew to $1.26 trillion in 2009 .

future pension obligations , however , impact current operating deficits only to the extent that annual contributions will need to rise to fully fund pensions .

data for state and local governments for fy2009 show that government pension expenditures account for just under 4% of total expenditures or $86 billion for all state and local government pensions .

these contributions are for future retirees .

payments for already retired or separated workers are a significantly larger expense ( $191 billion in fy2009 ) .

these payments are typically funded with employee retirement trust funds , not from general fund revenue .

the use of public debt has important economic consequences that extend beyond the comparative metrics presented in this report .

economists examine broader issues surrounding government debt and its impact on the financial markets and the economy .

these issues , which are not mutually exclusive , include ( 1 ) the degree to which government debt crowds out domestic investment and net exports and ( 2 ) the economic efficiency of using tax - exempt debt to subsidize public capital formation .

the two chiefly negative consequences may seem to justify greater oversight of state and local government debt and the implicit federal subsidy .

designing a federal oversight role , however , would need to address the underlying constitutional issues governing the federal - state relationship .

this report examines the complexities of state and local government finance and how the magnitude of state fiscal stress varies considerably from state to state .

congress has recently held hearings examining the fiscal health of state and local governments and has offered legislation in two areas related to state and local fiscal health analyzed in this report: government debt and government pensions .

state and local debt , although growing , has not reached the point where widespread default seems likely .

to date , few defaults have occurred and interest costs for debt outstanding represented a relatively modest 3.5% of total state and local government expenditures .

more recent government budget data may show that for selected local government issuers , such as governmental authorities that rely on specialized revenue streams , interest costs have risen and default — and possible state government intervention — may be more likely than in the past .

prolonged weakness in the economy would certainly raise this probability .

some policymakers are concerned that state and local governments are issuing too much debt , increasing the risk of potential default .

in response , congress may seek to increase oversight of the municipal bond market .

historically , the federal government has not actively engaged in regulating how state and local governments finance activities .

congress has limited authority as the tower amendment to the securities and exchange act of 1934 explicitly prohibits the federal government from requiring any issuer of municipal securities , directly or indirectly through a purchaser or prospective purchaser of securities from the issuer , to file with the [securities and exchange] commission or the [municipal securities rulemaking] board prior to the sale of such securities by the issuer any application , report , or document in connection with the issuance , sale , or distribution of such securities .

congress does confer a tax preference to state and local government bond issuers and could modify this tax preference to induce changes in bond disclosure requirements .

also , the internal revenue service ( irs ) currently audits selected outstanding tax - exempt bond issues to determine if the bonds comply with tax law .

expanding these audits may help ensure that the tax - exemption and associated federal revenue loss is merited .

congress may also examine alternatives to tax - exempt bonds for subsidizing state and local government capital investment .

in the 112 th congress , several bills have been introduced to extend and expand a modified version of build america bonds ( babs ) including h.r .

11 , h.r .

736 , h.r .

747 , and h.r .

992 .

babs are viewed by many observers as a more efficient alternative to tax - exempt bonds .

congress may also take a more active role in the oversight of state and local government pensions .

legislation has been introduced to address state pension issues .

h.r .

567 and s. 347 would require greater transparency of state and local government pension systems .

recently , moody's , one of the primary bond rating agencies , announced that it would begin integrating tax - supported debt and unfunded pension liabilities when evaluating state bond ratings .

in the near term , however , annual pension contributions represent roughly 4% of state and local government operating expenditures ( $86.1 billion in fy2009 ) .

as such , the underfunded pension systems are a longer - term concern and , for most states , have a marginal impact on short - term operating deficits .

