a multitude of laws enacted over the past century authorize the lease or sale of federal lands and resources by federal agencies — the bureau of land management ( blm ) , the national park service ( nps ) , the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , and the bureau of ocean energy management , regulation , and enforcement ( boemre ) in the u.s. department of the interior ( doi ) and the forest service ( usfs ) in the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the receipts from selling or leasing federal lands and resources have been used for a wide variety of purposes , including funding general federal government activities and compensating state and local governments for the tax - exempt status of federal lands .

this report presents information on the receipts from the sale and / or lease of federal lands and resources ; it identifies the legislative authority for the sales or leases and the process by which fees are established .

it also presents information on the disposition of those receipts — the amount or percentage allocated to specific accounts or deposited in the general treasury .

many of these accounts have mandatory spending authority , allowing deposits to be spent without further appropriation by congress .

others require annual appropriations by congress to be spent .

the report does not include information on federal receipts from water resources or marine fisheries , or federal lands and resources administered by other departments or agencies , such as the department of defense .

it also excludes renewable energy activities on federal lands , because the receipts from these activities are relatively minor at this time .

the report presents information on federal land sales , on the sale or lease of renewable resources , on the sale or lease of minerals , and on other resource sales or leases .

congress faces two general issues in legislation to create or reauthorize programs for the sale or lease of federal lands and resources: the price or fee to be charged , and how the receipts should be used .

at a time of heightened fiscal concerns , the sale or lease of lands and resources presents opportunities to increase federal receipts and / or to use receipts to reduce the federal deficit , and ultimately the burden on federal taxpayers .

on the other hand , a significant portion of receipts historically has been paid to state and local governments .

in authorizing land and resource sales and leases , congress can choose how fees or prices are to be established .

some sales and leases are offered and bid competitively , and thus the price is a value determined by the market .

other leases and sales are made at prices either specified in law or set administratively within statutory guidelines .

some administered prices are intended to estimate a fair market value , such as the appraisals for federal land sales .

other administered prices reflect other factors ; for instance , grazing fees are to reflect sale prices of beef cattle , among other factors .

in some instances , there has been considerable debate over the factors to be considered in setting fees .

some have raised concerns that administered fees differ from the prices that would occur in a competitive market .

blm and usfs grazing fees , for example , have been noted to be below the fees charged by other landowners .

critics argue that the low fees are a substantial subsidy to the ranching industry ; others contend that the fees reflect that public land ranching is an economically marginal operation , and that higher grazing fees would drive many ranchers out of business .

similarly , hardrock mining fees recover at least some administrative costs , but return none of the value of the minerals extracted from the federal land ; however , free access to the minerals has promoted economic development in many areas .

congress can also choose how to allocate receipts from any of the land and resource sale or lease programs it creates or amends .

one issue is whether to provide mandatory spending authority for the receipts .

proponents of mandatory spending for particular programs generally are seeking greater financial stability , as compared to the vagaries of the annual appropriations process .

opponents argue that all taxpayers should benefit from the sale or lease of public assets , and often desire the more intense oversight that comes with annual appropriations .

mandatory spending also can affect federal spending levels and the budget deficit .

another issue is how the receipts should be used .

some advocate using the fees to reduce the fiscal burden on taxpayers generally .

however , some fees are intended to recover administrative costs , while others are intended to fund activities to restore lands and resources to pre - sale conditions .

other receipts are "reinvested" in federal land or resource management in some way .

in general , users may be more likely to tolerate higher fees or prices if they see that the additional federal receipts are to be used for management programs that they benefit from , at least in the long run , if not immediately .

each agency has an array of additional activities that also generate receipts .

many of these include permanent appropriations of receipts from specific sources for specific purposes .

with a few exceptions ( eg , usfs recreation and special land use permits listed below ) , these permanent appropriations are fully dedicated to the specified purposes .

each agency's accounts with receipts of more than $10 million in fy2009 ( other than those discussed above ) are listed below in decreasing size .

park concessions franchise fees , $58.2 million in fy2009 — administrative fees are collected from national park system concessions to approximate fair market value .

collections are permanently appropriated ; 80% are for use at the park unit where the funds were collected , and 20% are available to the secretary for high priority management and operations throughout the national park system .

donations , $31.2 million in fy2009 — contributions from the public are permanently appropriated for management and operations of the national park system .

operation and maintenance of quarters , $20.0 million in fy2009 — salary deductions from employees living in nps housing are permanently appropriated for the operations and maintenance of that housing .

concessions improvement accounts , $13.7 million in fy2009 — concessionaire deposits are permanently appropriated for facility improvements at the park units where the funds were collected .

transportation system , $11.0 million in fy2009 — fees collected for public transportation services to any national park system unit , authorized by p.l .

105-391 ( the national parks omnibus management act of 1998 ) are permanently appropriated to the nps .

recreation fees ( other than under flrea ) , $50.2 million in fy2009 — receipts from ski area permits , cabin fees , and other permitted recreation activities .

fees are disposed to states ( 25% payments ) , to the roads and trails fund ( 10% ) , and to the general treasury ( 65% ) .

 ( see the discussion under " timber ," above , for information on usfs payments to states and the national forest roads and trails fund. ) .

restoration of lands and improvements , $45.0 million in fy2009 — receipts from forfeitures of bonds or from judgments against contractors for work not completed are permanently appropriated for agency employees or contracts to complete the work .

cooperative deposits , $22.7 million in fy2009 — deposits from cooperators and others are permanently appropriated for joint work efforts , such as deposits from timber purchasers for road maintenance during and after timber harvesting .

special land use permits , $14.8 million in fy2009 — receipts intended to approximate fair market value are collected from special use permits for the use of national forest lands , such as for telecommunication sites and agricultural activities .

fees are disposed to states ( 25% payments ) , to the roads and trails fund ( 10% ) , and to the general treasury ( 65% ) .

helium fund , $96.7 million in fy2009 — receipts for the sale of crude helium ( and natural gas and liquid gas from the crude helium enrichment unit ) are permanently appropriated to administer helium leasing and extraction from federal lands and crude helium sales , storage , and transmission , as well as clean - up and disposal of unneeded helium refining facilities .

rights - of - way processing , $14.3 million in fy2009 — receipts are intended to recover the costs of processing rights - of - way for pipelines , transmission lines , wind and solar energy projects and more .

expenditures require annual appropriations .

migratory bird conservation fund , $52.3 million in fy2009 — receipts from the sale of "duck stamps" ( $22.9 million in fy2009 ) and from import duties on arms and ammunition ( $29.4 million in fy2009 ) are permanently appropriated for wildlife refuge land acquisition .

national wildlife refuge fund , also called the refuge revenue - sharing fund , $20.8 million in fy2009 — receipts from resource sales and user fees ( eg , timber and grazing ) for national wildlife refuges ( $6.7 million in fy2009 ) are permanently appropriated and supplemented with annual appropriations ( $14.1 million in fy2009 ) .

payments are made to counties at the highest of ( 1 ) 25% of net receipts ; ( 2 ) 0.75% of fair market value of the land ; or ( 3 ) $0.75 per acre .

