in the weeks prior to commencement of operation odyssey dawn , the ongoing uprising in libya against the government of muammar al qadhafi was the subject of domestic and international debate about potential international military intervention , including the proposed establishment of a no - fly zone over libya .

on march 17 , 2011 , the united nations security council adopted resolution 1973 ( unscr 1973 ) , establishing a no - fly zone in libyan airspace , authorizing robust enforcement measures for the arms embargo established by resolution 1970 , and authorizing member states "to take all necessary measures … to protect civilians and civilian populated areas under threat of attack in the libyan arab jamahiriya , including benghazi , while excluding a foreign occupation force of any form on any part of libyan territory. .

policy debates in the united states , allied countries , and the middle east have intensified in parallel with the authorization , launch , and continuation of u.s. and coalition military operations .

third parties , including the u.s. government , have staked out firm political positions demanding qadhafi's ultimate departure , but opposition forces have yet to demonstrate that they have the capacity to dislodge qadhafi on their own , and resolution 1973 calls for an immediate cease - fire and dialogue , which qadhafi may yet embrace in a bid to stay in power .

for the united states , reconciling a long - term objective of regime change with participation in military action to enforce a un security council resolution that does not expressly endorse that goal is a particular challenge .

some observers have warned that the use of force — whether by external parties , libyan rebels , or some combination of the two — to affect regime change in tripoli may have unpredictable consequences for the long term stability of the country and the region .

this report provides an overview of military operations under u.s. command from march 19 to march 29 , 2011 , and the most recent developments with respect to the transfer of command of military operations from the united states to nato on march 30 .

for more information on the conflict in libya , see crs report rl33142 , libya: unrest and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

on march 27 , 2011 , after just over a week of coalition air operations under u.s. command , the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) announced that it would take over command and control of all ongoing military operations in libya .

according to nato secretary general anders fogh rasmussen , the goal of nato's operation unified protector is "to protect civilians and civilian - populated areas under threat of attack from the gaddafi regime. .

this entails ( 1 ) enforcing a un - mandated arms embargo ; ( 2 ) enforcing a no - fly zone over libyan territory ; and ( 3 ) protecting civilians and civilian population areas from being attacked by military forces from the qadhafi regime .

operation unified protector is commanded by canadian air force lt. gen. charles bouchard , headquartered at the allied joint force command in naples , italy .

he reports to joint force commander u.s. general samuel j. locklear iii , who in turn reports to nato supreme allied commander u.s. admiral james stavridis ( admiral stavridis also serves as commander us european command ) .

as of march 28 , 12 nato member states , including the united states , had committed military forces to the new nato mission .

 ( for more details , see " involvement of nato , nato member states , and coalition partners ," below. ) .

following passage of unscr 1973 , on march 19 , 2011 , u.s. and allied forces established an initial no - fly zone over major cities and air bases near the libyan coast , as shown in figure 1 .

the first offensive operations were carried out by french aircraft striking armored units near benghazi ( see more detail under " france — operation harmattan " below. ) .

the no - fly operation was enabled by a strike against libyan air - defense assets and other targets using 110 tomahawk and tactical tomahawk cruise missiles and strikes by three b - 2 spirit bombers delivering 45 joint direct attack munitions ( jdams ) against libyan air bases .

tomahawks were also fired from british ships in the area , and british tornado gr4 aircraft flying from the royal air force base at marham , england , reportedly employed storm shadow cruise missiles .

by march 23 , 2011 , the no - fly zone had expanded to cover the entire libyan coastline "boundary to boundary," including tripoli , and offensive operations were under way against libyan ground forces observed to pose a threat to civilian populations .

however , there was "no indication that qadafi's forces are pulling back from misrata or ajdabiya. .

on march 28 , 2011 , dod announced that a - 10 and ac - 130 aircraft had begun operations over libya on march 26 .

the a - 10 is optimized to destroy armored vehicles , while the ac - 130 provide close air support and air interdiction .

introduction of these systems increases u.s. capability to counter libyan ground forces .

operational considerations influencing the scope of operation odyssey dawn include .

u.s. air force units participating in operation odyssey dawn include: b - 2 stealth bombers from the 509 th bomb wing at whiteman air force base , mo f - 15es from the 492 nd fighter squadron and 494 th fighter squadron at raf lakenheath , britain f - 16cj defense - suppression aircraft from the 480 th fighter squadron at spangdahlem air base , germany ec - 130 commando solo psychological operations aircraft from the 193 rd special operations wing , pennsylvania air national guard , middletown , pa kc - 135s of the 100 th air refueling wing at raf mildenhall , britain and the 92 nd air refueling wing , fairchild afb , wa c - 130js from the 37 th airlift squadron at ramstein air base , germany a - 10 attack fighters ac - 130 gunships as part of a 25-hour round trip mission , the b - 2s struck combat aircraft shelters at ghardabiya airfield in the opening hours of operation odyssey dawn .

the f - 15es and f - 16cjs attacked ground forces loyal to qadhafi that were advancing on opposition forces in benghazi and threatening civilians .

kc - 135s refueled the strike aircraft en route to an unnamed forward air base , and the c - 130js moved ground equipment and personnel to that forward base , as did theater - based c - 17s .

u.s. navy ships involved in operation odyssey dawn include: arleigh burke - class guided - missile destroyers uss stout ( ddg 55 ) and uss barry ( ddg 52 ) submarines uss providence ( ssn 719 ) , uss scranton ( ssn 756 ) and uss florida ( ssgn 728 ) marine amphibious ships uss kearsarge ( lhd 3 ) and uss ponce ( lpd 15 ) command ship uss mount whitney ( lcc / jcc 20 ) support ships lewis and clark , robert e. peary and kanawha .

naval and marine aviation assets include: av - 8b harrier fighters , ch - 53 super stallion helicopters and mv - 22 osprey tiltrotor aircraft aboard the kearsarge and ponce kc - 130j tanker aircraft flying from sigonella air base , italy ea - 18g growler electronic attack aircraft of vaq - 132 , based at whidbey island , wa and flying from aviano air base , italy .

these aircraft were diverted from iraq to support operation odyssey dawn .

p - 3 orion sub - hunters and ep - 3 aries electronic attack aircraf .

the united states took initial operational command of coalition operations to enforce united nations security council resolution ( unscr ) 1973 , with the goal of subsequently transitioning leadership to a coalition commander .

army general carter f. ham , who assumed command of u.s. africa command ( africom ) on march 9 , served as theater commander for the operation .

tactical operations were coordinated by a joint task force under admiral samuel j. locklear iii onboard the command and control ship uss mount whitney .

locklear serves jointly as commander of u.s .

naval forces europe and africa , and as commander of allied joint force command , naples , which has operational responsibility for nato missions in the mediterranean .

uk and french naval officers are onboard the mount whitney , as well as liaison officers from a number of other countries .

air force maj. gen. margaret woodward , commander of 17 th air force , was the initial joint force air component commander for operation odyssey dawn .

the coalition currently includes forces from 13 nations either already in the region or en route .

as of march 24 , 2011 , non - u.s. coalition aircraft were flying "65 percent" of all sorties , up from 13% on march 20 .

france and the united kingdom ( uk ) have been the most vocal proponents of taking action against qadhafi to protect civilians in libya — the two countries sponsored unsc resolutions 1970 and 1973 , and pushed the european union to quickly adopt sanctions against the qadhafi regime .

they have also played a central role in the ongoing military operations in libya .

within a week after passage of unscr 1970 , both french president nicolas sarkozy and british prime minister david cameron had publicly called on qadhafi to relinquish power and each had instructed their respective military leadership to begin working with allies on plans for a no - fly zone over libya .

on march 10 , france became the first and only country to recognize the libyan transitional national council "as the legitimate representative of the libyan people. .

on saturday , march 19 , two days after passage of unscr 1973 , president sarkozy convened an emergency meeting of allied and arab leaders in paris which endorsed the immediate deployment of military aircraft to stop an assault by qadhafi forces on benghazi and the establishment of a no - fly zone in the country .

before the end of the meeting , french fighter planes had attacked armored vehicles and tanks belonging to qadhafi forces on the outskirts of benghazi .

some participants at the paris meeting were reportedly critical of the french government both for insisting on convening the meeting before agreeing to endorse air strikes and for then launching strikes before the meeting was over .

french officials claim that meeting participants were informed of the operation and argue that the assaults were necessary to prevent an imminent attack on benghazi .

in any case , the strikes had clearly been planned and coordinated with the knowledge of key allied militaries , including the united states and uk .

french officials add that the meeting was essential to maintaining coalition unity and arab league support for military operations and for securing the participation of some arab governments in the enforcement of unscr 1973 .

only the united states and nato possess the command and control capabilities necessary for coalition operations enforcing the no - fly zone over libya and protecting civilians on the ground .

in spite of statements underscoring nato unity on steps announced to date , the initial planning and operational phases were also marked by significant levels of discord within europe and nato on the aims and future direction of the mission .

a key point of contention was reportedly the amount of flexibility that nato forces would be granted to protect civilians and civilian areas , as called for in paragraph 4 of unscr 1973 .

reports indicate that french officials insisted on maintaining the ability to strike ground forces that threatened civilian areas , while their turkish counterparts vocally opposed any targeting of ground forces .

adding to the strain within nato , nato ally germany abstained from unscr 1973 and , opposed to any potential combat operation , on march 23 , withdrew its naval assets in the mediterranean from nato command .

throughout the first week of operations , other european allies contributing to the mission , including italy and norway , expressed increasing frustration with the lack of agreement within nato , with norway refusing to deploy its fighter jets unless under they were under nato command and control .

although the allies appear to have come to agreement on the terms of their military engagement moving forward , some of the aforementioned tensions could reemerge over the course of the mission .

france , along with other allies , has expressed concern that a nato - led mission in libya could lead to heightened criticism of western motives in the region .

among other things , they have argued that skepticism of u.s. motives and public perception of nato as a u.s. - dominated alliance could erode support for the mission within arab countries .

accordingly , french and other allied officials have consistently emphasized the importance of maintaining arab endorsement of , and involvement in , the ongoing military operations as well as diplomatic efforts to broker a cease fire and possible transfer of power in libya .

to this end , on march 29 , nato and other partner countries participating in the nato mission announced the establishment of the libya contact group , tasked with providing "leadership and overall political direction to the international effort in close coordination with the un , au , arab league , oic , and eu to support libya ; provide a forum for coordinating the international response on libya ; and provide a focal point in the international community for contact with the libyan parties. .

nato's north atlantic council will continue to provide executive political direction to nato military operations .

crs report rl31133 , declarations of war and authorizations for the use of military force: historical background and legal implications , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41701 , no - fly zones: strategic , operational , and legal considerations for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41199 , the war powers resolution: after thirty - six years , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20775 , congressional use of funding cutoffs since 1970 involving u.s. military forces and overseas deployments , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21311 , u.s. use of preemptive military force , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33142 , libya: unrest and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

