public pension plans , also referred to as governmental plans , are generally plans that provide retirement or deferred income to employees of the u.s. government , a state government or its political subdivision , or any agency or instrumentality of those governments .

according to a 2010 gao report , approximately 20 million employees and over 7 million retirees and survivors are covered by state and local government pension plans , typically through a traditional defined - benefit plan .

recently , questions have been raised about the funded status of many public pension plans , as it has been reported that many of these plans are facing substantial future funding shortfalls .

concerns have been raised that these liabilities could jeopardize the fiscal stability of some state and local governments .

there is considerable debate over whether this is a problem that needs to be addressed and if so , the cause and the extent of public pension plan underfunding .

while it has been reported that public pension funds experienced recent gains , some of the estimates have placed the combined unfunded liabilities anywhere from hundreds of billions of dollars to over $3 trillion .

in an effort to address these issues , some legislators and others have argued to reform public pension plans and the benefits they offer .

in 2011 alone , over 20 states introduced or passed legislation aimed to reduce or otherwise modify pension plan benefits for current or future retirees , and more proposals have been introduced this year .

this report provides an overview of how public pension plans are regulated at the federal and state levels .

it discusses selected legal issues that may arise if attempts are made to remedy or prevent public pension plan underfunding , in particular , by changing plan benefits .

this report will also briefly address possible federal regulation of state and local public pension plans .

employment - based retirement benefits are governed at the federal level by two main laws , the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) and the internal revenue code .

in general , these two laws address two types of pension plans: defined benefit and defined contribution plans .

under a defined benefit plan , an employee is promised a specified future benefit , traditionally an annuity beginning at retirement .

benefits often are based on average pay and years of service .

to fund the plan , an employer makes contributions to the common pension fund that are actuarially expected to grow through investment to cover the promised benefits .

under the terms of the plan , employees may make contributions as well .

most public pension plans are traditional defined benefit plans .

a defined contribution plan ( eg , a 401 ( k ) plan ) is one in which the contributions are specified , but not the benefits .

a defined contribution plan ( also called "an individual account" plan ) is one that provides an individual account for each participant that accrues benefits based solely on the amount contributed to the account and any income , expenses , and investment gains or losses to the account .

the employee bears the investment risk in a defined contribution plan .

some state and local governments maintain defined contribution plans , and there have been proposals in various states to switch from a defined benefit to a defined contribution plan .

enacted in 1974 , erisa provides a comprehensive federal scheme for the regulation of pension and other employee benefit plans offered by private - sector employers .

while erisa does not require an employer to offer employee benefits , it does mandate compliance with its provisions if such benefits are offered .

title i of erisa imposes various federal standards aimed at protecting the interests of plan participants and beneficiaries , including reporting and disclosure , vesting , participation , funding , fiduciary duty , and civil enforcement requirements .

title iv of erisa created a plan termination insurance program , under which pension benefits are paid to plan participants and beneficiaries up to a statutory maximum if the benefits cannot be paid by the employer .

public pension plans are generally exempt from these provisions of erisa , but may be subject to federal regulation under the internal revenue code .

the internal revenue code grants certain tax benefits to "qualified" retirement plans .

among these tax advantages , employer contributions to a qualified plan on behalf of its employees are tax deductible for the employer .

in addition , qualified retirement plan participants do not pay tax on employer contributions or the benefits they accrue in the pension plan until the participant ( or beneficiary ) takes a distribution .

given that state and local governments do not pay federal taxes , the tax benefit for employer contributions is irrelevant to them .

however , public pension plans must be qualified so that the plan participants can avoid paying taxes on their pension benefits until the benefits are actually received .

in order to be a qualified plan under the internal revenue code , pension plans must meet several requirements .

governmental plans , however , are only subject to a subset of the qualification requirements that private - sector pension plans must meet .

in many cases , public pension plans are subject to different requirements under the internal revenue code than private - sector plans , including certain less stringent pre - erisa requirements for vesting and funding .

aside from the requirements set out in the internal revenue code , public pension plans are primarily regulated under state statutes , local ordinances , and state constitutions .

these laws typically address the basic features of public pension plans , including eligibility , contributions , and types of benefits provided , and the laws vary widely from jurisdiction to jurisdiction .

while public pension plans have no guarantor of plan benefits , states generally have constitutional or statutory provisions that dictate how pension plans are to be funded , protected , managed , or governed .

recently , in an effort to alleviate pension plan underfunding and protect state and local government budgets , governors and legislators in several states have proposed and enacted various modifications to their pension plans .

over the past few years , almost two - thirds of states have made some form of benefit and / or contribution change to their plans ( eg , reducing benefit levels , requiring higher employee contributions , or amending age and service requirements to lengthen the accumulation and shorten the distribution period of pension benefits ) .

while the majority of changes are directed at future participants and / or benefit accruals , some of the changes affect current employees and retirees .

although states may not face obstacles in changing the pension benefits available for new employees , the issue is not as clear with respect to existing ones .

as discussed below , certain legal parameters may affect the ability of state and local governments to amend their pension plans .

these parameters vary by state and depend on each state's laws and constitutional provisions governing its retirement system , what these laws provide with respect to the protection of an individual's pension benefits , and when any right to a pension benefit attaches .

courts have conceptualized the legislative modification of public employee pension plan benefits in different ways .

historically , most courts viewed public pensions as gratuities that could be amended at any time .

although it may not be controlling in the interpretation of a state law , the supreme court has historically found that statutes providing retirement benefits to pensioners create a mere "expectancy" that may be modified , revoked , or suspended by the authority granting it through subsequent legislation .

however , this view has now been abandoned in most states , and public employee pension benefits are generally afforded greater protection under current state and constitutional law .

this is , at least in part , because many courts now characterize public plan pensions as deferred compensation — that an employee is entitled to these benefits for work that has already been performed .

in order to address the issue of public pension plan underfunding , some have called for federal action .

in the past , there have been efforts to regulate public pension plans similar to erisa .

in particular , following enactment of erisa , various proposals were introduced that would have required public plans to meet various federal standards , such as reporting , disclosure , and fiduciary duty requirements .

legislative history indicates that congress intentionally exempted these plans from erisa for various reasons , most of which center around the differences inherent in regulating a private pension plan versus one sponsored by a state or local government .

because of these differences , it was concluded that additional data and study were necessary before attempting to regulate public plans .

federalism concerns were also raised , based on the idea that regulating state and local pension plans would constitute impermissible federal interference in the affairs of state and local government .

however , the legal landscape has changed due to supreme court decisions issued after erisa's enactment in 1974 .

while it appears that to date no proposals have been introduced in the 112 th congress to comprehensively regulate public pension plans , there had been discussion of possible federal legislation to allow states to declare bankruptcy , something that states cannot currently do , in order to avoid or reduce certain financial obligations , such as pension obligations .

another proposal addressing public pension plans , the public employee pension transparency act , would require public pension plan sponsors to file various plan financial data with the treasury secretary , including plan assets at fair market value and plan liabilities at an interest rate based on the u.s. treasury obligation yield curve .

the bonds issued by governmental entities that did not comply with the disclosure requirements would lose their federal tax exemption .

among other things , the legislation also states that the federal government would not be liable for any obligation related to a shortfall in any public pension plan .

