china is the world's most populous country with approximately 1.4 billion people .

it has experienced tremendous economic growth over the last three decades with an average annual increase in gross domestic product ( gdp ) of 9.8% during that period .

this rapid economic growth has led to an increasing demand for energy , spurring china to more than double its electric power generating capacity in each of the last three decades , growing from 66 gigawatts ( gw ) installed in 1980 to 1,100 gw installed as of 2011 .

china is also the world's largest producer and consumer of coal .

according to the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) , coal currently fuels about 66% of china's electricity generation .

however , the reduction of air pollution caused in part by the burning of coal for electric power has become a major public policy focus in china .

while many of china's new coal plants are among the most technically advanced in the world , burning coal results in sulfur dioxide , oxides of nitrogen , and particulate emissions which contribute to air pollution , and greenhouse gas emissions linked to global climate change .

the current and potential future environmental consequences of burning coal are a major reason china has been decreasing the use of coal , and actively seeking to increase its renewable energy capabilities .

when current rates of use are considered , limited domestic reserves of coal , natural gas , and oil provide another impetus for change .

however , china's announced intent to rely on domestic , sustainable solutions for its growing energy needs has led to a focus on developing "green" or renewable energy resources .

china has ambitious targets for developing both its hydropower and non - hydropower renewable energy resources with a major push of laws , regulations and incentives in the last few years .

development of large - and medium - sized hydropower projects had previously been at a standstill with environmental impact and population displacement issues presenting major obstacles .

the wind power sector is illustrative of china's accomplishments , as installed wind power capacity has gone from 567 megawatts ( mw ) in 2003 to 75,000 mw in 2012 .

developing its domestic renewable energy resources also provides a growth opportunity for china's domestic renewable energy technology industries , and serves to increase its domestic manufacturing capabilities .

this report will look at the laws , programs , and policies encouraging development of wind , solar , hydropower , and biomass power in the china and the united states as the major renewable electricity technologies common to both countries .

government incentives in the united states and china for renewable energy projects encompass a set of tools which generally depend on where a particular project is on a product development cycle , and will be the focus of this report .

for example , direct subsidies are more often applied earlier in the timeline of research and development ( r&d ) projects , while tax incentives are generally made available later in a cycle to aid manufacturing ventures or to encourage consumers to adopt the technologies and help to build demand .

with the process of urbanization continuing in china , a further 200 million to 300 million people are expected to move to urban areas over the next 20 years .

this shift in population is seen as a driving force behind the change in focus from increasing gdp to increasing domestic consumption in the 12 th five - year plan .

the national government still owns or controls many of the country's large industries and enterprises , and sets goals for economic development in the periodic five - year plans .

as such , china's industries and enterprises are still encouraged to meet goals set in the national government's economic plan .

but today's china also has a large and growing private sector , and improving the employment and income prospects for its citizens appears to be behind a shift to a market focus in many areas of china's "socialist market economy. .

the 12 th five - year plan emphasizes the development new industries which can feed into the future growth of its economy .

one such sector is renewable energy , and in the last five years , china has developed its manufacturing capabilities in wind turbines and solar panels and is using these capabilities to serve its own needs to produce renewable electricity .

china recognizes that given the growing demand for energy at home , developing its domestic renewable energy industry and building manufacturing capacity can lead to advantages in future export markets .

in late 2009 , the standing committee of the national people's congress affirmed its support of the development of the renewable power industry by building china's domestic capacity .

grid companies were directed to purchase all renewable electricity generated , with the state council to determine the proportion of renewable electricity to overall generating capacity in order to meet national goals .

china has chosen to implement a renewable energy law mandating minimum deployment levels for renewable electricity technologies ( in terms of gigawatts of capacity by a target date ) , and to support these deployment goals with a complementary , national feed - in tariff for selected technologies .

officially , however , energy efficiency and conservation remain china's top energy priority .

these are considered the "low - hanging fruit" in the quest to reduce energy use and cut demand .

energy efficiency in china's larger firms is approaching levels in western countries .

the 11 th fyp saw china's energy consumption per unit of gdp ( i.e. , energy intensity ) drop by 19.6% .

the 12 th fyp may not result in the energy savings seen in the previous five years , since many small power plants , less energy efficient coal - fired power plants , and steel mills were shut down .

few if any of these less efficient producers remain open .

most of the energy savings in the 12 th fyp are expected to come from structural changes in china's economic structure and technological improvements .

energy efficiency benchmarks have been established for china's top 1,000 energy consuming industries ( which accounted for 33% of national and 47% of industrial energy usage in 2004 ) with energy reduction goals set for each enterprise .

china is the world's largest market for new construction with approximately 2 billion square meters of floor space added annually .

china's existing building codes ( for both residential and public buildings ) focus on heating , ventilation and air conditioning , as well as lighting , hot water and power use .

new standards have been in development since 2005 with national energy design criteria for residential buildings .

energy efficient building codes are a key tool in establishing passive measures for energy savings in new future housing stock .

the "weak link" in china's electricity planning has been transmission .

targets have been set for building renewable electric power generation without effective measures for accomplishing grid connection and integration , especially for remote wind power .

china's grid companies must accept subsidized wind power , but costs of building transmission lines to connect to wind farms ( especially those in remote regions ) are not subsidized .

as a result , as much as one - third of wind power generation in china is not connected to the grid due to a lack of transmission capacity .

when combined with low tariffs , this likely means that china's wind power sector has been operating at a loss .

to help remedy the imbalance , the state grid corporation has begun to build a pilot "smart grid" in china's larger cities to help integrate renewable energy sources .

formal goals for a smart grid are expected to be incorporated into china's 12 th five - year plan , with a "unified strong and smart grid" to be built nationwide by 2020 .

the lack of grid integration for wind has improved only slightly in the last few years , with curtailment of wind capacity ( due to inadequate transmission capacity ) being especially acute in the less populous northern western provinces of china .

china today is dealing today with some of the same issues that the united states is likely to face as it considers building the infrastructure to take advantage of potentially huge wind and solar resources of the u.s. west and southwest .

china's transmission system ( like that of the united states ) is mostly regional in functionality , and could benefit from improved connectivity across regions if renewable resources in remote areas are to be more fully harnessed .

the cost of developing the transmission system will be great in both countries , but china has begun to build efficient ultra - high voltage ( uhv ) transmission lines ( eg , voltages of 1,000 kilovolt ( kv ) alternating current , or higher , and 800 kv direct current , or higher ) .

uhv can reduce transmission line losses and transmit more power over longer distances .

china's state grid corporation plans to invest $88 billion through 2020 to build uhv lines .

in contrast to china's socialist market economy , the united states has overall a market - driven economy .

some observers argue that the current higher costs of renewable electricity do not favor market adoption .

however , the goals for increased use of renewable energy are several , and include energy security , energy independence , cleaner air , and more recently anthropogenic climate change , sustainability concepts , and economic development .

goals for reducing pollution have been enforced by government regulations requiring changes in the fuels used for power generation , and are often buttressed by requirements to install equipment to reduce particular types of emissions .

such goals could reasonably be said to apply both to the united states and china .

in the united states , while individual states may have renewable electricity mandates , there is no federal law driving development of renewable energy .

many observers believe that renewable energy technologies need a federal policy driver which creates a national demand for renewable electricity if it is to be a "significant" contributor to domestic power generation picture .

this opinion is largely based on the view that renewables are not "mature" technologies , since renewable electricity technologies are largely intermittent or variable resources , requiring fossil resources to make renewables dispatchable ( i.e. , providing power on demand ) .

if increased deployment of renewable electricity technologies is a u.s. policy goal , a recent analysis by the national renewable energy laboratory suggests that the united states could also implement both a renewable electricity standard and a fit .

others believe that renewable energy technologies should rely on venture capital and private sector investment alone , and the market alone should dictate whether they are employed .

however , it is noted that the united states relies more on investment from venture capitalists for clean energy technology development than the rest of the world combined .

venture capital has driven much energy innovation in the united states in the past and will undoubtedly play a role in the future in funding the next generations of clean energy technologies .

creation of green jobs by developing a globally competitive renewable energy technology manufacturing industry has been described as a cornerstone of u.s. economic policy .

developing such a capability in the united states will likely require major investments from the federal government .

such an effort may have to go beyond tax credits and loan guarantees as have been used to this point in time if the development of renewable energy technology manufacturing capacity and "green jobs" creation are goals .

in some countries , these policies can be instituted at the discretion of a central government .

the massive allocation of government - funded resources by countries seeking to build renewable energy technology leadership and global market share is an indication of the greater reliance these nations expect to have on the renewable energy industry .

the potential for product and equipment sales is key to their belief that such a transition should be accelerated .

the united states has traditionally relied primarily on market forces and tax incentives to encourage the deployment of new technologies .

this would be the "business as usual" model .

however , several factors exist that call into question the "business as usual" model for innovation and deployment of renewable energy technologies .

for example , investment dollars are scarce at this time , as the nation is still emerging from a recession ; and other nations have aggressively used governmental powers to channel resources into renewable energy programs that have permitted them to establish renewable energy industries whose products and productivity have exceeded those of the united states .

further , many believe that the u.s.'s existing ( mostly non - renewable ) low - cost energy system limits market opportunities in the short term , despite potential opportunities in the longer term or abroad .

with recent environmental regulatory measures to reduce air emissions coming into effect , the opportunity for clean technologies may be increasing .

but some observers have argued for more aggressive governmental intervention to bolster and accelerate u.s. activities relating to renewable energy .

china's 11 th fyp required state - owned enterprises to reduce energy intensity by 20% overall from 2005 levels .

while china was able to reduce energy intensity 14.4% from 2005 to 2009 , there was an increase of 3.2% in energy intensity during the first quarter of 2010 .

meeting these energy intensity goals proved to be a challenge .

china pledged in the 12 th fyp to cut energy consumption per unit of gdp by 16% and cut carbon emissions by 17% in the period from 2011 to 2015 .

but meeting the 16% drop in energy intensity in the 12 th fyp may be a greater challenge if total gdp is larger .

the ndrc recently stated that during the first two years of the 12 th fyp , "china's aggregate energy consumption per unit of gdp dropped by 5.5% , only meeting 32.7% of the five - year plan target.... to realize the 12 th five - year plan goal , china must reduce its annual energy consumption by 3.84% ... over the next three years. .

like china , the united states relies most on coal for electric power generation with that fuel providing about half of the u.s. power generation .

clean coal technologies are seen as a part of china's clean energy future , and an opportunity exists for china and the united states to work together to develop these technologies .

however , china has decided that renewable electricity will also be a significant part of that energy future , with current plans for renewable energy sources to contribute 15% of its primary energy needs by 2020 .

targets , planning , and investment have all followed to further china's renewable energy goals .

unconventional sources of natural gas , such as coalbed methane and gas shales , may be resources that both the united states and china can develop .

recent technological developments have raised the potential for natural gas to be produced in abundance especially from tight shale gas formations .

the outlook for renewable energy development could be affected if these unconventional natural gas sources can be developed and economically produced in an environmentally acceptable manner .

