comprehensive refugee reform legislation , the refugee protection act of 2011 ( s. 1202 / h.r .

2185 ) , would make significant revisions to asylum policy .

senate committee on the judiciary chairman patrick leahy and house committee on the judiciary subcommittee on immigration policy and enforcement ranking member zoe lofgren introduced the companion bills on june 15 , 2011 .

among the asylum revisions in s. 1202 / h.r .

2185 , the bill would eliminate the time limits on seeking asylum in cases of changed circumstances ; proscribe conditions under which an asylum seeker who was a victim of terrorist coercion would not be excluded as a terrorist ; provide alternatives to detention of asylum seekers ; modify certain elements necessary for the asylum seeker to meet the conditions for the granting of asylum ; and , allow aliens interdicted at sea the opportunity to have an asylum interview .

for many years , most foreign nationals who sought asylum in the united states were from the western hemisphere , notably central america and the caribbean .

from october 1981 through march 1991 , for example , salvadoran and nicaraguan asylum applicants totaled over 252,000 and made up half of all foreign nationals who applied for asylum with the ins .

in fy1995 , more than three - fourths of asylum cases filed annually came from the western hemisphere .

in fy1999 , the people's republic of china ( prc ) moved to the top of the source countries for affirmative asylum claims , with 4,209 new cases .

somalia followed as a leading source country with 3,125 cases in fy1999 .

as the overall number of asylum seekers fell in the late 1990s , the shrinking numbers from central america contributed to the decline .

simultaneously , the number of asylum seekers from the prc began rising and reached 10,522 affirmative cases in fy2002 .

the prc remained the leading source country throughout the 2000s .

country conditions lie at the core of the principle that the united states will not return a foreign national to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

as discussed more fully above , individualized persecution or persecution resulting from group identity may form the basis of the asylum claim .

in the individualized instance , if the asylum seeker demonstrates that there is a reasonable possibility of suffering such persecution as an individual if he or she were to return to that country ; and he or she is unable or unwilling to return to , or avail himself or herself of the protection of , that country because of such fear ; then the fear of persecution is deemed reasonable .

in the group identity instance , if the asylum seeker establishes that there is a pattern or practice in his or her home country of persecution of a group of persons similarly situated to the applicant on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion ; and establishes his or her own inclusion in and identification with such group of persons ; then the fear of persecution is deemed reasonable .

although there are many who would revise u.s. asylum law , those advocating change have divergent perspectives .

some cite the seemingly inexplicable disparities in asylum approvals rates and urge broad - based administrative reforms .

others argue that given the religious , ethnic , and political violence in various countries around the world , it has become more difficult to differentiate the persecuted from the persecutors .

some express concern that u.s. sympathies for the asylum seekers caught up in the current political uprisings in the middle east , northern africa , and south asia could inadvertently facilitate the entry of terrorists .

others maintain that current law does not offer adequate protections for people fleeing human rights violations or gender - based abuses that occur around the world .

some assert that asylum has become an alternative pathway for immigration rather than humanitarian protection provided in extraordinary cases .

at the crux of the issue is the extent to which an asylum policy forged during the cold war is adapting to the competing priorities and turbulence of the 21 st century .

some of these issues are highlighted below .

over the past decade , the united states has admitted or adjusted about 1 million foreign nationals to legal permanent resident ( lpr ) status each year , and annual asylee adjustments have ranged from 1% to 9% of the total .

overall , asylee adjustments comprised only 4% ( 411,972 ) of the 10.3 million lprs admitted or adjusted from fy2000 through fy2009 .

unlike other facets of u.s. immigration policy , asylum issues are less about the number of foreign nationals involved and more about the qualities of the policies and the efficacy of the procedures .

asylum is an adjudication of a person based upon facts , evidence , beliefs , and circumstances that might be clear at some times yet nebulous at other times .

the policy tensions of asylum often pit the promotion of our humanitarian values against the prevention of fraudulent abuses ; the protection of the persecuted against the security of our borders ; and the obligations of our moral responsibilities internationally against the commitments of our social priorities domestically .

the balance of these competing concerns may be shaken by a crisis in a neighboring nation or by larger world events .

the u.s. congress plays the key role in considering when and whether revision or re - calibration of asylum law and policies is warranted .

