congressional awareness of issues associated with locally owned and operated levees is increasing , largely because of the nationwide remapping of floodplains by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) and efforts to reauthorize the fema's national flood insurance program ( nfip ) which expires on september 30 , 2011 .

floodplain remapping can result in owners of mortgaged structures located in areas protected by levees being required to purchase flood insurance if the levees cannot satisfy fema's levee accreditation requirements .

many communities and levee owners struggle with the expense and effort of data collection , repairs , and improvements needed to obtain levee accreditation and have approached congress for assistance .

multiple federal agencies have roles in levee accreditation and federal levee assistance .

most notably , fema coordinates updates to flood insurance rate maps ( firm ) and issues levee accreditations that waive the mandatory purchase requirement for homeowners who reside in areas protected by levees .

in certain limited situations discussed later in this report , the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) may certify the data submitted to fema for accreditation purposes .

however , existing federal actions to assist locally operated levees are limited , particularly in the scope of eligible activities .

limitations stem from constraints on federal funding and from levee operation , maintenance , and improvements generally being the responsibility of the levee owner .

levees are structures , either earthen embankments or concrete and steel floodwalls , built along rivers , or other bodies of water , to prevent water from flooding bordering land .

levees are located throughout the country and are found in approximately 22% of u.s. counties , where almost half of the u.s. population resides .

nationally , average economic damage from floods in leveed areas ranges between $5 billion and $10 billion annually .

the full extent and specific conditions of the nation's levees are unknown , but the national committee on levee safety , which was created by congress , estimates that more than 100,000 miles of levees may exist .

the federal government through the corps built less than 15,000 miles of these levees .

the corps operates roughly 2,100 miles of the 15,000 it constructed .

that is , local levee owners operate and maintain the estimated 85,000 miles of locally constructed levees and almost 13,000 miles of corps constructed levees .

one estimate puts the five - year level of investment for new construction or maintenance needed for the nation's existing levees at $50 billion .

congress has considered in recent years whether and how to change the current division of levee responsibilities and their costs , and whether to modify existing levee - related federal programs .

some stakeholders seek to expand flood hazard mitigation activities eligible for federal funds to include levees , while others are concerned that the federal government might assume more of the costs and liability for levee investments that they consider a local responsibility .

another aspect of the debate is whether to change fema's risk assessment , remapping , and timelines for obtaining levee accreditation .

these changes are raised in the context of climate change and a broader rethinking of flood risk management and control structures ( like levees ) following hurricane katrina and recent floods .

this report covers the federal role in locally operated levees .

it does not address federally owned and operated levees , which are less common and are concentrated in a few areas of the united states ( eg , along the mississippi river ) .

the report first discusses the role of levees in flood risk reduction , the shared responsibilities for levees in the united states , and the role of three agencies: fema , the corps , and the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

next , it discusses federal assistance for levees starting with their study and construction , then levee - related flood fighting and levee repair , rehabilitation , and inspection .

it also describes the debate about whether levees investments have a role in federal flood mitigation programs .

corps , fema , and nrcs activities and authorities are compared .

finally , the report outlines policy options for locally operated levees that might be considered by the 112 th congress .

legislative proposals in the 111 th congress are discussed in an appendix .

in the united states , flood - related roles and responsibilities are distributed within a regulatory framework designed to permit the responsible development of the nation's floodplains .

local governments generally are responsible for land use and zoning decisions that shape floodplain and coastal development , but the federal and state governments also influence decisions on managing flood risk .

state and local governments make decisions that allow or prohibit development in flood - prone areas .

local , private , and sometimes state entities construct , operate , and maintain most levees and have initial flood - fighting responsibilities .

agencies of the federal government operate flood control dams , offer crop insurance , support hazard mitigation , and provide emergency response and disaster aid for recovery from floods .

the federal government constructs some of the nation's levees , but most often does in partnership with local project sponsors who are responsible for operation and maintenance .

no federal program specifically regulates the design , placement , construction , or maintenance of nonfederal levees .

while federal and state agencies often have their own policies and criteria for levee design , construction , and maintenance , there are no national engineering standards or policies for levee design or level - of - protection standards for different floodplain uses .

many levees protecting today's communities and agricultural investments originally were constructed more than 50 years ago by local interests reclaiming land for agriculture and other uses .

rather than each landowner building separate levees , landowners often consolidated their resources by forming a levee district .

as a consequence of this history , many of today's physical constructions and configurations , as well as institutional arrangements for flood protection , have roots distinct from their current use as flood protection for development .

for the most part , municipalities serving concentrated urban populations have assumed flood control responsibilities , while special levee districts remain active in rural and agricultural areas .

prior to the lower mississippi river flood of 1927 , the federal role in flood control was limited .

in addition to authorizing the corps to design and construct significant flood control projects along the mississippi river ( and on the sacramento river ( ca ) ) , the flood control act of 1928 reiterated the sense of congress , at the insistence of president coolidge , that there should be local contribution toward flood control works .

the act also provided that the federal government generally could not be held liable for flood damage .

from 1928 to 1936 , there was considerable debate about the need for national planning for flood control and a national water resources program , and the proper roles of congress and the executive branch in this planning and selection of construction projects .

the flood control act of 1936 ( 49 stat .

1570 ) declared some flood control a "proper" federal activity: it is hereby recognized that destructive floods upon the rivers of the united states , upsetting orderly processes and causing loss of life and property , including the erosion of lands and impairing and obstructing navigation , highways , railroads , and other channels of commerce between the states , constitute a menace to national welfare ; that it is the sense of congress that flood control on navigational waters or their tributaries is a proper activity of the federal government in cooperation with states , their political sub - divisions and localities thereof ; that investigations and improvements of rivers and other waterways , including watersheds thereof , for flood - control purposes are in the interest of the general welfare ; that the federal government should improve or participate in the improvement of navigable waters or their tributaries including watersheds thereof , for flood - control purposes if the benefits to whomsoever they may accrue are in excess of the estimated costs , and if the lives and social security of people are otherwise adversely affected .

since 1936 , congress has authorized the corps to construct hundreds of miles of levees .

today the federal role in flood risk management goes beyond assisting with the construction of dams and levees .

for instance , some federal actions attempt to modify individual and community behavior to reduce flood vulnerability ; the nfip and fema's hazard mitigation programs are examples .

congress established the nfip with the 1968 passage of the national flood insurance act .

prior to the program's establishment the federal government relied on a "levee - only" policy that permitted unrestricted development of the floodplains along with an emphasis on structural flood control systems .

making federally subsidized flood insurance available to property owners signaled a shift in federal policy towards a flood control strategy that was less dependent on structural measures .

the new policy had the intended consequence of regulating the development of flood - prone areas .

the nfip's multi - pronged regulatory system consists of flood risk assessment and mapping , flood insurance , and land use and building construction measures that restricted development in vulnerable areas .

the nfip allows for residential construction in known floodplains , with the proviso that construction must follow building code regulations that include flood - proofing requirements .

fema's hazard mitigation programs fund mitigation activities such as elevating properties , acquiring properties and converting them to open space , retrofitting buildings , and implementing limited flood control systems .

fema's nfip plays a significant role in federal levee policy and promotes interaction between fema and the corps on levee accreditation .

as discussed earlier , the 1968 national flood insurance act established the nfip .

federal flood insurance currently is available in participating communities to help individuals and small businesses recover from flood damage .

fema officials point out that the nfip has realized significant savings both to itself and to property owners by reducing the cost of disaster relief .

the basic requirement of the flood management program ( and access to federal flood insurance ) is that communities adopt and enforce minimum land use and building code regulations to prevent new development from increasing the flood risk and to protect new and existing buildings .

property owners obtaining loans from federally regulated lending institutions , or receiving federal assistance for acquisition or construction in special flood hazard areas ( sfhas ) in communities that participate in the nfip , are required to purchase flood insurance for their outstanding mortgage balance , up to a maximum of $250,000 in coverage for single - family homes .

the mandatory purchase requirement applies only to certain properties in floodplains .

levees that protect a community from a 1% - annual - chance flood can reduce the nfip mandatory purchase requirement .

the corps is the primary federal agency involved in the study and construction of levees .

the nrcs provides limited assistance for small - scale levees .

fema has had little involvement in levee planning and construction .

the corps and fema have several programs that authorize the agencies to assist with flood fighting in response to an imminent or occurring flood event .

these flood fighting actions can include assisting with existing levees that are locally operated ( eg , temporary reinforcement measures ) or the construction of temporary levees to manage floodwaters .

fema , the corps , and nrcs have programs that can fund disaster related emergency levee repairs .

while some of the flood fighting activities discussed above may overlap with disaster related repairs , such as the fema public assistance program , most activities covered by repair and rehabilitation assistance discussed below do not occur during a flood event .

rather , repair and rehabilitation activities are undertaken after the peak of a flood event has occurred and the extent of damage from the flood event can be determined .

activities that save lives and reduce damage to property are generally considered flood mitigation activities .

fema hazard mitigation grant programs provides funding for flood mitigation activities .

hazard mitigation can reduce federal costs by decreasing the level of damage from future disasters .

since 1989 , congress has appropriated over $135.6 billion for fema disaster assistance programs .

as shown in table 4 and discussed in further detail below , over $8.9 billion has been made available for hazard mitigation in the last five years .

certain flood damage reduction projects are eligible under fema's hazard mitigation grant program ( hmgp ) and pre - disaster mitigation grant program ( pdm ) .

there is debate regarding the extent to which fema hazard mitigation assistance programs can be used for levee construction and betterment , if at all .

fema hazard mitigation assistance programs cannot duplicate the activities of other federal agencies or be part of a larger flood control system .

it is thus critical to understand the extent to which fema and corps programs ( and to a lesser extent nrcs programs ) may or may not fund similar flood reduction projects .

 table 5 summarizes information on the corps , fema , and nrcs programs previously described ; it presents an overview of the federal programs that are most often discussed as potential sources of funds for locally operated levees .

the table clarifies that the corps is the main federal partner in the construction of locally operated levees .

what it does not show is that , as previously discussed , the process for obtaining this federal construction assistance is a lengthy multi - step process , and there is significant competition for available federal funds among congressionally authorized projects .

table 5 shows that there are no general federal authorities for assistance with the regular operation and maintenance of locally operated levees .

it further shows that there are multiple possible authorities for federal assistance for levees damaged by natural events and that each authority has its own cost share ; which of these authorities is appropriate depends on the type of event ( eg , declared disaster ) and the type of levee ( eg , small ) .

as previously noted , congress is debating whether and how to change the current division of levee responsibilities and their costs .

some stakeholders seek expansion of activities eligible for federal assistance , while others are concerned with the federal government assuming more of the cost and liability for levee investments that they consider a local responsibility .

this section discusses some of the options available for congressional consideration .

these include , but are not limited to , maintaining the status quo , adopting the recommendations of the congressionally established national committee on levee safety , creating a new grant program , supplementing existing grant programs , or reducing the federal role in levee funding .

the 112 th congress has expressed interest in the mapping methodology used by fema in updating the firms .

on february 3 , 2011 , 27 u.s .

senators sent a letter to fema administrator craig fugate requesting that fema discontinue its "without levee" analysis for determining firms for areas where existing levees have not obtained fema accreditation if the community in the affected area objects .

members of congress also have introduced legislation to address issues with updates to firms and the impact of new maps on the purchase requirements for the nfip .

in addition to the legislation discussed below , efforts to address the challenges facing locally owned levees may be pursued through efforts to reauthorize the nfip .

addressing local levee issues in a reauthorization or other bill raises a budgetary consideration .

increases in the authorizations or appropriations in federal assistance for locally owned levees would increase the demands on federal fiscal resources .

congress , the administration , and the public are carefully scrutinizing actions that would expand federal activities given the current federal fiscal climate .

while considering nfip reauthorization , which expires september 30 , 2011 , and during other legislative deliberations , congress may decide whether , and if so how , to address locally operated levees having difficulty obtaining and maintaining fema accreditation , and whether to change the current federal assistance provided to locally operated levees .

congressional action may clarify federal authorities for activities assisting locally operated levee and may reduce the risk of duplication of programs .

although levee issues have become a more prominent subject of congressional interest in recent years , consensus on how federal policy , programs , and funding should evolve remains elusive .

legislation on levee accreditation two bills related to levee accreditation were introduced in the 111 th congress .

in a march 2010 letter to the fema administrator and the assistant secretary of the army for civil works , 16 senators in the 111 th congress requested a meeting to discuss levee accreditation and flood mapping processes .

also during the 111 th congress , roughly 40 members were part of the congressional levee caucus ; the caucus chair announced levee certification as its chief priority .

h.r .

4935 , pal extension referred to the house committee on financial services , h.r .

4935 would have provided the fema regional office directors with the authority to grant a pal extension not to exceed 24 months for communities making a "good faith effort" to comply with the fema levee accreditation requirements .

the good faith effort would include documentation that a community has adequate funding for levee rehabilitation and has retained a private contractor or appropriate federal agency to verify the certification of the levee .

s. 3109 , rural community flood protection act of 2010 referred to the senate committee on environment and public works , s. 3109 would have authorized the corps to perform nfip data certification as part of the agency's civil works program rather than as a reimbursable activity .

the certification would be cost - shared , with a 65% federal and 35% local split , except that nonfederal interests representing fewer than 10,000 people and volunteer levee operators would have no local cost - share .

the bill would not have authorized a specific level of appropriations .

data on the average costs of data certification are not currently available .

the bill also would have addressed levee owners' concerns about the financial burden of obtaining data certification by authorizing the corps to perform at full or partial federal expense work that under the nfip is considered the levee owners' responsibility .

under the provisions of the bill , the federal government would assume all of the cost associated with levees protecting smaller communities and run by volunteers ; most likely , these would be in rural areas .

it is unclear how many such levees exist , since few rural levees provide protection from a 100-year flood .

furthermore , it is unclear whether such rural levees represent the greatest risk to life and property and therefore should receive a greater share of federal investment .

the greater federal cost share in the bill for rural levees appeared to be based on a perception of a lower ability among these levee owners to pay for data certification , rather than on a greater federal stake in these levees .

legislation on nfip mapping and flood insurance s. 3285 , suspension of flood map modernization updates referred to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , s. 3285 would have required that the fema administrator suspend any map updates under map mod for seven years for counties with a flood protection structure built or maintained by the corps .

the proposed legislation would not have suspended map updates for counties protected by locally operated levees .

h.r .

3415 and s. 3051 , suspension of flood insurance rate maps in areas where certain levees are being repaired h.r .

3415 and s. 3051 are identical bills that would have suspended flood insurance rate map updates for up to seven consecutive years in communities that contain levees with a design deficiency , if the community has a repair plan that was developed by the corps or a licensed professional engineer , was approved by fema or the corps , is based on reasonably current design data , and includes an adequate financing mechanism for implementing the plan .

the repair plan must also ensure that once the repairs are completed , the levee would provide protection from a 100-year flood .

h.r .

3415 was referred to the house committee on financial services , and s. 3051 was referred to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs .

legislation on fema's hazard mitigation programs h.r .

1746 ( p.l .

111-351 ) and h.r .

3377 , authorizations for the pre - disaster mitigation grant program passed by the house and the senate in december 2010 , h.r .

1746 ( p.l .

111-351 ) reauthorized the pdm program for three fiscal years beginning in fy2011 , with authorization for $180 million in fiscal year 2011 , $200 million for fiscal year 2012 , and $200 million in fy2013 .

the legislation increased the minimum award amount for each state by providing the lesser of $575,000 or 1% of total program appropriations , with a maximum per state award not to exceed 15% of the fiscal year appropriation .

the enacted legislation also included a prohibition on congressionally directed spending for the pdm program .

while h.r .

3377 would have authorized an annual appropriation of $250 million for three years , beginning in fy2010 , the bill did not receive further consideration because h.r .

1746 was passed by both the house and the senate .

the pdm program is a potential source of funding to address the levee issues presented in this report .

appropriations for pdm have fluctuated significantly since initial program authorization , ranging from $150 million for fy2003 and fy2004 to $50 million in fy2006 .

