the department of health and human services ( hhs ) has designated eight of its 11 operating divisions ( agencies ) as components of the u.s. public health service ( phs ) .

the phs agencies are ( 1 ) the agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) , ( 2 ) the agency for toxic substances and disease registry ( atsdr ) , ( 3 ) the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , ( 4 ) the food and drug administration ( fda ) , ( 5 ) the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , ( 6 ) the indian health service ( ihs ) , ( 7 ) the national institutes of health ( nih ) , and ( 8 ) the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) .

atsdr is administered by the director of the cdc and is included in the discussion of cdc in this report .

the programs and activities of five of the phs agencies — ahrq , cdc , hrsa , nih , and samhsa — are mostly authorized under the public health service act ( phsa ) .

while some of fda's regulatory activities are also authorized under the phsa , the agency and its programs largely derive their statutory authority from the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) .

many of the ihs programs and services are authorized by the indian health care improvement act , while atsdr was created by the comprehensive environmental response , compensation and liability act ( cercla , the "superfund" law ) .

the missions and key functions of the phs agencies vary .

two of them are primarily research agencies .

nih conducts and supports basic , clinical , and translational medical research , and ahrq conducts and supports research on the quality and effectiveness of health care services and systems .

three agencies — ihs , hrsa , and samhsa — provide health care services or support systems that do so .

ihs supports a health care delivery system for american indians and alaska natives .

health services are provided through tribally contracted and operated health programs , and through services purchased from private providers .

hrsa funds programs and systems to improve access to health care among low - income populations , pregnant women and children , persons living with hiv / aids , rural and frontier populations , and others who are medically underserved .

samhsa funds community - based mental health and substance abuse prevention and treatment services .

cdc and atsdr are public health agencies that develop and support public health prevention programs and systems , such as disease surveillance and provider education programs , for a full spectrum of acute and chronic diseases and injuries , including public health emergencies and bioterrorism .

the phs agencies have limited , if any , regulatory responsibilities with the exception of fda ; its mission is largely regulatory , ensuring the safety of foods and the safety and effectiveness of drugs , vaccines , medical devices , and other health products .

ahrq , cdc , hrsa , nih , and samhsa receive most of their funding through the annual appropriations act for the departments of labor , health and human services , education , and related agencies ( labor - hhs - ed ) .

funding for atsdr and ihs is provided through the interior , environment , and related agencies ( interior / environment ) appropriations act .

fda receives its funding through the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies ( agriculture ) appropriations act .

for each phs agency , this report provides a brief overview of the agency's statutory authority and principal activities and includes a table summarizing its funding for fy2010 and fy2011 , as well as the fy2012 budget request .

the fy2010 amounts reflect the funding provided in the agency's fy2010 appropriations act , with subsequent minor adjustments .

the fy2011 amounts are based on the funding provided by the full - year continuing resolution ( cr ) — the department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 — that was enacted on april 15 , 2011 , marking the completion of the fy2011 regular appropriations cycle more than six months after the start of the fiscal year .

both the fy2010 and fy2011 amounts in the funding tables in this report are taken from each agency's fy2011 operating plan .

also included in each table is a column showing the change in funding between fy2011 and fy2010 .

the fy2012 amounts represent the funding levels requested in the president's fy2012 budget , which are summarized in the hhs fy2012 budget in brief .

the funding tables show the agencies' discretionary budget authority and program level for each fiscal year .

discretionary budget authority represents the funding provided in the annual labor - hhs - ed or other applicable appropriations acts .

program level indicates the total amount of funding available to the agency , which includes discretionary budget authority plus additional funding from other sources .

these include ( 1 ) user fees ; ( 2 ) phs evaluation set - side funds ( see discussion below under "phs program evaluation set - aside" ) ; and ( 3 ) funding provided in laws other than annual appropriations acts , notably the health reform law ( see discussion below under "ppaca funding" ) .

each funding table shows the amounts for all the major budget items , which are summed to give the agency's total program level .

at the bottom of the table , any user fees , set - aside funds , ppaca funds , and other non - discretionary funds are then subtracted from the program level to show the agency's discretionary budget authority .

most tables include one or more non - add entries either to highlight the funding for specific programs within a larger budget line or , in some instances , to indicate the allocation of user fees or ppaca funds .

each table is also accompanied by a brief discussion of the changes ( mostly reductions ) in the agency's budget for fy2011 , followed by an overview of the president's fy2012 budget request for the agency .

for a summary of phs agency funding for fy2011 , see the text box below ( "phs agency fy2011 funding at - a - glance" ) .

on june 16 , 2011 , the house passed the fy2012 agriculture appropriations act ( h.r .

2112 ) , which includes funding for fda .

details of the agency's funding for fy2012 , as recommended by the house , are included in the fda section below .

this report will be updated once the house appropriations committee completes its work on the fy2012 labor - hhs - ed and interior / environment appropriations acts , which fund the other phs agencies .

samhsa is the lead federal agency for increasing access to behavioral health services .

it supports community - based mental health and substance abuse treatment and prevention services through formula grants to the states and u.s. territories and through numerous competitive grant programs to states , territories , tribal organizations , local communities , and private entities .

under samhsa' s charitable choice provisions , religious organizations are eligible to receive funding in order to provide substance abuse services without altering their religious character .

the agency also collects information on the incidence and prevalence of mental illness and substance abuse at the national and state levels .

samhsa and most of its programs and activities are authorized under phsa title v. however , the agency's two largest programs , the substance abuse prevention and treatment ( sapt ) block grant and the community mental health services ( cmhs ) block grant , which together accounted for more than 60% of the agency's budget in fy2010 , are separately authorized under phsa title xix part b .

under phsa title v , samhsa is organized into three centers: the center for mental health services ( cmhs ) , the center for substance abuse treatment ( csat ) , and the center for substance abuse prevention ( csap ) .

each center has general statutory authority , called programs of regional and national significance ( prns ) , under which it has established grant programs for states and communities to address their important substance abuse and mental health needs .

prns authorizes each center to fund projects that ( 1 ) translate promising new research findings to community - based prevention and treatment services ; ( 2 ) provide training and technical assistance ; and ( 3 ) target resources to increase service capacity where it is most needed .

in addition , phsa title v authorizes a number of specific grant programs , referred to as categorical grants .

the phsa also directs samhsa to conduct data collection and analysis activities related to mental health and substance abuse .

most samhsa programs are administered by one of the three centers and focus on mental health , substance abuse prevention , or substance abuse treatment .

several cross - cutting programs receive support separately from all three centers , including the national registry of evidence - based programs and practices , the samhsa health information network , the minority aids program , and the minority fellowship program .

to better address cross - cutting issues , samhsa has also created connections between centers for programs with both mental health and substance abuse components .

for instance , the co - occurring state incentive grant , which supports improvements to infrastructure and capacity for treating individuals with both mental health and substance abuse conditions , is administered by both cmhs and csat .

samhsa and its programs were last reauthorized in 2000 , as part of the children's health act .

funding authority for most of samhsa's grant programs expired at the end of fy2003 , though many of them continue to receive annual appropriations .

congress has not taken up comprehensive reauthorization legislation since 2000 , though it has added some new authorities to title v and otherwise expanded the agency's programs and activities in the past decade .

table 7 shows samhsa's funding for fy2010 and fy2011 , the change between those years , and the fy2012 budget request .

several non - add programs have been included in the table as examples ; these do not represent a complete list .

while phs evaluation set - aside funds are incorporated in the funding amounts for certain programs and activities , the pphf transfers are included as their own separate row .

both the set - aside funds and the pphf transfers are subtracted from the samhsa program level at the bottom of the table to give the agency's total discretionary budget authority .

as discussed in more detail below , samhsa's fy2012 budget request proposes a restructuring of its programs and activities .

to the extent possible , the table reflects the existing structure , consistent with fy2010 and fy2011 appropriations .

the new samhsa - wide programs in the fy2012 request are listed separately with the fy2010 and fy2011 columns left blank ( see discussion below under "fy2012 budget highlights" ) .

the fy2011 full - year cr ( p.l .

112-10 ) slightly reduced samhsa's funding below the fy2010 level .

with the 0.2% across - the - board rescission , the agency's discretionary budget authority for fy2011 is $3.380 billion , which is $52 million ( 1.5% ) less than the fy2010 amount .

however , that reduction was more than offset by a $68 million increase in pphf transfers .

samhsa's total program level for fy2011 is $3.599 billion , which is $16 million ( 0.4% ) above the fy2010 program level of $3.583 billion .

p.l .

112-10 prohibited the funding of grants for prescription drug monitoring programs originally authorized under the national all schedules prescription electronic reporting act of 2005 ( nasper ) .

in fy2010 , $2 million was appropriated for the nasper grants .

the president's fy2012 budget request includes a total program level of $3.649 billion for samhsa , which represents an increase of $66 million ( 2% ) over the fy2010 program level ( see table 7 ) .

the fy2012 program level includes budget authority of $3.387 billion , down about 1% from the fy2010 budget authority of $3.431 billion , plus $263 million in phs evaluation set - aside funds and pphf transfers .

importantly , the fy2012 budget reflects a restructuring of samhsa's programs in an effort to focus more resources on prevention of substance abuse and mental illness , assist indian tribes in addressing substance abuse and suicide , and support emerging issues such as primary / behavioral health care integration and health information technology .

to accomplish these goals samhsa's fy2012 budget request includes funding for three new prevention programs .

first , it proposes a new substance abuse prevention state grant program focused on high - risk communities and youth , which will be funded using the sapt block grant's 20% prevention set - aside .

second , it proposes expanding an existing discretionary mental health prevention program aimed at young children ( project launch ) to create a new state grant program to support comprehensive mental health prevention strategies for children , youth and young adults .

finally , the fy2012 budget proposes a new grant program using pphf funds to promote behavioral health in indian tribes by reducing alcohol and substance abuse and preventing suicide .

among other programmatic changes reflected in its fy2012 budget , samhsa has combined most of the existing prns grant programs in the three centers into a single account for innovation and emerging issues ; consolidated funding for three different data collection systems and the agency's evidence - based practice registry into one performance and quality information systems budget line ; and grouped the seclusion and restraint program , the protection and advocacy and the prescription drug monitoring formula grant programs , and two other regulatory and oversight programs into a single budget line .

appendix a .

community health center fund ppaca section 10503 established a community health center fund ( chcf ) to provide supplemental funding for health center operations and the national health service corps ( nhsc ) .

the law provided annual appropriations to the chcf totaling $11 billion over the five - year period fy2011 through fy2015 .

ppaca also included a provision the intent of which is that in order for the chcf funds to be used , regular appropriations for the health centers program and the nhsc must be maintained at least at the fy2008 funding level .

p.l .

112-10 eliminated this requirement for fy2011 , thus allowing chcf funds to be used in fy2011 even though the regular appropriations for health centers and the nhsc for the current fiscal year have been cut well below the fy2008 level .

table a - 1 summarizes the amounts appropriated to the chcf and the allocation of funds for each of the five fiscal years .

ppaca section 10503 also included an appropriation of $1.5 billion , available for the period fy2011 through fy2015 , for health center construction and renovation .

these funds are separate from the chcf and are not included in table a - 1 .

appendix b .

prevention and public health fund ppaca section 4002 established a prevention and public health fund ( pphf ) , appropriated in perpetuity , to be used to support prevention , wellness , and other public health - related programs and activities authorized under the public health service act ( phsa ) .

ppaca appropriates to the pphf: $500 million for fy2010 ; $750 million for fy2011 ; $1 billion for fy2012 ; $1.25 billion for fy2013 ; $1.5 billion for fy2014 ; and $2 billion for fy2015 and each fiscal year thereafter .

transfers from the pphf to specific hhs activities for fy2010 and fy2011 have been carried out by the hhs secretary and are summarized , along with the administration's proposed transfers for fy2012 , in table b - 1 .

pphf transfers to phs agencies are also itemized in the funding tables presented earlier in this report .

ppaca requires the secretary , when using pphf funds to augment existing programs and activities , to maintain at least the fy2008 funding level .

fy2011 appropriations for the pphf became available on october 1 , 2010 , at the beginning of the fiscal year .

fy2011 operating plans for the recipient agencies show how these funds have been and will continue to be used for this fiscal year .

in some cases , pphf funds appear to be used to replace funds from regular appropriations .

under current law , pphf funds are appropriated in perpetuity .

as a result , the fy2012 amounts in the table reflect not the administration's request for the funds , but rather the administration's intended allocation and use of the funds .

congress may by law ( including an appropriations law ) direct the secretary to expend the funds in a manner other than what is proposed , or take any other actions with respect to these funds .

