the european union ( eu ) is one of the united states' chief agricultural trading partners and also a major competitor in world markets for goods and services , as well as for farm products ( table 1 ) .

as a destination , the eu accounted for 20% of total u.s. merchandise exports and 8% of u.s. agricultural - product exports during the 2008-2010 period .

the eu ranked as the fifth most important destination for u.s. agricultural products behind canada ( 17% share ) , mexico ( 13% ) , china ( 12% ) , and japan ( 11% ) during that same period .

however , as a source for u.s. agricultural - product imports , the eu ranked first , with a 22% share placing it ahead of canada ( 20% ) , mexico ( 15% ) , china ( 4% ) , and brazil ( 3% ) .

both the united states and the eu provide significant government support to their agricultural sectors .

according to the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , in 2009 the eu and the united states together accounted for 60% of all government support to agriculture among the major developed economies .

however , eu and u.s. farm program support differ in both size and scope , as well as in the manner in which the support is provided .

in the united states , federal farm policy has traditionally focused on price and income support programs concentrated on row crops including grains , oilseeds , cotton , as well as dairy .

in addition , the united states has provided substantial support to the sugar sector via supply management and import quotas .

in contrast , the eu provides more extensive support to a broader range of farm and food products — in addition to traditional row crops , sugar , and dairy , eu support also is extended to fresh and processed fruits and vegetables , and livestock products .

the eu's total agricultural support generally is much higher than in the united states although actual support levels vary based on the definition of "agricultural support. .

for example , when using a broad , inclusive definition of the agricultural sector ( one that encompasses rural development and consumer nutrition assistance ) , then during the 2006-2007 period the eu spent an average of $119.7 billion per year in total government outlays , compared with $86.2 billion by the united states for a ratio of 1.4 to 1 ( table 2 and table 4 ) .

when the comparison is limited to the most market - distorting types of direct farm subsidies during the same period , then the levels are smaller but the difference is much greater ( $36.9 billion in eu outlays versus $10.1 billion in u.s. outlays , for a ratio of 3.6 to 1 ) .

when the definition of support includes non - monetary forms of support such as trade barriers and border measures , then the difference in support levels is still greater .

for example , the oecd estimates that in 2009 the eu accounted for nearly half ( 48% or $120.8 billion ) of all government support for agriculture ( both monetary and non - monetary ) among the major developed economies , compared with a 12% share ( $30.6 billion ) for u.s. agricultural support outlays ( for a ratio of nearly 4 to 1 ) .

in addition to the difficulties inherent in defining what constitutes support , or even what constitutes agriculture , direct spending comparisons of agricultural support levels between the u.s. and eu also are complicated by significant structural differences in their respective farm sectors .

the united states has more than double the farmland base ( over 1 billion acres versus about 457 million acres in the eu ) , while the eu has more than six times the number of farms ( 13.8 million versus 2.2 million ) spread across its 27 member countries ( table 2 ) .

as a result , eu outlays per unit of land appear much larger than in the united states , whereas u.s. outlays per farm appear much larger than in the eu .

the technological scale of agricultural production also varies dramatically across the eu's 27 member nations , thus adding to the difficulty of generalizing about eu farm policy effects in comparison with u.s. farm policy .

many of the eu's more recently added countries of eastern europe ( table 3 ) have been slow to adopt western technology , in large part due to the extremely small size of their agricultural holdings .

for example , the united states has 2.2 million farms with an average size of 418 acres per farm .

this contrasts with romania , which has nearly 4 million individual farm holdings with an average holding of about 9.4 acres , and poland , which has another 2.4 million holdings averaging about 19 acres each .

even the more western eu member country of italy has 1.7 million farms with an average holding of about 23 acres .

this small farm size limits the benefits from the economies of scale inherent in the advanced - technology agricultural production used in the united states .

the eu also has a much larger commercial animal population , nearly double that of the united states , but with smaller average animal numbers per farm with animals .

in general , the small size of eu farm holdings , their substantially larger number relative to the united states , and the generally larger share of rural population in the eu ( 26.3% versus 18% ) has played a strong role in the formation of eu farm policy — it tends to have a stronger rural development flavor and allows frequent exemptions for identifiably small farming units from certain restrictions and payment limitations .

because the united states and the eu figure so dominantly in the development and use of agricultural policy on the global level , information comparing the eu and u.s. farm support programs will likely continue to be of interest to congress as the united states prepares for another round of domestic farm bill negotiations and the world trade organization ( wto ) doha negotiations move forward .

this report uses data from two public sources to compare agricultural support between the united states and the eu: ( 1 ) estimates of domestic support for agricultural programs based on wto notifications ; and ( 2 ) the oecd's country - level policy database .

each of these data sources uses a slightly different metric to evaluate agricultural support but arrives at very similar conclusions .

both the united states and the eu have relied on similar policy instruments to support their respective agricultural sectors — price and income supports , direct payments to producers , supply controls , and border measures — although their implementation and the range of affected commodities has been fairly different over the years .

to fully appreciate the current status of u.s. and eu farm policy , it is useful to briefly review the origins and evolution of their respective policies .

as a general rule , since the mid - 1980s total farm sector support ( measured in annual outlays ) in the united states has increased substantially while outlays in the eu have declined slightly .

however , there are several similar policy trends in both the eu and united states: agricultural support has declined as a share of total gross farm receipts , support for market - distorting commodity programs has decreased both in absolute terms and as a share of agricultural support , and support for less distorting non - commodity - type programs — eg , conservation , rural development , agro - forestry , nutrition , and bioenergy — has increased substantially and now accounts for a majority share of total farm support .

the eu is one of the united states' chief agricultural trading partners and also a major competitor in world food markets .

both the eu and the united states heavily support their agricultural sectors .

however , strong budgetary pressures coupled with a shifting policy preference towards greater market orientation have motivated both the united states and the eu to modify their farm programs since the 1980s .

traditional price and income support programs have been progressively replaced by support that is decoupled from production or prices .

many commodity groups and members of congress representing agricultural districts , have historically defended u.s. farm support programs as a means to ensure that the united states has continued access to the "most abundant , safest , and cheapest food supplies in the world. .

yet some argue that the failure of the united states and eu to enact deeper , more rapid reforms of their respective farm support programs has contributed to delays in the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations within the world trade organization ( wto ) .

information comparing the eu and u.s. farm support programs will continue to be of interest to congress as the doha negotiations continue to move forward .

