the 112 th congress will decide whether , and on what terms , to extend the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant and related programs .

tanf was created in the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l .

104-193 ) , and is best known for helping states pay for their cash assistance programs for very low - income families with children .

however , tanf also helps states finance a wide range of benefits and services that seek to either ameliorate the effects of or address the root causes of economic disadvantage among families with children .

tanf is currently funded through the end of fy2012 ( september 30 , 2012 ) .

this report provides an overview of potential issues that might arise during a discussion of extending tanf funding or a long - term reauthorization .

it does not go into detail on tanf program rules or necessarily provide the most up - to - date data on tanf .

for a non - technical overview , see crs report r40946 , the temporary assistance for needy families block grant: an introduction .

for a report that details tanf program rules , see crs report rl32748 , the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant: a primer on tanf financing and federal requirements .

for current data on tanf , see crs report rl32760 , the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant: responses to frequently asked questions .

tanf is a product of the welfare reform debate of the mid - 1990s , which ended four decades of legislative efforts to either substantially revamp or replace the system of providing cash assistance to needy families with children .

cash assistance programs specifically for needy families with children date back to the state - and locally funded "mothers' pension" programs of the early 1900s ; the federal government first funded these programs under the social security act of 1935 .

the visibility of cash assistance programs increased in the 1960s , when caseload increases raised concerns about their cost and effects .

the welfare reform debates from the late 1960s to the mid - 1990s focused on issues related to families headed by a single mother ( which comprised most of the families on the assistance rolls during that period ) , and , specifically , concerns that welfare itself helped contribute to economic disadvantage of families with children .

social science research showed that cash assistance provided to non - working families was a disincentive for the single mother to go to work .

additionally , there was much discussion that a system of cash welfare targeted toward single parent families contributed to the rise in single , female - headed families .

the research evidence on the effects of cash assistance on family structure is less conclusive than it is on the effects of cash assistance on work .

there were other policy concerns about the adequacy of cash assistance benefits .

cash assistance programs were run at the state and local level , with large variations in eligibility criteria and benefit amounts .

the cash assistance programs also provided limited aid to the working poor .

research conducted in the 1980s and the early 1990s indicated that while many families received cash assistance for short periods of time , some families experienced long - term welfare dependency .

further , other research showed that mandatory welfare - to - work programs could be effective in moving families from the assistance rolls into employment .

thus , a policy requiring participation in activities that could lead to employment addressed the concern that receipt of cash assistance discouraged work .

tanf was created in the 1996 welfare law .

the basic rules of tanf are discussed below .

however , tanf was only a part of a series of policy changes that addressed the many policy concerns raised by cash assistance programs .

the changes in low - income assistance policies of the mid - 1990s were the culmination of a shift in emphasis away from providing a safety net for families without earnings to supporting the "working poor," particularly through expansions of the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) .

table 1 shows the cash assistance caseload in the context of related economic and social indicators for families with children for 1995 through 2010 .

the table shows that some of the circumstances of 2010 were very different from those of 1995 .

the cash assistance rolls are significantly diminished and reach a far smaller share of poor children than in 1995 .

the rate at which single mothers work is even higher in 2010 than in 1995 ( despite the lingering effects of the 2007-2009 recession ) , and the poverty rate for children living in families headed by mothers is lower in 2010 than in 1995 .

however , some of the indicators of social and economic disadvantage commonly associated with welfare issues have changed little or have even worsened in an era of lower cash assistance caseloads .

the poverty rate for all children declined in the late 1990s — but this improvement was ephemeral , as the child poverty rate increased in the 2000s even before the onset of the recession that began in december 2007 .

the rate at which children are born to unmarried mothers climbed in the 2000s , reaching a historical high .

the continued high rates of child poverty and children being born into and living in single - mother families raise policy issues .

research has linked both being raised in a poor family and being raised in a single - parent family to lower chances of success later in life .

that is , while many poor children and many children raised by a single parent do well , these factors increase the likelihood that a child will fail in school or suffer other negative outcomes .

it should be noted that the diminishment of state - based cash assistance does not mean that overall spending for the poor or poor families with children has also declined .

on the contrary , expansions of the eitc and a new refundable portion of the child tax credit , along with increases in medicaid , the children's health insurance program ( chip ) , the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , the program formerly known as food stamps ) , and supplemental security income ( ssi ) have resulted in higher levels of outlays for total need - tested aid to low - income families , including low - income families with children .

p.l .

112-96 ( the law that extended the payroll tax cut through 2012 ) provided tanf funding through the end of fy2012 .

it provides fy2012 funding for the basic tanf block grant , healthy marriage and responsible fatherhood competitive grants , and certain other funds at their fy2011 levels .

it does not provide fy2012 funding for tanf supplemental grants ( discussed in detail below ) .

in addition , p.l .

112-96 prevents electronic benefit transaction access to tanf cash at liquor stores , casinos , and strip clubs ; states would be required to prohibit access to tanf cash at automated teller machines ( atms ) at such establishments ; and requires states to report tanf data in a manner that facilitates the exchange of that data with other programs' data systems .

under the short - term extension of tanf , the 112 th congress would have to act again to continue the program beyond september 30 , 2012 ( the end of fy2012 ) .

president obama's fy2013 budget did not propose a comprehensive reauthorization of tanf .

it did propose to revive tanf supplemental grants and make them permanent .

it also proposed to "restructure" the tanf contingency fund , which provides additional grants to help states deal with increased costs associated with a recession .

the proposed extension of tanf and the lack of an administration proposal for a longer - term reauthorization defers the major budget and policy decisions related to the block grant .

most federal tanf policy focuses on historical concerns related to cash assistance for needy families with children , which led to the 1996 welfare law more than 15 years ago .

in terms of the larger policy issues associated with tanf , the administration did discuss some general principals it would like to see addressed .

the department of health and human services fy2013 budget in brief says: when congress takes up reauthorization , we want to work with lawmakers to strengthen the program's effectiveness in accomplishing its goals .

this should include using performance indicators to drive program improvement and ensuring that states have the flexibility to engage recipients in the most effective activities to promote success in the workforce – including families with serious barriers to employment .

we also want to work with congress to revise the contingency fund to make it more effective during economic downturns .

the remainder of this report will use the administration's budget request and general principles as a framework for discussing tanf issues before the 112 th congress .

it will first discuss general budget issues and supplemental grants that are the main focus of the president's fy2013 budget request .

a discussion of tanf performance measurement , its response to recessions , and subsidized employment follow .

in addition , the report will briefly address a related issue of responsible fatherhood initiatives , as the administration put forward a responsible fatherhood agenda in its fy2013 budget .

for each issue , it provides a listing of policy options that generally have been drawn from proposals made in the past .

also , see " additional reading ," below , for documents from organizations that provide policy options that might be addressed in tanf reauthorization .

p.l .

112-35 ( h.r .

2943 , geoff davis ) .

extended tanf basic , healthy marriage and responsible fatherhood , and mandatory child care grants ( and certain other tanf funds ) through december 31 , 2011 .

passed the house , september 21 , 2011 ; passed the senate , september 23 , 2011 ; signed by the president , september 30 , 2011 .

p.l .

112-78 ( h.r .

3765 , camp ) .

includes a two - month extension of tanf funding through february 29 , 2012 .

passed by both the house and senate by unanimous consent , and signed by the president , on december 23 , 2011 .

p.l .

112-96 ( h.r .

3630 , camp ) .

includes provisions to extend tanf basic , contingency fund , responsible fatherhood and healthy marriage grants , and mandatory child care funds through the end of fy2012 .

also provides that tanf cash assistance cannot be accessed in strip clubs , liquor stores , or casinos .

requires that tanf data reported by states be in a standardized format .

passed the house december 13 , 2011 .

amended to provide a two - month extension of tanf funding without policy changes and passed by the senate december 17 , 2011 .

conference agreement , including an extension of tanf through the end of fy2012 , filed on february 16 , 2012 , and passed both the house and senate february 17 , 2012 .

signed by the president on february 22 , 2012 .

s. 943 ( hatch ) and h.r .

3567 ( boustany ) .

would require states to establish policies that prevent the use of tanf cash assistance in any transaction that occurs in a liquor store , a casino , or a strip club .

states that fail to implement a policy could be penalized with a funding reduction of up to 5% of the state family assistance grant .

amended version passed the house february 2 , 2012 .

h.r .

628 ( cleaver ) .

establishes a $20 billion tanf emergency contingency fund for fy2011 through fy2018 .

it provides funding for increases in cash assistance , non - recurrent short - term benefits , and subsidized employment .

h.r .

1135 ( jordan ) and h.r .

1167 ( jordan ) .

similar bills ; both would reduce the tanf basic block grant to $15.5 billion .

also , both would set an overall cap on spending for need - tested benefits , enforced through the congressional budget process .

h.r .

2277 ( doggett ) .

would extend tanf supplemental grants through the end of fy2011 ( september 30 , 2011 ) .

h.r .

3193 ( fincher ) .

would require state tanf programs to operate random drug testing programs for tanf applicants and recipients and would require state tanf programs to deny assistance to individuals who test positive for illegal drugs or are convicted of drug - related crimes .

the state family assistance grant would be reduced by 10% if a state does not implement a drug testing program .

h.r .

3226 ( lee ) .

would reestablish the emergency contingency fund for state tanf programs to provide funding related to increased caseload , increased expenditures for non - recurrent short - term benefits , and increased expenditures for subsidized employment .

h.r .

3573 ( moore ) .

would permanently reauthorize tanf , increase the basic block grant for both inflation and child population growth since 1996 , prospectively increase the block grant for inflation and child population growth , establish open - ended matching grants for subsidized employment , revise the tanf contingency fund , and provide open - ended matching grants for child care .

it would establish reducing child poverty as the first goal of the block grant .

the bill would also prohibit states from ending benefits entirely ( full family sanctions ) for failure to meet program requirements , require states to engage in a sanction review process with a family before imposing a sanction , and prohibit states from imposing a time limit on receipt of assistance of less than 60 months .

it would also require states to determine a family budget necessary to meet basic needs , as well as penalize states that fail to provide a benefit commensurate with such a family benefit .

h.r .

3638 ( grijalva ) .

includes a provision to establish a $5 billion contingency fund for fy2012 and fy2013 .

h.r .

3659 ( paulsen ) .

includes provisions to extend tanf basic , contingency fund , responsible fatherhood and healthy marriage grants , and mandatory child care funds through the end of fy2012 .

also provides that tanf cash assistance cannot be accessed in strip clubs , liquor stores , or casinos .

requires that tanf data reported by states be in a standardized format .

passed the house december 15 , 2011 .

h.r .

3722 ( pearce ) .

would require states to operate drug testing programs for all applicants of assistance and require sanctions for those that fail the test .

also requires applicants to pay the costs of the drug test up - front .

such costs would be reimbursed to the applicant once he or she passes the drug test and begins to receive assistance .

s. 83 ( vitter ) and h.r .

1769 ( boustany ) .

would require states to operate drug testing programs for recipients of tanf assistance , and would require states to sanction individuals who fail drug tests .

the american public human services association and the national association of state tanf administrators , temporary assistance for needy families: recommendations for reauthorization , december 2010 , http: / / www.aphsa.org / home / doc / aphsa - nastatanfrecommendations.pdf .

katherine bradley and robert rector , confronting the unsustainable growth of welfare entitlements: principles of reform and next steps , heritage foundation , june 24 , 2010 , http: / / thf_media.s3.amazonaws.com / 2010 / pdf / bg2427.pdf .

elizabeth lower - basch , goals for tanf reauthorization , center for law and social policy january 24 , 2011 , http: / / www.clasp.org / admin / site / publications / files / tanf - reauthorization - goals.pdf .

