willie davis was a passenger in a car stopped by police in greenville , alabama , for a traffic violation .

the police arrested davis for giving a false name .

after handcuffing him and placing him in the back of a patrol car , the police searched the passenger compartment of the car in which davis had been riding .

the police found a gun inside davis's jacket , and davis was convicted of possessing a firearm as a convicted felon .

at the time of the search , the police were acting in conformity with eleventh circuit precedent .

the eleventh circuit had adopted the widely accepted interpretation of the supreme court's decision in new york v. belton , which entitled police to conduct a warrantless and suspicionless search of a vehicle's passenger compartment after arresting one of its passengers .

after davis was convicted , however , the supreme court held in arizona v. gant that this type of suspicionless vehicle search incident to arrest violated the fourth amendment to the u.s. constitution .

the fourth amendment provides a right against "unreasonable searches and seizures. .

it secures privacy interests in one's person and property against unreasonable incursions by state and federal officials .

however , the parameters of fourth amendment protection have significantly changed during the last century and continue to evolve in response to supreme court decisions .

as the court's fourth amendment jurisprudence shifts , so does its approach to related questions , such as when and how courts should remedy fourth amendment violations .

although the supreme court has often framed civil liberty and the rule of law as requiring that a legal remedy accompany every legal right , the court did not announce a remedy for fourth amendment violations until 1914 .

then , in weeks v. united states , the court held that unconstitutionally obtained evidence could be excluded at trial to remedy a fourth amendment violation .

this remedy , subsequently termed the "exclusionary rule," initially only applied to fourth amendment violations by federal actors , but , in 1961 , the court extended it to violations by state actors as well .

the scope of the exclusionary rule has narrowed since these early decisions .

the exclusionary rule , for example , is no longer treated as a constitutional doctrine .

instead , the supreme court has described the rule as a pragmatic doctrine that only applies when the benefits of evidentiary suppression exceed its costs to the justice system .

the court has also articulated several exceptions to the exclusionary rule's applicability .

the "good - faith exception," which renders the exclusionary rule inapplicable to evidence that the police obtained illegally but in "good - faith," is arguably the most significant of these exceptions .

today , the good - faith exception applies in such a wide number of circumstances that its application appears to be the norm from which evidentiary exclusion is the exception .

under recent supreme court jurisprudence , the good - faith exception applies to all illegally obtained evidence that was not seized as a result of "deliberate" and "culpable" police misconduct .

the court emphasized this standard in its decision in davis , confirming that police culpability is now the dispositive factor in determining the exclusionary rule's applicability .

courts apply the exclusionary rule to deter fourth amendment violations by suppressing unconstitutionally seized evidence .

the rule was initially conceived as a constitutionally required remedy for — rather than a deterrent of — illegal searches and seizures , but recent supreme court cases have emphasized that the exclusionary rule is neither rooted in nor required by the u.s. constitution .

this shift in judicial thinking may reflect a move toward textualism on the supreme court as well as concern that the exclusionary rule impedes the criminal justice system by barring probative evidence of a criminal defendant's guilt from admission at trial .

the supreme court has narrowed the reach of the exclusionary rule over the years .

today , the exclusionary rule is applied only if the benefits of its application — primarily its deterrent effect on unconstitutional police conduct — outweigh the costs to law enforcement and the administration of justice .

the court has also articulated several exceptions to the exclusionary rule's operability .

arguably the good - faith exception is the most significant exception to the exclusionary rule .

it permits the unconstitutionally obtained evidence to be introduced at trial when it was seized in "good - faith" by law enforcement officers .

as it was initially articulated in united states v. leon , the good - faith exception seemed to apply only when the police acted in "objectively reasonable reliance" on the legal error of an authority other than the police .

these authorities included state legislatures and magistrate judges .

however , the supreme court subsequently extended the good - faith exception to good - faith reliance on a clerical error within the police department — namely , a mistake in a police database file regarding the status of the suspect's arrest warrant .

in herring v. united states , the court held in 2009 that "to trigger the exclusionary rule , police conduct must be sufficiently deliberate that exclusion can meaningfully deter it , and sufficiently culpable that such deterrence is worth the price paid by the justice system. .

supporters of the exclusionary rule criticized the decision for undermining the fourth amendment by expanding the good - faith exception's applicability .

however , the court wrote that "the flagrancy of the police misconduct" has always "constituted an important step in the calculus" of the exclusionary rule , and it characterized the exclusionary rule's evolution as a series of cases excluding evidence obtained as a result of flagrant or deliberate violations of suspects' rights .

united states v. davis was the first case in which the supreme court was asked to apply the herring standard and determine whether particular police conduct was "culpable. .

prior to the supreme court's opinion , the federal circuit courts of appeals had reached conflicting decisions about the admissibility of evidence seized in an unconstitutional search that , at the time it was conducted , complied with precedent .

the supreme court held that this evidence is admissible because police do not act culpably by conducting an unconstitutional search that conformed with "binding appellate precedent. .

the case confirms that , under the herring test , police culpability is now the sole relevant factor in determining whether the exclusionary rule applies .

congress has occasionally considered supplementing the supreme court's exclusionary rule jurisprudence with legislation codifying the exclusionary rule or the good - faith exception .

over the years , some members have expressed displeasure that the exclusionary rule substantially interferes with law enforcement and the conviction of criminal defendants against whom there is probative evidence that they have committed a crime .

however , congressional efforts to curtail the exclusionary rule's reach have encountered resistance over concerns that , in the name of fighting crime , these efforts will result in the violation of the rights of innocent people .

in 1968 , congress codified the exclusionary rule to a limited extent with respect to information obtained illegally through interceptions of certain wire or oral communications .

more recently , the 104 th congress considered codifying a good - faith exception to the exclusionary rule in the exclusionary rule reform act of 1995 .

notably , congress would not be able to curtail the exclusionary rule's application in circumstances in which it is constitutionally required .

however , the supreme court has consistently emphasized that the rule has no constitutional basis .

it is therefore widely accepted that congress has broad authority to bar ( or require ) the exclusionary rule in federal cases , and the court's opinion in davis supports this position .

nevertheless , legislation barring the exclusionary rule might carry implications for the operability of "state exclusionary rules" and raise questions about whether and how fourth amendment violations should be deterred and / or remedied in the future .

davis v. united states was the first case in which the supreme court applied the "deliberate" and "culpable" herring standard for the good - faith exception's application .

the supreme court held that evidence seized in an unconstitutional search that , at the time it was conducted , complied with precedent is admissible because police do not act culpably when they conform with "binding appellate precedent. .

the case also suggests that police culpability is the sole relevant factor in determining whether the exclusionary rule applies .

although the majority and dissent in davis disagreed over whether the holding would dramatically limit the number of cases in which the exclusionary rule applies , davis fits within a body of case law that , as a whole , narrows the rule's applicability .

on one hand , this trend suggests that the exclusionary rule's opponents may no longer be motivated to reform the rule legislatively , and therefore any push to codify the exclusionary rule will originate with the rule's supporters .

however , legislative reform may not only be motivated by a desire to see the exclusionary rule apply — or not apply — to remedy fourth amendment violations , it may also be motivated by a perceived need to provide clarity and predictability to police operations .

exclusionary rule jurisprudence has been described as so "severely contorted" and "complicated" as to be nearly impossible for police officers , who need to make quick decisions about the legality of their actions , to apply in the field .

drawing on this concern , the dissent in davis suggested that the court's decision would confound police operations by further complicating this jurisprudence and requiring courts and police to make difficult distinctions between "binding" and non - binding appellate precedent .

however , supporters of the court's opinion in davis would presumably disagree with this assessment and contend that davis clarified the exclusionary rule jurisprudence by restricting the rule's application to only the most flagrantly violative searches .

