many diplomatic and military practitioners as well as theorists have argued that successful execution of a military operation depends on how well specific actions are matched to strategic intent .

practitioners and observers have debated what constitutes international "authorization" for the establishment of a no - fly zone .

given the paucity of relevant precedents , and the dissimilarities among them , there may not exist a single , clear , agreed model .

authorization may be not only a question of approval or disapproval .

it may also include parameters for the execution of the mission , and conditions under which the authorization for the no - fly zone operation will be considered discontinued .

it may not be necessary to achieve all of the broad objectives of grand strategy before discontinuing the no - fly zone — the no - fly zone operation may be designed to catalyze overall progress toward those objectives .

in turn , the concept of authorization is typically considered to be linked to the ideas of both "legality" and "legitimacy" — the three concepts overlap but are all distinct .

the precise meaning of each of the terms is still debated .

in addition to international authorization , debates have addressed the question of congressional authorization — whether and when there is a need for congressional approval based on the war powers resolution for a proposed no - fly zone .

the question of whether and how congressional authorization is sought for a proposed operation could have an impact on congressional support — including policy , funding , and outreach to the american people — for the operation .

on november 7 , 1973 , congress passed the war powers resolution , p.l .

93-148 , over the veto of president nixon .

the war powers resolution ( wpr ) states that the president's powers as commander in chief to introduce u.s. forces into hostilities or imminent hostilities can only be exercised pursuant to ( 1 ) a declaration of war ; ( 2 ) specific statutory authorization ; or ( 3 ) a national emergency created by an attack on the united states or its forces .

it requires the president in every possible instance to consult with congress before introducing american armed forces into hostilities or imminent hostilities unless there has been a declaration of war or other specific congressional authorization .

it also requires the president to report to congress any introduction of forces into hostilities or imminent hostilities , section 4 ( a ) ( 1 ) ; into foreign territory while equipped for combat , section 4 ( a ) ( 2 ) ; or in numbers which substantially enlarge u.s. forces equipped for combat already in a foreign nation , section 4 ( a ) ( 3 ) .

once a report is submitted "or required to be submitted" under section 4 ( a ) ( 1 ) , congress must authorize the use of force within 60 to 90 days or the forces must be withdrawn .

since the war powers resolution's enactment in 1973 , every president has taken the position that this statute is an unconstitutional infringement by congress on the president's authority as commander in chief .

the courts have not directly addressed this question , even though lawsuits have been filed relating to the war powers resolution and its constitutionality .

some recent operations — in particular u.s. participation in north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) military operations in kosovo , and in u.n. - authorized operations in bosnia and herzegovina , in the 1990s — have raised questions concerning whether nato operations and / or u.n. - authorized operations are exempt from the requirements of the war powers resolution .

regarding nato operations , article 11 of the north atlantic treaty states that its provisions are to be carried out by the parties "in accordance with their respective constitutional processes," implying that nato treaty commitments do not override u.s. constitutional provisions regarding the role of congress in determining the extent of u.s. participation in nato missions .

section 8 ( a ) of the war powers resolution states specifically that authority to introduce u.s. forces into hostilities is not to be inferred from any treaty , ratified before or after 1973 , unless implementing legislation specifically authorizes such introduction and says it is intended to constitute an authorization within the meaning of the war powers resolution .

regarding u.n. - authorized operations , for "chapter vii" operations , undertaken in accordance with articles 42 and 43 of the u.n. charter , section 6 of the u.n .

participation act , p.l .

79-264 , as amended , authorizes the president to negotiate special agreements with the u.n. security council , subject to the approval of congress , providing for the numbers and types of armed forces and facilities to be made available to the security council .

once the agreements have been concluded , the law states , further congressional authorization is not necessary .

to date , no such agreements have been concluded .

given these provisions of u.s. law , and the history of disagreements between the president and congress over presidential authority to introduce u.s. military personnel into hostilities in the absence of prior congressional authorization for such actions , it seems likely that a presidential effort to establish a "no - fly zone" on his own authority would be controversial .

controversy would be all the more likely if the president were to undertake action "pre - emptively" or in the absence of a direct military threat to the united states .

since the war powers resolution gives the president the authority to launch u.s. military actions prior to receiving an authorization from congress for 60-90 days , it is possible that the president could direct u.s. armed forces to take or support military actions in accordance with u.n. security council resolutions , or in support of nato operations , and then seek statutory authority for such actions from congress .

no - fly zone operations can conceivably take a number of different forms , and can themselves vary a great deal over time .

key considerations include , but are not limited to , the following factors .

the costs of establishing and maintaining a no - fly zone are likely to vary widely based on several key parameters: the specific military tasks that a given no - fly zone operation calls for .

for example , initial costs might be relatively high if , as a first step , it were necessary to destroy the adversary's air defenses .

a particularly robust surface - to - air capability , including a large number of discrete sam sites , might prove relatively costly to suppress .

the geography of the adversary's country — the surface area and type of terrain over which u.s. and partner forces would have to operate .

a large surface area , as in onw and osw in iraq , or mountainous terrain , as in odf in bosnia and herzegovina , could both add cost , depending on the concept of operations for enforcing the no - fly zone .

the duration of the no - fly zone .

the extent to which the united states is joined by international partners in the effort .

the extent of "mission creep" — how , if at all , the operation expands to include a broader array of activities designed to achieve the same military , and strategic , objectives .

as a rough guide to the range of possible costs , table 1 shows the costs to the u.s. government of u.s. participation in a variety of air operations in the 1990s .

of these , operation noble anvil , the air war in yugoslavia designed to address conflict in kosovo , was the most intense .

it involved initially limited and later extensive attacks to degrade air defenses throughout the federal republic of yugoslavia , including all of serbia .

those were followed by escalating air attacks initially focused on the military infrastructure and later on strategic targets .

the operation lasted for two and a half months , from march 24 through june 10 , 1999 .

the operation — including the no - fly zone and extensive additional activities — cost a total of $1.8 billion .

toward the other end of the spectrum are costs of the two no - fly zone coalition operations in iraq .

the costs to the u.s. government of operation southern watch averaged somewhat more than $700 million per year , although the amounts varied substantially from year to year .

the osw mission involved constant patrols over a relatively large geographic area , punctuated by occasional strikes against iraqi air defense sites .

it imposed a considerable burden on u.s. air force units , mainly because of the long duration of the operation — from 1992 to 2003 .

crs report rl31133 , declarations of war and authorizations for the use of military force: historical background and legal implications , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20775 , congressional use of funding cutoffs since 1970 involving u.s. military forces and overseas deployments , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21311 , u.s. use of preemptive military force , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41725 , operation odyssey dawn ( libya ) : background and issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed .

