regulation , like taxing and spending , is a basic function of government .

each year , federal agencies issue between 3,000 and 4,000 final rules on topics ranging from the timing of bridge openings to the permissible levels of arsenic and other contaminants in drinking water .

unlike taxing and spending , however , the costs that nonfederal entities pay to comply with federal regulations are not accounted for in the federal budget process .

some policy makers have expressed an interest in measuring total regulatory costs and benefits .

for example , the congressional office of regulatory analysis creation and sunset and review act of 2011 ( h.r .

214 , 112 th congress ) would require the newly created office to issue "an annual report including estimates of the total costs and benefits of all existing federal regulations. .

as discussed later in this report , for nearly 14 years , congress has required the office of management and budget ( omb ) to prepare a report each year on the aggregate costs and benefits of federal rules .

however , measuring total regulatory costs and benefits is inherently difficult .

for example , researchers must determine the baseline for measurement ( i.e. , what effects would have occurred in the absence of the regulation ) and aggregating the results of studies conducted years earlier with different methodologies and quality can be highly problematic .

some observers , including omb , currently doubt whether an accurate measure of total regulatory costs and benefits is possible .

crain and crain developed their $1.75 trillion estimate of total regulatory costs by adding together cost estimates for each of four categories or types of regulation: economic regulations ( $1.236 trillion ) ; environmental regulations ( $281 billion ) ; tax compliance ( $160 billion ) ; and regulations involving occupational safety and health , and homeland security ( $75 billion ) .

as figure 1 below illustrates , the estimated cost of economic regulations was more than 70% of the authors' estimate of total regulatory costs .

as noted previously and as shown below in table 2 , in 2005 , w. mark crain estimated total federal regulatory costs in 2004 at about $1.11 trillion .

in 2010 , crain and crain estimated those costs in 2008 at about $1.75 trillion — an increase of about $639 billion ( 57.4% ) in four years .

some of this increase is due to inflation , but the authors said that the main reason for the increase was a change in the methodology used in developing their estimate of the cost of economic regulations .

as table 2 below indicates , were it not for the increase in the cost estimate for economic regulations , the total estimated cost of the three other types of regulations would have decreased by about $6 billion between 2004 and 2008 .

for nearly 15 years , congress has required omb to submit annual reports on the costs and benefits of federal regulations .

the first such requirement was in section 645 of the treasury , postal service and general government appropriations act , 1997 ( p.l .

104-208 ) , which required the director of omb to submit a report by september 30 , 1997 , that provided ( among other things ) "estimates of the total annual costs and benefits of federal regulatory programs , including quantitative and nonquantitative measures of regulatory costs and benefits. .

similar requirements were contained in other appropriations bills in subsequent years .

in 2001 , section 624 of the treasury and general government appropriations act , 2001 , ( 31 u.s.c .

§ 1105 note ) , sometimes known as the "regulatory right - to - know act," put in place a permanent requirement for an omb report on regulatory costs and benefits .

specifically , it requires omb to prepare and submit with the president's budget an "accounting statement and associated report" containing an estimate of the total costs and benefits ( including quantifiable and nonquantifiable effects ) of federal rules and paperwork , to the extent feasible , ( 1 ) in the aggregate , ( 2 ) by agency and agency program , and ( 3 ) by major rule .

the accounting statement is also required to contain an analysis of the impacts of federal regulation on state , local , and tribal governments , small businesses , wages , and economic growth .

although accurate measures of the costs and benefits of all federal rules would be useful , decision makers using studies of aggregate regulatory costs and benefits to guide public policy need to be aware of those studies' conceptual and methodological underpinnings .

the validity and reliability of crain and crain's $1.75 trillion estimate of total federal regulatory costs in 2008 depends on the validity and reliability of its individual elements .

more than 70% of the overall estimate ( $1.236 trillion ) is based on the wgi index of regulatory quality for the united states , with the authors determining the extent to which economic regulations reflected in that index reduces per capita real gdp in the united states .

however , one of the authors of the regulatory quality index has said that crain and crain misinterpreted the index , and that higher values on the index cannot be interpreted as "less stringent regulations. .

even if it could , he said that the index for the united states should be compared to a country with a preferable index , not to an idealized "best possible" score on the index .

comparing the united states' regulatory quality index in 2008 to the country with the highest index that year ( ireland ) would have reduced crain and crain's estimate of the cost of economic regulations by nearly two - thirds .

other commenters ( including one of the peer reviewers of the crain and crain study ) raised similar concerns about whether the regulatory quality index could be used to measure the cost of economic regulations , and about the regression analysis used to produce the cost estimate .

responding to these criticisms , crain and crain said that they continue to believe that the regulatory quality index indicates the stringency of a country's economic regulations , and believe that it was appropriate for them to compare the index for the united states to a "conceptual regulatory environment" represented by a 2.5 score rather than to another country with a somewhat higher index score .

the world bank indicates on its website that measures like the regulatory quality index are "often too blunt a tool to be useful in formulating specific governance reforms in particular country contexts. .

crain and crain's estimates for environmental , occupational safety and health , and homeland security regulations were developed by mixing together academic studies ( some of which were more than 30 years old ) with agencies' estimates of regulatory costs that were developed before the rules were issued ( some of which are now 20 years old ) .

omb has said that adding together diverse sets of individual studies to develop a summary measure of regulatory costs is an "inherently flawed" approach .

the agency estimates that crain and crain used were drawn from omb reports to congress on the estimated costs and benefits of regulations , which were typically presented as low - to - high ranges .

however , crain and crain used only the highest cost estimates from these reports , stating that they did so because the omb estimates did not cover all regulations , and because they believe "government agencies tend to be conservative in estimating regulatory costs. .

omb has said that there is little documentation to support this view , and empirical studies of agencies' regulatory cost estimates have not resolved the issue .

also , omb has concluded that estimates of the costs and benefits of regulations issued more than 10 years earlier are of "questionable relevance. .

since 2003 , omb's annual "regulatory right - to - know act" reports to congress have only included information on the costs and benefits of major rules issued during the previous 10 years .

although omb has recognized that this approach understates total regulatory costs and benefits , omb has said it does not believe older estimates are reliable or useful in informing policy decisions .

in one of its first reports to congress on this issue , omb also said that the incremental costs of regulations ( i.e. , over and above what businesses and individuals would have done in the absence of regulations ) tend to decrease over time , as companies' business practices and consumers' expectations change .

thus , although the national highway traffic safety administration has significantly increased the safety of automobiles , it is not likely that if the agency's regulations were eliminated the automobile companies would discontinue the safety features that had been mandated .

consumers demand safer cars than they used to and automobile companies are concerned about product liability .

this same phenomenon exists with the environment , although probably to a lesser extent .

environmentally responsible behavior has become good for the bottom line… .

over time , this "rising baseline" phenomenon reduces the true costs and benefits of health , safety , and environmental regulations .

estimates of the aggregate costs and benefits of regulation that include unadjusted estimates from aging studies are thus likely to be over estimates of the current costs and benefits of those regulations .

omb went on to say that "it does not seem implausible that , for environmental and other social regulations over ten years old , no more than half of compliance costs would likely be saved if these federal regulations magically disappeared over night. .

crain and crain's estimate for the cost of tax paperwork was reportedly based on data from the irs and the tax foundation , but data in omb's annual information collection budget suggests that the number of hours of tax paperwork may be much higher than the authors used in their report .

on the other hand , crain and crain's assumptions regarding the per hour cost of completing the paperwork may be too high ( eg , the assumption that "human resources professionals" paid at nearly $50 per hour would be completing all business paperwork ) .

however , a threshold question is whether tax paperwork should be considered in the same category as regulatory costs .

omb does not include tax paperwork in its annual reports to congress on regulatory costs and benefits .

although crain and crain attempted to determine all of the costs associated with federal regulations , their report did not discuss the benefits of those regulations — even when information on regulatory benefits was readily available in the omb reports that they used to determine regulatory costs .

in their report , the authors said that it "does not address the benefits of regulation , an important challenge that would be a logical next step toward achieving a rational regulatory system. .

crain and crain told crs that they did not include regulatory benefits in their study "because we researched the topic as required by the office of advocacy. .

the sba office of advocacy confirmed that crain and crain "were not asked to look at benefits , as the task for this last iteration was to update the previous study , which also looked at costs and the disproportionality between small and large businesses. .

executive order 12866 requires covered agencies to "assess both the costs and the benefits of the intended regulation and , recognizing that some costs and benefits are difficult to quantify , propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that the benefits of the intended regulation justify its costs. .

it also says that agencies should generally select regulatory approaches that "maximize net benefits. .

omb's reports to congress on the aggregate costs and benefits of federal regulations have generally indicated that the estimated benefits exceed the estimated costs .

for example , see the following: in the report for 2010 covering major rules reviewed by omb from october 1999 through september 2009 for which benefits and costs were monetized , the aggregate costs were estimated to be between $43 billion and $55 billion , and the aggregate benefits were estimated to be between $128 billion and $616 billion .

of the 16 major rules issued during fy2009 for which benefits and costs were monetized , the costs were estimated at between $3.7 billion and $9.5 billion , and the benefits were estimated at between $8.6 billion and $28.9 billion .

in the draft report for 2011 covering major rules reviewed by omb from october 2000 through september 2010 for which benefits and costs were monetized , the aggregate costs were estimated to be between $44 billion and $62 billion , and the aggregate benefits were estimated to be between $136 billion and $651 billion .

of the 18 major rules issued during fy2010 for which benefits and costs were monetized , the costs were estimated at between $6.5 billion and $12.5 billion , and the benefits were estimated at between $23.3 billion and $82.3 billion .

each year , however , there were a number of rules in which the agencies only quantified or monetized benefits or costs , but not both .

most commonly , the agencies quantified or monetized only costs .

as noted at the beginning of this report , crain and crain's estimate that federal regulations cost $1.75 trillion in 2008 has been cited as evidence of the need for regulatory reform legislation .

however , crain and crain told crs that their report was "not meant to be a decision - making tool for lawmakers or federal regulatory agencies to use in choosing the 'right' level of regulation .

in no place in any of the reports do we imply that our reports should be used for this purpose .

 ( how could we recommend this use when we make no attempt to estimate the benefits ? ) .

as crain and crain suggest , information on regulatory costs alone , whether for individual rules or for all rules in the aggregate , provides only one piece of information that congress and other policymakers can use in determining how to proceed .

for example , even if all federal regulations did cost $1.75 trillion in 2008 ( which at least some commenters believe may not be correct ) , if the monetized benefits of those regulations were determined to be greater than those costs , then policymakers may conclude that those costs were ( in the words of executive order 12866 ) "justified. .

on the other hand , if the monetized benefits of federal regulations were estimated to be less than the estimated costs , policymakers may reach another conclusion , or may decide to examine any non - monetized costs and benefits of those rules .

but a valid , reasoned policy decision can only be made after considering information on both costs and benefits .

in an effort to assess the sensitivity of crain and crain's results , crs ran a linear regression using similar , but somewhat different , data and methods .

specifically , crs compiled a dataset for 30 oecd countries over the period 2002-2008 using the same dependent variable ( gdp per capita in constant 2000 dollars ) and four of the five independent variables that were used by crain and crain .

the four identical independent variables were ( 1 ) the world governance indicators regulatory quality index , ( 2 ) broadband penetration rates , ( 3 ) country population , and ( 4 ) foreign trade as a percentage of gdp .

data for these four variables were obtained from the oecd website ( http: / / www.oecd.org ) .

crain and crain also included one other variable in their analysis: primary school enrollment as a share of the eligible population .

in their analysis , the associated coefficient had an unexpected negative sign ( indicating that as primary school enrollment went up , gdp per capita went down ) .

crain and crain told crs that the negative coefficient could be due to "aging pyramid" demographic effects .

in the crs analysis , two variables were added to account for such demographic effects: the proportion of the population under 14 and the proportion of the population over 65 .

these variables were calculated from data obtained from the u.s. census bureau international population statistics .

these demographic measures may capture "aging pyramid" effects more directly than the primary education variable .

crs ran a cross - country fixed effects panel estimator with year indicator variables .

natural logarithms of all variables except the regulatory quality index were used in the regression .

estimation results using stata 11 xtreg procedure , using robust ( white ) standard errors that are used by most empirical researchers .

estimation results run with conventional standard errors , which are very similar , are available upon request .

the estimation output is shown in table a - 1 below .

the estimated coefficient on the world governance indicators regulatory quality index is very small and is not significantly different from zero .

the coefficient on population is also statistically insignificant , although other estimated coefficients have expected signs and are statistically significant at conventional levels of confidence .

the point estimate of the coefficient regulatory quality index ( .0001609 ) can be used to estimate the economic effect of shifting the united states from the 2008 regulatory quality index value ( 1.508 ) to the 2008 level of ireland ( 1.856 ) .

according to that calculation which presumes that the regression specification reflects the true structure of the economy , that shift would result in an increase of $2.14 in per capita gdp ( measured in year 2000 dollars ) .

because the point estimate of the effect of the regulatory quality index is so imprecise , however , the calculated effect of a hypothetical shift of u.s. regulatory quality to the irish level is also imprecise .

one test statistic ( rho , a measure of intercountry correlation ) indicates that 99.9% of the variance in the model results from differences among countries , rather than time - series variation within countries .

this could suggest that estimating the effects of variables that generally change slowly over time , such as the regulatory environment in economically advanced countries , may be challenging using panel estimation methods the employ highly aggregated country - level data .

other econometric approaches that focus on more specific changes in regulatory environment may provide a better path for understanding the effects of regulation on economic activity .

