executive orders requiring agencies to impose certain conditions on federal contractors as terms of their contracts have raised questions about presidential authority to issue such orders .

these orders typically cite the president's constitutional authority , as well as his authority pursuant to the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 ( fpasa ) .

fpasa authorizes the president to prescribe any policies or directives that he considers necessary to promote "economy" or "efficiency" in federal procurement .

for example , there have been legal challenges to orders ( 1 ) encouraging agencies to require the use of project labor agreements on large - scale construction projects ; ( 2 ) requiring that certain contracts include provisions obligating contractors to post notices informing employees of their rights not to be required "to join a union or to pay mandatory dues for costs unrelated to representational activities" ; and ( 3 ) directing departments and agencies to require their contractors to use e - verify to check the work authorization of their employees .

these challenges have alleged , among other things , that the orders were beyond the president's authority , under fpasa or otherwise .

a 2011 draft executive order that would have directed departments to require contractors to "disclose certain political contributions and expenditures" raised similar and additional questions as to whether it would have been within the president's authority , as it resembled legislation that was considered , but not enacted , by the 111 th congress .

the issuance of executive orders requiring agencies to impose certain conditions on federal contractors and subcontractors has practical as well as legal significance given the scope of federal procurement activities .

spending on federal contracts totaled $541.1 billion , or approximately four percent of u.s. gross domestic product , in fy2010 , and approximately 22% of u.s. workers are employed by entities subject to requirements placed on certain federal and federally funded contractors and subcontractors pursuant to executive orders .

thus , some commentators have expressed concern that , if presidential authority to issue directives imposing requirements on federal contractors is construed broadly , the executive branch effectively could regulate significant segments of the u.s. economy .

this report provides background on the authorities under which presidents have historically issued executive orders pertaining to federal contractors and the legal issues potentially raised by the exercise of these authorities .

it also surveys key cases challenging executive orders pertaining to federal contractors , which typically were issued under the authority granted to the president under the fpasa .

the report concludes by addressing potential limitations on and congressional responses to presidential exercises of authority regarding federal contractors .

broadly speaking , executive orders are directives issued by the president .

such directives may have the force and effect of law if they are based on express or implied constitutional or statutory authority .

executive orders are "generally directed to , and govern actions by , government officials and agencies" and are sometimes characterized as "affect[ing] private individuals only indirectly. .

however , they can effectively reach private conduct , such as when an executive order requires agencies to incorporate particular terms in their contracts , or prohibits them from entering contracts with persons who do not comply with certain conditions .

presidents from franklin d. roosevelt through barack obama have issued orders that seek to leverage the government's procurement spending to promote socio - economic policies that some commentators would characterize as extraneous to contractors' provision of goods or services to the government .

the issuance of such orders has been controversial , partly because of disputes regarding the desirability of the underlying socio - economic policies to be promoted through the procurement process and partly because some commentators characterize such presidential actions as trespassing upon congressional prerogatives .

presidential power to issue executive orders must derive from the constitution or from an act of congress .

contractor - related executive orders historically have been issued based upon the president's powers under article ii of the constitution or the powers delegated to the president by fpasa .

the earliest orders using the procurement process to further socio - economic policies of the president appear to have been issued during world war ii , and were based upon the president's constitutional authority as commander - in - chief .

later , during the 1960s , several orders were issued under the authority of prior executive orders or other provisions of federal law .

more recently , orders have been issued based on presidential authority under fpasa .

fpasa states that its purpose is to "provide the federal government with an economical and efficient system for … [p]rocuring and supplying property and nonpersonal services" and authorizes the president to prescribe any "policies and directives" consistent with the act that he "considers necessary to carry out" the act's goals of efficiency and economy .

courts and commentators have disagreed as to whether congress intended to delegate to the president broad authority over procurement or authority only over narrow "housekeeping" aspects of procurement , and fpasa's legislative history is arguably inconclusive .

while a few courts have found that the president has "inherent authority" over procurement , questions have arisen about whether such authority survived the enactment of fpasa .

some commentators have suggested that the authority delegated to the president under fpasa is so broad that presidents do not need to assert inherent authority over procurement .

cases alleging that particular executive orders are beyond the president's authority may be broadly divided into two types based upon the arguments raised in these cases and the courts' treatment thereof: ( 1 ) cases challenging one of several executive orders directing executive branch agencies to require certain federal and federally funded contractors to adhere to anti - discrimination or affirmative action requirements , and ( 2 ) cases challenging other contractor - related executive orders .

some executive orders regarding contractors' anti - discrimination and affirmative action obligations were issued prior to the enactment of fpasa , and , in part because they rely upon constitutional authority , they can raise somewhat different legal issues than cases challenging orders issued under the authority of the fpasa .

the following discussion of key cases regarding contractor - related executive orders is arranged chronologically , so as to highlight developments in the case law over time .

in a few instances , cases addressing similar issues have been grouped together , rather than treated individually .

as the case law illustrates , presidents have broad authority under fpasa to impose requirements upon federal contractors .

however , this authority is not unlimited , and particular applications of presidential authority under fpasa have been found to be beyond what congress contemplated when it granted the president authority to prescribe policies and directives that promote economy and efficiency in federal procurement .

for example , in chrysler , regulations promulgated under the authority of executive order 11246 were deemed to lack the required nexus to congressionally delegated authority because the regulations were not contemplated in statutory grants of authority such as the fpasa that may have been relied upon for executive order 11246 .

a similar argument was made in liberty mutual , where attempts to subject insurance underwriters to executive order 11246 failed the "reasonably close nexus" test between the economy and efficiency in federal procurement and the recordkeeping and other requirements imposed on contractors by the order .

additionally , the requirements of particular executive orders have been found invalid when they conflict with other provisions of law .

in reich , the court found that debarment of contractors who hired permanent replacements for striking workers was preempted by the nlra .

in east texas and truckers mgmt .

 , the courts found that executive order 11246 , which addressed the use of bona fide seniority systems by government contractors and subcontractors , conflicted with title vii of the civil rights act , which exempted bona fide seniority systems .

executive orders on federal contracting promulgated under authorities other than the fpasa potentially could be found invalid under youngstown , although it is unclear that presidents would rely solely on the constitution for such authority given the breadth of presidential authority under the fpasa .

however , in building and construction trades department , afl - cio , an executive order on the use of plas in federal contracting was upheld based , in part , on the president's constitutional authority .

further developments in the case law are possible , given that recent presidents have continued the practice of their predecessors in terms of issuing executive orders on government contracting .

these orders may require agencies to incorporate in their contracts provisions obligating contractors to take steps that some commentators would characterize as extraneous to contractors' provision of goods or services to the government .

legislation in this area is also possible , as congress may amend or repeal an executive order , terminate the underlying authority upon which it is based , or use its appropriations authority to limit its effect .

in the event that congress sought to enlarge or cabin presidential exercises of authority over federal contractors , congress could amend fpasa to clarify congressional intent to grant the president broader authority over procurement , or limit his authority to more narrow "housekeeping" aspects of procurement .

congress also could pass legislation directed at particular requirements of contracting executive orders .

for example , the 112 th congress enacted legislation that seeks to forestall implementation of any executive orders requiring disclosure of contractors' political contributions and expenditures .

specifically , the national defense authorization act for fy2012 ( p.l .

112-81 , §823 ) prohibited the heads of defense agencies from requiring contractors to submit "political information" related to the contractor , a subcontractor , or any partner , officer , director , or employee thereof , as part of the solicitation or during the course of contract performance .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 , §743 ) similarly barred the use of appropriated funds to "recommend or require" persons submitting offers for federal contracts to disclose political contributions or expenditures .

