canada has long been the united states' most important energy partner .

canada is the single largest foreign supplier of petroleum products , natural gas , and electric power to the united states — and the united states is the dominant consumer of canada's energy exports .

canada is also the primary recipient of u.s. energy exports .

the value of the energy trade between the two countries totaled nearly $100 billion in 2010 , helping to promote general economic growth and directly support thousands of energy industry and related jobs on both sides of the border .

increased energy trade between the united states and canada — a stable , friendly neighbor — is viewed by many as a major contributor to u.s. energy security .

the u.s. - canada energy relationship is increasingly complex , however , and is undergoing fundamental change , particularly in the petroleum and natural gas sectors .

congress has been facing important policy questions in the u.s. - canada energy context on several fronts , including the siting of major cross - border pipelines , increasing petroleum supplies from canadian oil sands , increasing natural gas production from north american shales , and the construction of new facilities for liquefied natural gas ( lng ) exports .

legislative proposals in the 112 th congress could directly influence these developments .

for example , h.r .

1938 would direct the president to expedite the consideration and approval of the keystone xl pipeline linking canadian oil sands production to refineries in the gulf of mexico .

h.r .

909 would encourage petroleum and natural gas production on the outer continental shelf , would prescribe requirements for coordination with adjacent states regarding associated pipeline construction , and would allow production of petroleum and natural gas from the arctic national wildlife refuge , among other provisions .

s. 304 would support a program to train workers in the construction , operation , maintenance , and performance of all related environmental processes involving oil and gas infrastructure in alaska .

other proposals in congress affecting hydraulic fracturing operations for natural gas production , offshore drilling , or u.s. oil shale development could also affect the u.s. - canada energy trade .

while specific energy policy issues arising in the united states and canada may appear to be independent of one another , many have important physical , economic , and environmental links .

thus , u.s. - canada energy policies established in one context may have important implications in others .

this report provides an overview of the u.s. - canada energy trade , with a focus on petroleum and natural gas .

it summarizes important trends in both of these sectors and identifies key connections among these trends .

finally , the report discusses possible implications for the u.s. - canada energy relationship going forward , highlighting considerations for congress as it continues its oversight of the energy industry and considers new energy legislation .

although the report raises environmental issues in specific contexts , a broad discussion of environmental impacts from north american energy production and consumption is beyond its scope .

in 2010 , 30% of primary energy consumed in the united states was imported ( figure 1 ) .

approximately 29% of these energy imports were canadian petroleum ( 18% ) and canadian natural gas ( 11% ) .

taken together , canadian petroleum and natural gas accounted for 9% of total u.s. primary energy consumption in 2010 , the largest contribution from any one foreign supplier .

the value of energy imports from canada in 2010 was $83.6 billion , accounting for about 3.5% of all u.s. imports of goods and services that year .

these payments were primarily for petroleum and natural gas ( figure 2 ) .

in addition to these imports , the united states exported $13.5 billion worth of energy commodities to canada , including $5.3 billion of refined petroleum products .

the north america free trade agreement's ( nafta's ) extensive energy provisions have facilitated energy trade between the united states and canada , underscoring the importance of this trade for both countries .

nafta states , in part , "it is desirable to strengthen the important role that trade in energy and basic petrochemical goods plays in the free trade area...." by virtue of nafta and the private sector orientation of the energy sectors in both countries , u.s. and canadian companies have become integrated in the development , production , transportation , and marketing of petroleum and natural gas .

joint ventures between u.s. and canadian companies on petroleum and natural gas projects are common .

these close connections , and geographic proximity , have led the u.s. and canadian energy markets to be viewed as one .

although the united states and canada have a long - established trade relationship in petroleum and natural gas — both have been shipped across the border since the late 1800s — several aspects of that relationship have been undergoing a transformation in recent years .

these changes include the rapid growth in petroleum supplies from canadian oil sands , the siting of major cross - border petroleum pipelines , renewed attempts to commercialize arctic natural gas , a sharp rise in natural gas production from u.s. shales , and the development of new liquefied natural gas ( lng ) facilities .

in each of these areas new technology and infrastructure investments may have a significant effect on the balance of energy supply , demand , and trade between the united states and canada .

in some cases , they may also create new competition between the two countries in developing specific mineral resources and infrastructure projects .

the united states and canada , while independent countries , effectively comprise a single integrated market for petroleum and natural gas .

these markets are physically linked by billions of dollars of transportation and refining infrastructure , and are economically linked by direct participation in the same regional and global energy markets .

canada is the largest foreign supplier of energy to the united states and will continue to be for the foreseeable future .

the united states depends on canada for oil and natural gas supplies that it cannot currently produce itself .

as the primary supplier of u.s. imports of petroleum and natural gas , canada is viewed as a stabilizing factor for u.s. energy supplies ; although petroleum prices are set in a global market , the likelihood that canada would cut off oil and natural gas supplies is remote .

but canada is equally dependent upon the united states to buy energy exports that might not easily find a market elsewhere due to geographical constraints .

the united states is also a critical supplier to canada of refined petroleum products .

u.s. - based companies invest heavily in assets and energy resources in canada and vice versa .

although individual companies in both countries may compete for specific energy opportunities ( eg , lng terminals ) , the overall energy relationship between the united state and canada is mutually beneficial .

traditionally , the energy trade between the united states and canada , while intertwined , has been uncomplicated — taking the form of a steadily growing southward flow of crude oil and natural gas to markets in the u.s. midwest and northeast .

but recent increases in oil sands and shale gas production , expansion of cross - border pipeline capacity , prospects for lng exports , and renewed interest in arctic natural gas have greatly complicated that energy relationship , creating new competition and interconnections .

consequently , while energy policies in one country have always inevitably affected the other , their cross - cutting effects in the future may not be widely understood and , in some cases , may be largely unanticipated .

for example , policies affecting u.s. shale gas production could affect north american natural gas prices overall , and thus , the costs of producing petroleum from oil sands ( which requires large volumes of natural gas for heating ) .

changing oil sands costs could , in turn , affect canadian petroleum supplies to the united states , affecting north - south pipeline use and changing u.s. petroleum import requirements from overseas .

changing natural gas prices would also change the economics of arctic natural gas , however , and influence the development of the arctic natural gas pipelines , which could provide an alternative source of economic natural gas for oil sands production in alberta .

how such scenarios could play out in reality is open to debate , but they illustrate the tangled web policymakers in both countries must navigate as they consider future energy , environmental , and transportation decisions .

as congress debates legislative proposals affecting the petroleum and natural gas industries , it may be helpful to consider these proposals in the broadest possible north american context , recognizing that the energy sector in canada may be moved in one direction or another based on policies in washington , dc .

for example , developers are already pursuing western canadian routes for petroleum exports to asia as an alternative to u.s. exports , especially if the latter should fail to grow as expected .

ultimately , the energy market effects of specific energy policies and projects must be weighed against their broader economic value , energy security implications , and environmental impacts .

to date , the judgment of congress has favored a growing u.s. - canada energy partnership — but ensuring that this relationship continues to be as mutually beneficial as possible will likely remain a key oversight challenge for the next decades .

if the balance tips the other way — either in the eyes of developers or the federal government — congress may need to reconsider its position on key energy and related initiatives to meet the united states' long - term policy objectives .

