managing price and income risks can be a major challenge for dairy farmers .

in 2011 , the farm price of milk has rebounded from lows in 2009 , but the price of corn , a major feed ingredient , has reached record highs .

the volatile nature of commodity markets presents opportunities for profits and losses when milk prices or feed costs change .

feed accounts for around 75% of a dairy farm's operating costs .

for producers of any farm commodity , certain practices to manage risk can help limit losses of capital so the farm can continue operating .

in dairy , and in agriculture generally , farm - level risk management is provided through both private and public sector tools .

by using these tools , dairy producers transfer to others risk they are unwilling to carry , shifting it either to those in the private sector who profit from accepting the risk , or to the government ( and taxpayers generally ) through subsidized insurance products or the milk income loss contract ( milc ) program .

this report describes the market risks dairy farmers face , discusses current risk management tools available to dairy producers , and provides a review of risk management options being considered for the next farm bill .

many in the dairy industry , producers and processors alike , generally support the federal government's policies promoting the use of risk management tools by individual producers .

in contrast , the industry is divided over changes to other , more traditional dairy policies and programs , including the possible addition of a supply management program .

federal dairy programs , such as price supports and federal milk marketing orders , are designed to address pricing and income issues , among other matters , for producers collectively .

even though these programs can affect dairy producer profitability , they are not included in this report because they generally address the industry as a whole and producers do not opt in or out as a means of managing their risks .

for information on a broader range of current programs and options for dairy policy , see crs report r41141 , previewing dairy policy options for the next farm bill .

in the 1970s and early 1980s , farm milk prices , resting atop milk support prices , were mostly stable and left little price uncertainty for producers .

as a result , individual producers had little need for managing price risk — the government price support program did it for them by removing large amounts of dairy products from the market .

subsequently , congress reduced price support levels throughout the 1980s to reduce program costs .

since then , farm milk prices have remained mostly above support levels , following increases in domestic and export demand , and annual fluctuations in farm milk prices have become routine .

for example , from 2006 to 2010 , milk prices moved between lows and record or near - record highs .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

the experience for dairy producers in 2009 was severe because prices had been at a record high in 2007-2008 and then fell sharply at a time when feed costs were rising substantially above long - run averages .

in recent years , increased demand for u.s. dairy product exports has been a factor behind the strength in milk prices .

the dairy industry has made significant gains by developing export markets and positioning itself to capture future growth in the global market .

the united states is now a net dairy exporter , and exports account for 10% or more of milk production .

becoming a larger player in the global dairy market has brought additional demand to the industry , but dairy producers have become more exposed to the price volatility in that market .

risk management tools for individual dairy producers can be categorized as either short - run or long - run tools .

they can be also categorized by who delivers the tool — either private parties or the federal government .

 ( see figure 5 . ) .

in the short run ( up to about a year or so ) , producers can lock in what they may view as favorable ( or at least acceptable ) prices and / or margins using forward contracts with milk buyers and feed dealers .

they might also use brokers to establish hedges using futures or options that lock in favorable prices or margins .

as a third option , producers might maintain cash reserves to get through the low price periods .

in the government category , congress occasionally grants emergency government assistance to producers that could be considered short - run risk management because , over the years , some producers have apparently considered the possibility of assistance to be sufficient risk protection .

finally , government insurance products administered by usda's risk management agency but delivered by private insurers are available to manage short - run risks .

long - run risk management strategies might include diversifying the farm operation , perhaps by growing more feed ( thus avoiding market purchases ) or by adding other enterprises , such as a trucking operation .

the goal of such moves would be to generate revenue streams that do not fluctuate in the same way as dairy revenues .

pursuing off - farm income is another way to reduce variability in farm household income by simply reducing dairy returns as a share of the overall household income .

but given the labor requirements of dairy operations , this is usually considered a less viable option than for other types of farms .

finally , the milk income loss contract ( milc ) program makes payments when milk prices drop below certain levels .

milc is considered a long - run tool because the target levels are in statute for multiple years over the life of the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) .

this is in contrast to the short - run private tools listed above , which offer price or margin protection at whatever levels the milk and feed markets determine for a specific time period , generally one year or so into the future .

sometimes producers can lock in favorable ( high ) margins , while at other times margins may be low or even negative .

these tools are described in more detail below .

as congress prepares to deliberate dairy policy in the next farm bill , policymakers might consider a number of options currently circulating in the industry to address the risk management needs of individual dairy producers .

these include facilitating the use of private hedging , expanding the government's lgm - dairy margin insurance , establishing "farm savings accounts," implementing a national margin insurance program , and modifying the existing milc program that provides counter - cyclical payments to dairy producers .

the section below briefly describes these approaches .

in addition to considering risk management tools , congress might also choose to address milk and dairy product market volatility through modification of federal dairy policy , might leave federal policy unchanged , or might reduce or eliminate federal assistance .

for a discussion of dairy policy options , see crs report r41141 , previewing dairy policy options for the next farm bill .

a number of risk management tools exist that individual dairy producers can use to ameliorate the financial effects of volatile milk prices and margins .

private risk tools such as forward contracting and hedging are currently used by dairy producers , but additional training for producers and bankers might contribute to expanded use .

some have suggested that producers and buyers of farm milk need help securing additional lines of credit for producers' margin accounts , which might increase their risk management activities .

usda's changes to the lgm - dairy insurance product in fy2011 demonstrated that subsidies ( and other changes in the policy ) increased demand for the product .

but it is not clear how much the subsidies actually increased total risk management activity or whether the subsidies crowded out the use of other risk tools and simply transferred money from taxpayers to farmers .

proponents of the proposed farm savings accounts ( fsas ) argue that this tool would assist individual producers to manage cash flows in an industry known for large annual fluctuations in income .

such a tool might address another vexing dairy policy issue — overinvestment in dairy operations — by offering producers a tax incentive to save during the boom years rather than build their herds to minimize tax liability .

if not met with an increase in demand , industry expansion can lead to higher production and lower prices in future years .

finally , with respect to both private and public marketing tools ( eg , hedging and government programs ) , policymakers might address whether the margin provided by the market ( and determined essentially each day that the futures market is open ) is sufficient for producers , or whether a minimum margin needs to be set through a "margin insurance" program or a milc - type program .

policymakers may also consider the implications of removing "too much" risk , and the possibility that high levels of margin protection could potentially lead to excess milk production and unfavorable returns for dairy producers .

