radioactive materials are used worldwide for medical , industrial , research , and other purposes .

yet their security is far from airtight , especially in foreign countries .

terrorists could create a radiological dispersal device ( rdd ) by obtaining radioactive material and detonating an explosive next to it .

an attack could contaminate some square miles , disrupt the economy , cost tens of billions of dollars to remediate , increase the long - term cancer rate , and cause panic in the target area and beyond .

while the press focuses on explosive - driven "dirty bombs," terrorists could also disperse radioactive material from aircraft or in other ways .

this report examines radiation and its effects , steps to prevent , respond to , and recover from an attack , and issues for congress .

many atoms are stable: they remain in their current form indefinitely .

some are unstable , or radioactive .

they "decay," often by emitting energetic particles .

gamma rays , a form of electromagnetic radiation , are often emitted by decay .

each radioactive atom , or "radionuclide," decays in a specific way .

some high - energy radiation is "ionizing. .

most atoms have no net electrical charge because they have an equal number of positively - charged protons and negatively - charged electrons .

ionizing radiation knocks electrons off atoms , turning atoms into positively - charged ions that damage living cells .

very low doses of radiation produce few if any effects , but progressively higher doses may increase the risk of cancer or may cause radiation sickness or death .

in the united states , dose is usually measured in units of rem .

this unit takes into account the amount of radiation absorbed and its biological effects .

the average background dose for the u.s. population is estimated at 620 millirem ( mrem ; 1,000 mrem = 1 rem ) per year .

about half is from natural sources , and half from exposure for medical purposes .

an rdd attack is likely to expose few people to a dose of more than a few rem per year .

views differ on the harm from that dose .

one view is that any amount of radiation increases cancer risk ; another is that there is no evidence that radiation of less than about 10 rem per year increases that risk .

federal standards differ for low doses .

for dose to the public resulting from the nuclear fuel cycle ( eg , nuclear power plants ) , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) uses a standard of 25 mrem per year of whole - body dose .

in contrast , the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) has established an occupational dose limit of 5 rem per year .

no single level marks the line between an acceptable and unacceptable dose .

an rdd attack would elevate dose in the affected area beyond the background dose .

the epa issued guidance for protective actions following nuclear and radiological incidents except nuclear war , and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) issued guidance for actions following rdd and improvised nuclear device ( ind , i.e. , a terrorist - made nuclear weapon ) incidents .

both agencies recommended "protective action guides" ( pags ) .

a pag is "the projected dose to a reference individual , from an accidental or deliberate release of radioactive material , at which a specific protective action to reduce or avoid that dose is recommended. .

fema divides incident response into phases .

for the early phase , which starts "at the beginning of the incident," the protective action recommended for a pag of 1 to 5 rem is sheltering in place or evacuation .

the intermediate phase "is usually assumed to begin after the incident source and releases have been brought under control. .

for it , fema recommends "relocation of the public" for a projected dose of 2 rem for the first year and 0.5 rem per year for any subsequent year .

the late phase starts when recovery and cleanup begin , and ends with their completion .

fema does not have a pag for the late phase because authorities would need to optimize among economic , land use , etc. , in determining which areas need to be remediated to what levels .

as a guide to quantities of material that should be protected , in 2003 the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) revised its code of conduct on the safety and security of radioactive sources .

the iaea decided that the code "should serve as guidance to states for — inter alia — the development and harmonization of policies , laws and regulations on the safety and security of radioactive sources. .

it lists 16 radionuclides that are in common use and could pose a threat .

for each radionuclide , the code lists three categories of radiation and the threshold radiation value for each category based on potential to harm individuals .

category 1 sources are those that , if not safely managed or securely protected , could cause permanent injury to someone who handled them for a few minutes , and death to someone who handled them unshielded for a few minutes to an hour .

for category 2 sources , the corresponding figures are minutes to hours and hours to days .

category 3 sources could cause injury to someone handling them for some hours .

of the 16 radionuclides , cesium - 137 chloride is of particular concern .

category 2 quantities are often a fraction of a gram .

somewhat larger amounts can contaminate a substantial area .

for example , figure 1 models a possible rdd attack on washington , dc , using about 50 grams of cesium - 137 chloride , which contaminates , to different levels , 0.81 to 5.10 square miles .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) mandates certain security measures for category 1 and 2 sources .

the nrc considers category 2 sources to be risk - significant .

since the nrc judges that category 2 sources could cause significant economic effects , it uses category 2 as the basis for mandating security measures beyond those in the energy policy act .

an rdd could cause prompt casualties , which would most likely come only from the explosion of a dirty bomb ; panic ; economic disruption , which might result if a port or city center were contaminated with radioactive material ; asset denial , in which public concern over the presence of radioactive material might lead people to abandon a subway system or an area of a city for months to years ; a requirement for decontamination , which would be costly ; and long - term casualties resulting from exposure to or inhalation of radioactive material .

a study of the economic impacts of an attack on the ports of los angeles and long beach using two rdds placed total u.s. losses at $8.5 billion for exports and $26.0 billion for imports .

while there have been thefts of radioactive material and attempts to use it for malevolent ends , there has not been a successful rdd attack , for reasons such as the following .

terrorists would need to learn about radiation for self - protection .

they would need to learn which radioactive materials would be suitable for an rdd .

they would have to obtain the material despite security measures .

they would have to move the material past detectors at u.s. ports and elsewhere .

they would have to acquire the other bomb components , assemble the bomb , and place it , steps that law enforcement might detect .

forensic analysis might reveal the perpetrator of the attack , possibly leading to retaliation and deterring state assistance .

while no one reason presents an insurmountable obstacle , the combination may help explain why an rdd attack has not occurred .

before september 11 , 2001 , the main concern for radioactive sources was their safe handling .

they were used worldwide in many applications with varying levels of security .

the ongoing u.s. response to the attacks is based on "layered defense," in which each layer increases the likelihood of disrupting a possible attack .

layers includes protecting sources through licensing , tracking , and physical security upgrades ; removing sources that are outside the tracking system because they are abandoned , lost , or stolen ; and reducing the number of sources in use .

what priority should be given to countering radiological vs. other forms of terrorism ? .

there are many contending arguments .

 ( 1 ) despite concerns about terrorist interest in rdds , no successful rdd attack has occurred .

 ( 2 ) of nuclear , chemical , biological , and radiological weapons , the latter would arguably kill the fewest people .

 ( 3 ) most planning , training , equipment , and supplies that would help respond to an rdd attack would be of use in other disasters as well , so it is difficult to determine the balance between funds to counter all hazards and those to counter rdds only .

 ( 4 ) since costs resulting from an rdd attack could be tens of billions of dollars , some measures directly relevant to an rdd attack , such as decontamination r&d and securing radioactive sources , may be cost - effective .

where are u.s. funds to secure radioactive sources most effectively spent ? .

one argument is that it is better to spend money to secure domestic radiological sources because if they are illicitly obtained they could be used promptly in an rdd , avoiding the risk of detection in other countries and at u.s. ports of entry .

this effort would be costly .

of course , it would also be costly to secure radiological sources in countries that could not do so without international assistance .

on the other hand , funds spent securing sources overseas might offer a higher benefit - cost ratio in that many sources overseas may be less secure than u.s. sources .

further , expenditures to counter the rdd threat overseas could help safeguard u.s. facilities in other nations and could help avert rdd attacks on critical facilities and infrastructure that could cause economic disruption .

while attention has focused on explosive - driven "dirty bombs," an unobtrusive rdd attack could go undetected for hours , giving material time to spread and to irradiate people .

a distributed network of sensors to detect , locate , and identify radioactive material would address this issue .

sensors could be mounted on buildings , police cars , or surveillance cameras .

work is underway to develop radiation - detection chips to be incorporated into cell phones or other mobile devices .

what would it cost to develop a detector network and deploy it in major metropolitan areas ? .

would it be appropriate for the federal government to fund deployment of such networks , or would deployment be a state or local responsibility ? .

the main cost of an rdd attack would be decontamination .

proper methods depend on the rdd material , its form , types of surfaces affected , and the required decontamination level .

decontaminators should be aware of the best techniques .

prompt availability of relevant information , such as through fema's lessons learned information sharing , would help .

decontamination would require the proper equipment and supplies .

has the government stockpiled the needed resources or arranged to have them manufactured quickly ? .

what areas might future r&d pursue ? .

what is the cost of decontamination vs. demolition and reconstruction ? .

techniques to decontaminate areas struck by an rdd would help decontaminate the much larger area struck by radioactive fallout from an ind .

many studies have considered how to dispose of nuclear waste .

the possibility of an rdd attack adds urgency to the disposition of radioactive waste .

most sealed sources have no disposition pathway .

choosing a permanent disposition pathway would reduce the risk of terrorists obtaining this material .

on a larger scale , decontamination would generate chemicals , water , and radioactive material .

how would this waste be handled ? .

if decontamination proved ineffective , an alternative would be to demolish contaminated buildings , generating much rubble .

where would it go ? .

if buried , would it contaminate the water table ? .

if it were to be buried out of state , would another state accept it ? .

how would it be transported ? .

would states along the proposed route try to block transit ? .

it would appear more efficient to plan in advance how to dispose of this rubble rather than deciding on a rushed basis postattack .

the gtri domestic materials protection program visits facilities requesting its service , examines the security situation , and installs security devices .

it provides this service on a voluntary basis at no initial cost to the facilities .

as of february 2011 , it had "identified more than 2,700 vulnerable buildings … with high - priority radioactive material in the united states," had completed security enhancements at 251 of the buildings , "with the remainder aiming to be completed by 2025. .

other upgrades will take several years as well .

alternatives include expanding this program to complete upgrades sooner , maintaining it at its current level , eliminating it , or making it mandatory .

congress has given nuclear forensics strong support , so it may wish to strengthen radiological forensics capability .

since radiological forensics is typically grouped with nuclear forensics , congress could establish a panel to examine the unique aspects and requirements of the former and how its science and technology might be advanced .

congress could also support the buildout of archives of samples relevant to rdds .

