enactment of p.l .

111-292 , the telework enhancement act of 2010 , on december 9 , 2010 , as the 111 th congress was approaching adjournment , represented the culmination of several years of legislative activity related to this issue .

for example , the 108 th and 109 th congresses saw the introduction and referral to committee of two bills , but no further action occurred on the legislation .

in the 110 th congress , the house passed a bill and the senate reported a bill , but neither measure saw further action .

under the law , the head of each executive agency of the federal government is required to establish and implement a policy under which employees shall be authorized to telework .

the policy must ensure that telework does not diminish employee performance or agency operations .

the law defines telework as a work flexibility arrangement under which an employee performs the duties and responsibilities of his or her position , and other authorized activities , from an approved worksite other than the location from which the employee would otherwise work .

to participate in telework , an employee must enter into a written agreement with the agency .

an employee whose official duties require , on a daily basis ( every work day ) , direct handling of secure materials determined to be inappropriate for telework by the agency head , or on - site activity that cannot be handled remotely or at an alternate worksite , is not eligible to telework , except in emergency situations , as determined by the agency head .

the house committee on oversight and government reform and the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs emphasized several underlying purposes of telework in reporting the legislation to the house of representatives and the senate , respectively: the committee has determined through its oversight efforts that there is not a consistent definition of telework across agencies.... an important consideration for agency telework programs is ensuring the security of government information... .

in recent years , telework also has increasingly been viewed as an important tool for ensuring continuity of essential government services in emergencies .

the goal of this legislation is to ensure that federal agencies more effectively integrate telework into their management plans and agency cultures .

the recent snow emergency in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area during the first half of february 2010 vividly underscored the importance of every agency having a telework policy in place and a culture that values and is prepared for telework... .

the committee has concluded that telework is an essential tool that agencies should deploy as part of their overall strategies for human capital management and continuity of operations , and that legislation is needed to help agencies overcome resistance to telework arising from inertia and fear of the unknown .

these issues , as well as the development of the telework managing officer's role ; the establishment of training programs for managers and supervisors and the employees under their direction who telework ; the office of personnel management ( opm ) and government accountability office ( gao ) evaluations of the law's implementation ; the operation of the test program on travel expenses ; and the documentation of measureable outcomes resulting from telework are among those that the house and senate may focus on in exercising oversight of the law's implementation .

the law amends part iii of title 5 of the united states code by adding a new chapter , chapter 65 , on telework .

the provisions of the law are paraphrased from the statutes at large in the summary that follows .

as p.l .

111-292 is implemented by the executive agencies , the house of representatives and the senate may wish to conduct oversight related to several issues , including the following .

given that , prior to the law's enactment , executive agencies had designated an individual to be responsible for coordinating telework administration , the manner in which the duties and responsibilities of that position were conducted may change now that congress has mandated appointment of a telework managing officer .

the effectiveness of the interactive training program on telework required by the law and how executive agencies will measure whether the training is adequate and the extent to which managers and supervisors are successful in administering telework for the employees under their direction .

the processes used by executive agencies to ensure fairness in the implementation of telework plans and that those employees who telework and those employees who do not are treated the same with regard to human resources management activities such as performance appraisal and promotion .

the number and particular expertise of staff at opm who are available to executive agencies for consultations on telework ; the timeline for opm release of any guidance that results from the agency's required consultations with fema , gsa , and the national archives and records administration ; and examination by congress of the findings of any research on telework performed by opm staff or under an opm contract .

the application of the statutorily required omb guidelines ( issued on april 28 , 2011 ) to ensure that information and information systems are secure during telework , and the expected costs and impacts on technology budgets in executive agencies resulting from the requirement that agency computer systems enable and support telework .

the details of executive agency coop plans , and any requirements for executive agencies to regularly report their coop activities to congress .

whether any amendments are suggested by the findings of opm's required annual report to congress on the law's implementation and whether any features of the gao telework program , that are identified in that agency's annual report to congress , may be applied in executive agencies .

the specific ways in which the chcos in executive agencies are coordinating with and ensuring the effectiveness of the tmo's in their agencies .

the role that the test programs on telework travel expenses may have in facilitating the operation of telework programs and the recruitment and retention of employees in executive agencies .

whether telework specifically enables federal employees to work more efficiently and perform their responsibilities more effectively , the specific cost savings agencies accrue through telework , and ways in which any cost savings could be used to fund other activities in the executive agencies .

