human immunodeficiency virus / acquired immune deficiency syndrome ( hiv / aids ) , tuberculosis ( tb ) , and malaria are three of the world's leading causes of morbidity and mortality .

along with the direct health effects , hiv / aids , tb , and malaria have far - reaching socioeconomic consequences , posing what many analysts believe are threats to international development and security .

because of this , the united states has considered the fights against these three diseases to be important foreign policy priorities .

in fy2012 , of the $8.8 billion the united states spent on global health programs under the global health initiative ( ghi ) — the obama administration's effort to coordinate and improve u.s. global health programming — approximately 84% was on bilateral and multilateral hiv / aids , tb , and malaria combined , with bilateral hiv / aids programs accounting for 58% of all funding .

the united states is currently the single largest donor for global hiv / aids and has played a key role in generating a robust international response to tb and malaria .

despite growing international support for global health programs over the last decade and progress made in controlling hiv / aids , tb , and malaria in much of the world , significant obstacles remain in fighting the three diseases .

in many countries , hiv infection rates are outpacing access to treatment , rates of drug resistance are increasing for tb and malaria , and health systems in resource - poor settings are under growing pressure to address these diseases while struggling to provide basic health care .

over the last few years , congress has debated the u.s. strategy to confronting these diseases , including how to best support a long - term approach to these diseases that generates positive outcomes for global health in general .

in response , implementing agencies have begun to make programmatic changes , and the obama administration has called for a revised u.s. approach to hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs in the hopes of making related efforts more effective and efficient .

this process has led to a broader discussion on how best to allocate global health funding , both within and between programs .

the financial crisis and economic recession , and consequent calls to reduce the u.s. budget deficit , have led to decreased funding for these diseases in recent years , and have heightened the urgency of reevaluating u.s. global health investments .

this report highlights some of the current challenges posed by hiv / aids , tb , and malaria , as well as several cross - cutting policy issues that the 112 th congress may consider as it determines u.s. global health funding for these three diseases , including health systems strengthening , country ownership , research and development , monitoring and evaluation , and engagement with multilateral organizations .

in may 2011 , results from a study demonstrated that early hiv treatment in couples with one infected partner reduced the risk of transmission by 96% .

this finding indicated the preventative benefits of hiv treatment and has been hailed by many as a "game - changer" in the fight against global hiv / aids .

in november 2011 , the board of the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis , and malaria ( global fund ) announced that due to the current fiscal environment and resulting inadequate funding , it would cancel its 11 th round of funding .

while it has put a "transitional funding mechanism" in place to avoid disruption of existing services , it will not be offering any new funding until 2014 .

on december 23 , 2011 , the president signed into law the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) .

congress appropriated $7.4 billion for hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs in fy2012 , including slightly decreased or level funding for hiv / aids , and slightly increased funding for malaria and tb programs .

on february 13 , 2012 , the president released the fy2013 budget request .

the request included approximately $7.2 billion for hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs , which included further decreases in funding for bilateral hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs .

at the same time , the request included a considerable increase in funding for the global fund .

despite the proposed decrease in bilateral hiv / aids funding , the budget request affirmed the administration's commitment to treating 6 million hiv - positive people by the end of 2013 , a target announced on world aids day in december 2011 .

u.s. efforts to address hiv / aids , tb , and malaria have grown significantly over the last few decades , as successive administrations and congresses have increasingly recognized the severity and impact of these diseases .

congress provides funds for hiv / aids , tb , and malaria assistance through several appropriations vehicles , including state and foreign operations ; labor , health and human services , and education ; and the department of defense .

funds are appropriated to a number of u.s. agencies including the department of state , usaid , cdc , and dod .

congress also provides sufficient resources to the office of aids research at the national institutes of health ( nih ) to support international hiv / aids research efforts , and to nih and dod for malaria research efforts .

the agencies use the funds for bilateral hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs and research and for contributions to multilateral organizations that address these diseases , including the global fund .

since fy2001 , u.s. funding in support of global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs has significantly increased .

funding for fy2012 , as signed into law by the president on december 23 , 2011 , demonstrates continued congressional commitment to global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs , although it did not support the increased funding for these programs included in the president's fy2012 budget request .

for a snapshot of recent years , table 1 includes u.s. actual , enacted , and requested funding for global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria from fy2008 through fy2013 .

appendix c includes all u.s. actual and estimated funding for global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria from fy2001 through fy2012 , as well as the president's fy2013 budget request .

in late 2011 , the world health organization ( who ) and the joint united nations program on hiv / aids ( unaids ) released new estimates of the scale of the global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria epidemics .

the separate reports on each disease highlighted significant progress being made in the fight against the diseases , much of which is attributable to the leadership and support of the united states .

the reports , characterized below , also identified major obstacles that remain .

hiv / aids , tb , and malaria overlap geographically , share risk factors , and can worsen the symptoms of each other in instances of co - infection .

despite these common factors , each disease presents unique challenges , which congress may consider as it debates the u.s. response to each disease .

for more information on the particular characteristics of and u.s. response to each of the diseases , see the following crs reports by alexandra kendall: crs report r41645 , u.s .

response to the global threat of hiv / aids: basic facts ; crs report r41643 , u.s .

response to the global threat of tuberculosis: basic facts ; and crs report r41644 , u.s .

response to the global threat of malaria: basic facts .

along with the challenges specific to hiv / aids , tb , and malaria , a number of issues extend to all three diseases .

this section looks at the following issues as they relate to all three of the diseases: health systems strengthening , including health worker shortages ; country ownership ; research and development ; monitoring and evaluation ; and engagement with multilateral organizations .

the second session of the 112 th congress will likely exercise oversight of and debate the appropriate funding amounts for global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs and priority areas within these programs .

discussions may focus on a number of critical disease - specific and cross - cutting issues , measurement of the effectiveness of the u.s. response , and tradeoffs the united states might consider as it sets priorities .

as congress reflects on these challenges , several overarching issues may also be considered: ways to assess impact and efficiency of global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs: as congress debates funding the fight against these three diseases , it will likely consider which methods to use in determining the distribution of finite global health and overall foreign assistance resources .

the united states might face decisions over whether it should invest in the lowest - cost interventions , such as anti - malaria bednets , versus the higher - cost interventions that high - burden countries may be unable to afford , such as antiretroviral therapy .

similarly , the united states might consider whether it should support programs tackling the high - mortality issues , such as drug - resistant tb , or the more widespread and commonplace issues , such as malaria infection .

the united states may also consider how it should balance its funding between high - impact activities , such as art programs , with dramatic results and areas like health systems strengthening , which may yield few immediate results but which could result in significant long - term progress .

more broadly , policymakers may weigh support for these programs against other foreign policy priorities .

role of the united states in the global fight against hiv / aids , tb , and malaria: the united states is a central leader in combating hiv / aids , tb , and malaria .

some members of congress have targeted global health funding for cuts as a way to reduce the u.s. deficit .

many supporters of these cuts have argued that the united states has played an overly generous role in combating issues like global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria , especially since these investments do not necessarily have direct implications for the wellbeing of u.s. citizens .

alternatively , many supporters argue that u.s. leadership in the fight against these diseases remains critical , particularly as new tools for treatment and prevention become available .

many of these advocates assert that given the prominence of the united states , any u.s. divestment could have significant negative consequences for some of the most vulnerable people in resource - poor countries .

some also point out that while the united states has been a key donor for hiv / aids , tb , and malaria , several european countries give more for these diseases as a share of their country's gdp .

finally , advocates assert that u.s. leadership is vital for sustaining the activities of the global fund , a key financial player in the fight against these diseases .

many advocates and critics of expanding u.s. global health assistance call for other countries , including a number of european countries , as well as emerging economies like china , india , brazil , and saudi arabia , to begin playing a larger role in combating global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria .

advocates argue that increased efforts among other donors could help achieve the united nations ( u.n. ) millennium development ( mdg ) goal "to combat hiv / aids , malaria , and other diseases," a goal which to which all u.n. member states have committed .

at the same time , there is disagreement over the ways in which u.s. leadership can and should motivate this kind of engagement .

hiv / aids , tb , and malaria assistance , economic development , and security: congressional consideration of u.s. hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs may be affected by debate over their role in the broader u.s. foreign policy agenda .

hiv / aids , tb , and malaria have undeniable humanitarian consequences .

at the same time , many argue that these diseases also have important implications for economic development and security .

development experts argue that disease can threaten political and economic stability in fragile areas of the world , undermining u.s. interests abroad .

health experts believe that u.s. citizens are threatened by the spread of infectious diseases across borders .

furthermore , foreign policy experts contend that global health efforts like pepfar have become critical diplomatic tools ( often referred to as medical diplomacy ) and have bolstered the image of the united states abroad , especially in sub - saharan africa .

alternatively , others caution against overly emphasizing the security and diplomatic implications of hiv / aids , tb , and malaria , and warn that doing so could lead to allocation of funding according to u.s. interests rather than human need .

appendix a .

acronyms and abbreviations appendix b. hiv / aids , tb , and malaria ghi goals pepfar strategy targets ghi set a number of goals to be reached from fy2010 through fy2014 .

ghi goals and projected targets for pepfar are: provide direct support for more than 4 million people on treatment ; support the prevention of more than 12 million new hiv infections ; ensure that every partner country with a generalized hiv epidemic has both 80% coverage of testing for pregnant women at the national level , and 85% coverage of antiretroviral drug prophylaxis and treatment as indicated , of women found to be hiv - infected ; double the number of at - risk babies born hiv - free , from a baseline of 240,000 babies of hiv - positive mothers born hiv - negative during the first five years of pepfar ; provide direct support for care for more than 12 million people , including 5 million orphans and vulnerable children ; support training and retention of more than 140,000 new health care workers to strengthen health systems ; and ensure that in each country with major pepfar investment , the partner government leads efforts to evaluate and define needs and roles in the national response .

u.s. tb strategy targets ghi goals and projected targets for u.s. tb programs are: to contribute to a 50% reduction in tb deaths and disease burden from the 1990 baseline ; to sustain or exceed the detection of at least 70% of sputum smear - positive cases of tb and successfully treat at least 85% of cases detected in countries with established usg tuberculosis programs ; to successfully treat 2.6 million new sputum smear - positive tb patients under dots programs by 2014 , primarily through support for need services , commodities , health workers , and training , and additional treatment through coordinated multilateral efforts ; and to diagnose and initiate treatment of at least 57,2000 new mdr - tb cases by 2014 and providing additional treatment through coordinated multilateral efforts .

u.s. malaria strategy targets ghi goals and projected targets for u.s. malaria programs are: to achieve africa - wide impact , by halving the burden of malaria ( morbidity and mortality ) in 70% of at - risk populations in sub - saharan africa ( approximately 450 million people ) , thereby removing malaria as a major public health problem and promoting economic growth and development throughout the region ; to limit the spread of anti - malaria multi - drug resistance in southeast asia and the americas ; to increase emphasis on strategic integration of malaria prevention and treatment activities with maternal and child health , hiv / aids , neglected tropical diseases , and tuberculosis programs , and on multilateral collaboration to achieve internationally accepted goals ; to intensify present efforts to strengthen health systems and strengthen the capacity of host - country workforces to ensure sustainability ; to assist host countries to revise and update their national malaria control strategies and plans to reflect the declining burden of malaria , and link programming of u.s. malaria control resources to those host country strategies ; and to ensure a woman - centered approach for malaria prevention and treatment activities at both the community and health facility levels , since women are the primary caretakers of young children in most families and are in the best position to help promote health behaviors related to malaria .

appendix c. hiv / aids , tb , and malaria funding table c - 1 presents an overview of u.s. funding for global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria efforts .

the table does not include global health spending that does not correlate to specific congressional appropriations .

for instance , cdc does not receive appropriations for global tb programs specifically , but spends a portion of its overall tb budget on international programs .

appendix d. hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria program maps two maps are shown for each disease .

the first displays u.s. bilateral funding levels across countries .

the second highlights u.s. countries receiving assistance in relation to global prevalence estimates for each disease .

hiv / aids figure d - 1 shows u.s. bilateral hiv / aids funding levels across countries in fy2011 .

figure d - 2 highlights u.s. countries receiving assistance in relation to global hiv prevalence estimates in 2009 .

tuberculosis figure d - 3 shows u.s. bilateral tb funding levels across countries in fy2011 .

figure d - 4 highlights u.s. countries receiving assistance in relation to global tb prevalence estimates in 2010 .

malaria figure d - 5 shows u.s. bilateral malaria funding levels across countries in fy2011 .

figure d - 6 highlights u.s. countries receiving assistance in relation to global malaria prevalence estimates in 2010 .

