historically , proceeds from the sale of lands managed by the bureau of land management ( blm ) under various laws were deposited in the general fund of the treasury .

however , certain laws have provided for the proceeds of land sales to be deposited in separate treasury accounts , with funds available to agencies for subsequent land acquisition and other purposes .

the federal land transaction facilitation act ( fltfa , 43 u.s.c .

§2301 ) , which expired on july 25 , 2011 , was one such law .

the law's purposes included allowing for the reconfiguration of land ownership patterns to better facilitate resource management , improving administrative efficiency , and increasing the effectiveness of the allocation of fiscal and human resources .

fltfa provided for the sale or exchange of land identified for disposal under blm's land use plans "as in effect on july 25 , 2000" — the date of enactment .

most blm lands ( except some lands in alaska ) are covered by a land use plan .

most of the proceeds were to be used for land acquisition , as described below .

proceeds from the sale or exchange of blm lands under fltfa were split between the state in which the lands were disposed of ( 4% ) and a separate treasury account ( 96% ) , called the federal land disposal account .

funds in this account , often called the fltfa account , were available without further appropriation .

the authority to sell or exchange blm lands under fltfa briefly expired on july 25 , 2010 — 10 years after enactment .

on july 29 , 2010 , it was subsequently extended for one year .

an issue for congress is whether to reauthorize this authority and , if so , in what form .

the 112 th congress has considered related legislation .

 ( see " administrative and legislative action "below. ) .

the funds in the treasury account when fltfa initially expired , an estimated $52 million , ceased to be available under the law .

an estimated $2 million in the account at the end of the one - year extension ( july 25 , 2011 ) also has ceased to be available .

the funds in the fltfa account were available to both the secretary of the interior and the secretary of agriculture to acquire inholdings and other non - federal lands ( or interests therein ) that are adjacent to federal lands and contain exceptional resources , with no more than 20% for blm's administrative expenses to carry out the land disposal program .

of the funds for acquisitions , at least 80% were to be used in the state in which the funds were generated , and the remaining funds could be used in any state .

further , not less than 80% of the funds for land purchases within a state were to be used to acquire inholdings .

figure 1 illustrates how $1.0 million in receipts from the sale or exchange of land under fltfa was to be disposed of , in accordance with the percentage categories in the law .

from the enactment of fltfa through fy2010 , a total of $115.7 million was raised through the sale or exchange of blm lands , and 25,967 acres were sold .

over the same period , about $63.7 million in funding was disbursed , with $49.2 million spent on the purchase of 18,135 acres .

the balance of this report is organized into four sections .

first , " overview of fltfa authority " describes fltfa's provisions on selling and acquiring land , and provides a summary of the program's termination .

second , " implementation of fltfa " presents an overview of how the land sale and acquisition authorities were used over the past decade , including the acreage of land sold and acquired and the amount of money collected and spent , both nationally and in particular states .

third , " administrative and legislative action " outlines president obama's proposal to amend fltfa and make it permanent , and 112 th and 111 th congress measures to extend and amend fltfa .

fourth , the " issues " section discusses several issues related to whether to extend or make fltfa permanent that have been of focus , including the need for fltfa , length of any extension , currency of land use plans , and retention and use of proceeds .

from the enactment of fltfa through fy2010 , a total of $115.7 million was raised through the sale or exchange of blm lands under the authority .

of this total , blm collected $103.2 million from the sale of 25,967 acres , and another $12.5 million from equalization payments for exchanged lands .

of the total receipts , $4.6 million ( 4% ) was provided to the states in which the lands were conveyed , and $111.0 million ( 96% ) was deposited into the fltfa fund .

of the money in the fund , approximately $59 million was spent , with $49.2 million used for acquiring land and an estimated $10 million for the costs of administering the land sale program , according to blm .

acquisitions were smaller than sales in terms of acreage and value .

specifically , the agencies acquired a total of 18,135 acres , using $49.2 million in fltfa funds and $9.7 million in other funds , for a total cost of $58.9 million .

the approximately $59 million in spending from the fltfa account represented about half ( 53% ) of the $111.0 million that was available before the program's initial termination , when the revenues ceased to be available .

several factors accounted for this relatively low level of spending relative to available funding .

in a 2008 report , the government accountability office ( gao ) identified challenges to completing land acquisitions , including the time , cost , and complexity of acquisitions ; difficulty in identifying a willing seller ; insufficient realty staff to conduct acquisitions ; lack of funding for some states ; and public opposition to land acquisitions .

initial expenditures for acquisitions were not made until fy2007 , pending the development of interagency agreements and the availability of funding .

specifically , the acquisition of lands under fltfa was delayed while implementing agreements were being developed among the four participating agencies .

in 2003 , the agencies issued the national mou on implementation , which included provisions on how the receipts were to be distributed among the agencies , and by march 2007 all blm state offices had developed and published state - specific interagency implementation agreements , according to blm .

also , little funding for land acquisition was available in the earlier part of the decade , because the land sales needed to raise funds for acquisitions began slowly following the enactment of fltfa .

for instance , only $5.0 million in receipts from sales was generated from fy2000 to fy2003 .

receipts from land sales increased dramatically over the next three years , with an additional $87.4 million in receipts from fy2004 to fy2006 .

the $49.2 million in total expenditures occurred between fy2007 and fy2010 .

the obama administration's fy2013 budget proposed making fltfa permanent and using current land management plans for determining which lands to sell or exchange .

the administration also testified in the 112 th congress in support of reauthorizing fltfa .

in one such testimony , the administration asserted that fltfa has been a "critical tool for enhancing our nation's treasured landscapes," and further stated that there are difficulties with relying on land exchanges under other blm authorities , that using current land use plans as the basis for sales would foster land disposals , and that important acquisitions have been made under fltfa .

the george w. bush administration also supported using updated land management plans for determining which lands to sell or exchange , and proposed extending fltfa for about 10 years .

in the 112 th congress , legislation to amend fltfa has been introduced in both chambers .

s. 3525 , s. 714 , and h.r .

3365 contain provisions to extend the authority to sell or exchange blm lands under fltfa , although the length of the extension varies among the measures .

s. 3525 would extend the authority for 11 years ( from july 25 , 2011 , until july 25 , 2022 ) , s. 714 would extend it for 10 years ( until july 25 , 2021 ) , and h.r .

3365 would extend it for 7 years ( until july 25 , 2018 ) .

in other respects the bills are identical .

they would remove the provision that terminates the fltfa account should the authority to sell and exchange lands expire .

this would allow funds in the account to continue to be used for acquisitions .

they also would allow for updated land management plans to be used as the basis for identifying lands for sale and exchange .

specifically , they call for use of plans in effect as of the date of enactment of the measures .

further , the bills would allow for acquisition of lands within or adjacent to federally designated areas regardless of when they were established .

on november 26 , 2012 , s. 3525 was considered on the senate floor .

however , it was returned to the senate calendar after a point of order against an amendment in the nature of a substitute was sustained and the amendment was ruled out of order .

the senate majority leader sought and received unanimous consent to resume consideration of s. 3525 at a future time .

s. 714 was placed on the senate calendar on september 6 , 2011 , and a house subcommittee held a hearing on h.r .

3365 on may 17 , 2012 .

legislation pertaining to fltfa also was introduced in the 111 th congress , but was not enacted .

among the measures , h.r .

6206 and s. 3762 had proposed to reinstate the monies that were in the fltfa account when the law expired on july 25 , 2010 .

both measures specified that the balance in the fltfa account as of july 24 , 2010 , was to be reinstated , and available until expended , for the purposes covered by the fltfa law .

several issues concerning whether to extend or make fltfa permanent have been under debate .

one issue is the extent to which there is a need for this authority in the context of other laws authorizing the sale and acquisition of federal land and other sources of funding for these purposes .

a second issue is whether any extension of fltfa should be relatively short ( eg , one year ) or relatively long ( eg , 10 years or more ) .

a third issue is whether to require land use plans as of july 25 , 2000 , to continue to be used as the basis of land sales .

a fourth set of issues relates to the retention and use of proceeds , including the extent to which any future proceeds should be retained by the agencies , used exclusively for land sales and acquisitions , and used primarily in the state in which they were generated , and whether previously generated proceeds should be returned to the fltfa fund .

the expiration of fltfa does not bar blm from selling or exchanging land identified for disposal , because blm has authority to dispose of lands under flpma and other laws .

further , the expiration of fltfa does not preclude blm , fws , nps , and fs from acquiring land , because the agencies have authorities ( of varying breadth ) to acquire nonfederal lands .

thus , an issue for congress is the extent to which fltfa provides a more efficient mechanism for the government to sell and purchase lands .

in enacting fltfa , congress asserted that "a more expeditious process for disposal and acquisition of land , established to facilitate a more effective configuration of land ownership patterns , would benefit the public interest. .

to establish a "more expeditious process" for disposing and acquiring land , fltfa provided that the proceeds of blm land sales would be retained by the agencies for subsequent land acquisitions .

the expiration of fltfa prevents the proceeds of sales from being retained .

allowing the agencies to keep the proceeds was intended to provide incentive to blm to sell land that had been identified for disposal .

it was also intended to provide a permanent , reliable source of funding for important acquisitions , rather than have such acquisitions depend primarily on the variability of the annual appropriations process .

for these reasons , congress may reinstate this permanent source of funding for land acquisitions .

alternatively , congress may continue to centralize decision - making on acquisition funding in the annual appropriations process .

annual appropriations for programs are often regarded as opportunities to target funding levels to changing needs and circumstances , and to conduct program oversight and evaluation .

the extent to which fltfa has fostered land sales and acquisitions is not clear from publicly available data .

consistent data on the number , acreage , and value of agency sales and acquisitions in the decade before and after the enactment of fltfa are not readily available .

further , it is unclear to what extent sales and acquisitions under other standing authorities , or individually enacted laws of congress , would have occurred since 2000 if fltfa had not been enacted .

challenges to selling and acquiring land could arise independent of fltfa , since fltfa did not change the general land sale and acquisition processes .

for instance , land sales and acquisitions are typically voluntary , unless specifically directed by congress .

some of the blm land for sale is in relatively low - value markets where the sales would not be expected to raise significant funding , or in some cases even to cover the administrative costs of the sales .

this could create a disincentive to selling these lands .

further , there may not be much demand for some of the blm lands available for sale , and blm does not typically market land for sale in the absence of expressed interest .

also , blm is required by law to sell land for at least fair market value , and may have difficulty finding buyers willing to pay market value .

in 2008 , gao determined that blm had not made sale of land under fltfa a priority , and that few parcels had been purchased with fltfa funds .

the agency cited several challenges to the sale and acquisition of land under fltfa .

gao noted a limited availability of knowledgeable realty staff , given the focus of realty staff on other agency priorities ( eg , processing rights - of - way for energy purposes ) .

other obstacles included the lack of sales goals or a sales implementation strategy , and weaknesses in developing a strategy for identifying and acquiring inholdings .

other factors , mentioned above , included the cost and complexity of acquisitions , difficulty in finding willing sellers , insufficient funding for some states , and public opposition .

blm has taken steps to address gao recommendations on setting goals for land sales , developing a strategy for implementing sales goals , and identifying and setting priorities for acquiring inholdings .

another issue is whether sufficient funding for land sales and acquisitions exists without the revenues derived from fltfa .

the amount of funding for blm land sales is not readily available , because appropriations for this particular purpose are not typically specified in appropriations laws or agency budget justification materials .

by contrast , each year , each of the four federal land management agencies receives a specified appropriation for land acquisition , primarily derived from the lwcf and provided through annual laws appropriating funds for interior , environment , and related agencies .

over the past decade ( fy2003-fy2012 ) , appropriations from lwcf for the four agencies have ranged from a low of $119.2 million for fy2006 to a high of $316.0 million for fy2003 .

appropriations for land acquisition for the most recent fiscal year , fy2012 , were $199.2 million .

the portion for each of the four agencies has varied considerably .

it is not clear whether different levels of appropriations from lwcf might have been provided if fltfa funding were not available for acquisitions .

another short - term extension of fltfa could provide additional time to assess whether there is a long - term need for fltfa relative to other sale and acquisition authorities .

a short - term extension also could be used if congress had specific sale and acquisition goals to be achieved under fltfa , such as the sale of a particular amount of land .

if this were the intent , congress could allow the authority to expire or could repeal it when the acreage goals were reached .

in general , shorter and more frequent program extensions could be viewed as fostering oversight and evaluation of the effectiveness of fltfa , and opportunities to amend the law to address changing circumstances and problems that might arise .

a longer - term extension might facilitate the establishment of a more vigorous and stable sale and acquisition program .

land sales might occur slowly during the early years of any extension , due to a lack of sufficient funds for the up - front costs of administering sales .

a longer - term extension might allow for the hiring of additional realty staff with some of the proceeds of sales .

further , the length and complexity of many sales and acquisitions could require a longer - term extension .

gao determined that the anticipated sunset of the original 10-year program and the uncertainty of renewal might have weakened the incentive to sell land .

further , gao reported that the acquisition process can take 2½ to 3 years , given the need for the four agencies to coordinate on and approve of proposed acquisitions .

the changing nature of land use plans has prompted interest in amending fltfa to allow the most current land use plans to be used as the basis of land disposals .

in 2001 , blm began a multiyear effort to develop new land use plans and to update existing ones to address changing circumstances , such as increased demand for energy resources .

blm estimates that , from the start of that effort , it has completed over 75 plan revisions and major plan amendments .

further , as of may 2012 , the agency was working on an additional 48 management plans , which were expected to be completed by 2016 .

the use of plans in effect as of enactment of fltfa does not keep blm from selling land identified for disposal in plans after that date , but prevents blm from keeping the proceeds of such sales .

the fltfa sales authority was not tied to future land use plans due to concerns that blm might revise plans to pursue a broad land disposal program as a way to generate funds .

blm asserts that its authorities to dispose of public lands would preclude this .

under flpma , for example , blm is authorized to sell certain tracts of land only if they meet specified criteria .

the agency also has asserted that land use plan revisions since 2000 have not changed significantly the acreage identified for disposal .

further , gao concluded in its 2008 report that , while blm land use plans identified areas for disposal , blm had not made sale of lands under fltfa a priority .

several issues arise regarding the allocation of proceeds of land sales .

one question has been whether to continue to allow 96% of the proceeds to be retained by the agencies , or whether to direct some portion of these receipts to the general fund of the treasury .

under a proposal in the fy2009 george w. bush administration budget , for instance , 70% of the net proceeds would have been deposited in the general fund of the treasury .

the proposal was promoted to reduce the federal deficit , to ensure that the public would benefit from land sales , and to reduce the amount of money not subject to oversight during the appropriations process .

however , such a change would reduce funds for acquisition of priority areas .

funding from the primary acquisition source — the land and water conservation fund — has varied widely over the past decade and remains uncertain .

a related question is whether some of the proceeds from land sales should be used for other federal lands purposes .

this idea was proposed by the george w. bush administration in several years .

for instance , in 2004 the bush administration had sought to dedicate 20% of the funds in the fltfa fund to conservation projects on federal lands , to include habitat restoration , rehabilitation , and improvement .

another issue regarding the allocation of proceeds is whether to retain the requirement that most of the funds for land acquisition be used in the state where the funds were generated .

gao concluded in 2008 that this requirement has made it difficult to acquire priority lands in states that sell relatively little land .

as mentioned above , 76% of the revenues raised through fy2010 — $88.1 million — came from land sales in nevada .

however , retention of funds within a state could foster stability of landownership in those states .

still another focus is on whether to reinstate the estimated $52 million in proceeds that were in the fltfa fund when the law initially expired and the $2 million in proceeds that were in the fund at the end of the one - year extension .

blm had intended to use a sizeable portion of the monies to sell lands under the law , and the agencies would resume the acquisition of priority inholdings and edgeholdings with these funds .

the $54 million in total funds was to become available for appropriation under the lwcf when fltfa expired .

it is uncertain whether these funds will be appropriated , whether in addition to or in lieu of traditional lwcf appropriations .

under current law , the lwcf accumulates $900.0 million in revenues , primarily from offshore oil and gas development .

historically , congress has appropriated this level of funding only twice , and on average typically appropriates less than half of the annual revenues .

another option could be to redirect these revenues to another specific government program or activity or to the general fund of the treasury .

