in one nightmare scenario , a terrorist "dirty bomb" spreads radioactive material across dozens of square miles , causing panic in the target area and beyond , costing tens of billions of dollars to remediate , costing further sums in lost wages and business , compelling the demolition and rebuilding of contaminated buildings , forcing difficult decisions on how to dispose of contaminated rubble and decontamination chemicals , and requiring people to relocate from areas with elevated levels of radiation .

but in other scenarios , a terrorist plot fails .

security measures keep terrorists from obtaining radioactive material .

terrorists use a weakly radioactive material that causes little contamination .

they obtain too little material to be effective , or so much that it kills them before they could attack .

equipment detects the material overseas , at u.s. borders , or inside the united states .

material disperses over a small area , facilitating cleanup , or so widely that much of the area would not require decontamination .

some blows out to sea .

such factors as weather , form of material , and degree of remediation required affect cleanup cost by several orders of magnitude and greatly reduce the damage that terrorists could expect to cause .

terrorist awareness of such failure paths might deter an attack .

radiological dispersal devices ( rdds ) may be explosive - driven — a dirty bomb — or use nonexplosive means like a crop duster airplane .

radioactive material may be dispersed indoors to contaminate a building , though the scenario most commonly discussed involves detonation of a dirty bomb outdoors .

because of their potential disruptive effects , legislation includes rdds as one type of weapon of mass destruction ( wmd ) , along with chemical , biological , and nuclear weapons , and a u.n. commission in 1948 included "radio active material weapons" as a form of wmd .

congress has been deeply involved in efforts to protect the united states and other nations against terrorist attacks , especially since 9 / 11 .

the large range of possible effects of radiation results in widespread misunderstanding of the characteristics and effects of rdds , especially when augmented by fear of radiation that has existed for over a half - century .

to address these and related problems , this report provides background on rdds and issues they raise ; it does not track policy actions concerning rdds in detail .

it attempts to help understanding of these weapons in order to aid congress in its oversight and funding of programs to counter them .

understanding the threat that an rdd attack poses and — of equal importance — the limits of that threat requires a brief discussion of the relevant science .

subsequent sections of this report turn to rdds , preventing an attack , and response to and recovery from an attack .

this report then offers observations and issues and options for congress .

it compares rdds and nuclear weapons but does not address chemical or biological weapons .

it is not intended as a comprehensive summary of the many domestic and international programs that address the rdd threat in some way .

congress has demonstrated a sustained interest in the threat that rdds pose to the united states and other nations .

it has enacted legislation pertaining to rdds , held hearings on them , and requested numerous reports from the government accountability office ( gao ) .

it has done so for a number of reasons .

radioactive materials are used worldwide for medical , industrial , research , and other beneficial purposes .

yet their security is far from airtight , especially in foreign countries , as evidenced by many reports of trafficking and attempted trafficking .

terrorists could create an rdd , though not necessarily an effective one , by stealing radioactive material and detonating an explosive charge next to it .

preventing an rdd attack and preparing to respond to and recover from an attack are thus matters of homeland security .

terrorists , too , are interested in rdds .

an rdd has the potential to contaminate some square miles ( ranging from less than one to perhaps 100 , depending on how one defines contamination ) with radioactive material .

the attack could render an area off - limits for days to years , cause significant economic disruption ( eg , by forcing the closure of a port or evacuating the center of a city ) , cost tens of billions of dollars to remediate , impose further costs in lost wages and business , force the demolition and rebuilding of contaminated streets and buildings , increase the cancer rate over the long term , and cause panic and a climate of fear in the target area and far beyond .

despite the seeming ease of launching a successful rdd attack , terrorists have not done so .

the reasons are necessarily speculative , but may include difficulties in handling radioactive material , lack of sufficient expertise to fabricate material into an effective weapon , a shift to smaller - scale but simpler attacks using standard weapons and explosives , and improved security .

of course , such factors cannot guarantee that no attack will occur .

accordingly , the executive branch , with congressional support and sometimes at congressional direction , has undertaken many measures to reduce the likelihood of an attack .

these include increasing the security of radioactive material , augmenting counterterrorism efforts by intelligence and law enforcement agencies , conducting "stings" to catch would - be terrorists attempting to purchase radioactive material and those willing to sell it , and deploying radiation detectors worldwide .

the government has also made extensive plans for responding to and recovering from an attack .

foreign governments and international organizations have taken similar measures , and some nongovernmental organizations have provided resources and analysis in support of counter - rdd efforts .

the prospect of an rdd attack raises several issues for congress , including: the priority to be given to countering terrorism using rdds vs. other types of unconventional weapons ; the priority to be given to domestic vs. overseas expenditures to secure radioactive sources ; whether to use federal funds to develop and deploy radiation detection networks in major cities and elsewhere ; how best to prepare for decontamination following an rdd attack , such as the balance between r&d , stockpiling of equipment and supplies , training , rapid distribution of information , and analysis of the cost of decontamination vs. demolition and reconstruction ; how to dispose of contaminated waste , including rubble from demolition and chemicals from decontamination , following an attack ; whether to modify standards for permitting unescorted access to certain u.s. radioactive sources ; whether to modify the pace of a program for implementing certain security enhancements for u.s. radioactive sources ; and how to enhance u.s. capability for radiological forensics .

the united states and other nations use a "layered defense" strategy in seeking to prevent an rdd attack .

no layer is expected to be perfect , but each increases the likelihood of disrupting a terrorist attack .

international , federal , state , and local organizations have added measures since 9 / 11 to prevent an rdd attack , and existing measures have been strengthened .

 ( as discussed under " attack response , recovery , and attribution ," programs to respond to an attack have also increased. ) .

it would be useful to know how much the united states spends on all aspects of countering rdds , whether the probability of an rdd attack has increased or decreased , and what impact an rdd attack would have .

measuring these variables would help congress make such spending decisions as whether to allocate more funds to: defense against rdds or chemical weapons , intelligence or securing radioactive sources , or securing sources domestically or overseas .

however , it appears that metrics for these variables are difficult if not impossible to obtain .

this report shows that the united states and others have done much to prevent , respond to , and recover from an rdd attack , but that more might be done .

in so doing , it raises many issues that congress may wish to consider , notably the priority for countering radiological vs. other forms of terrorism and where resources for enhancing security against rdds might most efficiently be deployed .

priority for countering radiological terrorism: it is difficult to know what priority should be given to countering radiological terrorism as opposed to other forms of terrorism .

some arguments suggest that the united states should be doing more in this arena , while other arguments suggest doing less .

 ( 1 ) despite concerns about terrorist interest in radiological material , there has been no successful rdd attack .

 ( 2 ) of nuclear , chemical , biological , and radiological weapons , the latter would arguably kill the fewest people .

 ( 3 ) radiological terrorism has arguably received less attention than other forms of cbrn terrorism .

the april 2010 nuclear security summit focused on nuclear terrorism .

u.n. security council resolution 1540 focused on nuclear , biological , and chemical weapons , though it also references security of radioactive sources .

 ( 4 ) as noted under " budget ," most planning , training , equipment , and supplies that would help respond to an rdd attack would be of use in other disasters as well , whether natural , accidental , or terrorist in origin , so that it is difficult to determine the balance between funds to counter all hazards and those to counter rdds only .

 ( 5 ) since costs resulting from an rdd attack could be tens of billions of dollars , some measures that are directly relevant to an rdd attack , such as decontamination r&d and programs to secure radioactive sources , may be cost - effective .

domestic vs. overseas expenditures to secure radioactive sources: where are u.s. funds to secure radioactive sources most effectively spent ? .

one argument is that it is better to spend money to secure domestic radiological sources because if they are illicitly obtained they could be used promptly in an rdd , avoiding the risk of detection in other countries and at u.s. ports of entry .

this effort would be costly .

kenneth luongo , president of partnership for global security , pointed to one cost element .

he urged that "all radiological sources in public buildings , beginning with metropolitan hospitals," should be secured , and estimates that it would cost about $125 million to complete such projects at all 500 u.s. metropolitan hospitals .

of course , it would also be costly to secure radiological sources in countries that could not do so without international assistance .

on the other hand , funds spent securing sources overseas might offer more leverage in that many sources overseas may have a lower level of security than do u.s. sources .

programs to secure sources in other nations could also promote a security culture , leveraging u.s. expenditures .

a further consideration is that expenditures to counter the rdd threat overseas could help safeguard the many u.s. facilities in other nations , such as military bases and embassies , and could help avert rdd attacks on critical facilities , such as seaports , that could cause economic disruption .

radiation detection networks : while attention has focused on explosive - driven "dirty bombs," an unobtrusive rdd attack could go undetected for hours , giving material time to spread and to irradiate people .

a distributed network of sensors to detect , locate , and identify radioactive material would address this issue .

sensors could be mounted on buildings , police cars , or surveillance cameras .

work is underway to develop radiation - detection chips to be incorporated into cell phones or other mobile devices .

what would it cost to develop a detector network and deploy it in major metropolitan areas ? .

would it be appropriate for the federal government to fund deployment of such networks , or would deployment be a state or local responsibility ? .

decontamination information and r&d: the main physical effect of an rdd would be contamination of high - value areas , and the main cost would be decontamination .

yet decontamination is complicated .

the proper methods depend on the rdd material , its form , the types of surfaces on which it is deposited , and the required decontamination level .

"first decontaminators" ( as distinct from first responders , who would be focused on more immediate tasks ) would presumably be less highly trained than experts from national laboratories and elsewhere .

yet they should be aware of what decontamination techniques would be ineffective or could worsen an rdd's effects .

according to gao , lawrence livermore national laboratory decontamination experts told us that the conventional use of high - pressure hosing to decontaminate a building is effective under normal conditions but could be the wrong cleanup approach for an rdd using cesium - 137 .

in this case , the imbibing ( absorbing ) properties of some porous surfaces such as concrete would actually cause this soluble radioactive isotope to penetrate even further into surfaces making subsequent decontamination more difficult and destructive .

prompt availability of relevant information , such as through fema's lessons learned information sharing , would help avoid such mistakes .

should this or other databases be augmented to include information for first decontaminators ? .

preparing for decontamination: some existing equipment can readily identify the material used in an rdd .

that data , however , would be of little value for decontamination unless the proper equipment and supplies , and training for their use , were available .

cities , especially those that had not obtained such resources , would inevitably turn to the federal government for support following an attack .

has the government stockpiled the needed resources for decontamination or arranged to have it manufactured quickly in the quantities needed ? .

to what extent is the stockpile updated in light of new r&d ? .

what areas might future r&d pursue ? .

note that the capability to decontaminate areas struck in an rdd attack would also be of value for decontaminating the much larger area receiving radioactive fallout in the event of an ind attack .

waste disposition and rdds: many studies , over decades , have considered how to dispose of nuclear waste .

since 1999 , after decades of study and multiple lawsuits , defense waste has been buried at the waste isolation pilot plant ( wipp ) in a salt bed in new mexico .

the issue of a permanent repository for spent fuel from nuclear power plants has been studied , and unresolved , for decades .

this issue is relevant to preventing an rdd attack because spent fuel could be used in an rdd .

political and technical considerations have blocked burial of such waste at yucca mountain , nevada .

in 2010 , the secretary of energy , at the direction of the president , established the blue ribbon commission on america's nuclear future "to conduct a comprehensive review of policies for managing the back end of the nuclear fuel cycle. .

the possibility of an rdd attack adds urgency to the disposition of radioactive waste .

most sealed sources have no disposition pathway , so disused sources are stored in ways that are less secure than , for example , deep underground burial .

deciding on a pathway for permanent disposition of such sources — which would not occupy a large volume — would reduce the risk of terrorists obtaining material that could be used in an attack .

on a vastly larger scale , if decontamination following an rdd attack proved ineffective , an alternative would be to demolish contaminated buildings and dig up streets , generating huge amounts of rubble .

where would it go ? .

if buried , would it contaminate the water table ? .

if it were to be buried out of state , would another state accept it ? .

how would it be transported ? .

would it contaminate the route along which it traveled ? .

would states along the proposed route try to block transit ? .

it is beyond the scope of this study to suggest alternatives , but it would appear to be more efficient to plan in advance how to dispose of this rubble rather than deciding on a rushed basis postattack .

standards for background investigations: nrc's increased controls order requires employers to check the background of employees for trustworthiness and reliability to determine who can have unescorted access to category 1 and 2 sources .

while some radiation safety officers ( rsos ) interviewed for this report saw this process as flawed and others did not , all agreed that there are no uniform standards for disqualification , and all treated as proprietary the standards they developed .

several looked for a pattern of behavior rather than specific disqualifying items .

at some organizations , human resources personnel made the judgment as to whether an applicant was trustworthy and reliable ; at others , the rso made the call ; at others , an in - house security expert did ; and at still others , a committee did .

all agreed it was considerably more difficult to evaluate a foreign national than a u.s. citizen .

as a result , an individual might be granted unescorted access by one organization but not by another .

congress could address this issue in several ways: decide that while the current approach to screening is inconsistently implemented , various organizations have been able to make it work , each in its own way , so that no action is called for .

each licensee with category 1 or 2 sources has individuals charged with deciding whether applicants are trustworthy and reliable .

direct nrc , fbi , or another agency to train those individuals on how to examine personnel background information , what clues to look for , what factors are disqualifying , etc .

direct nrc to specify grounds for disqualification in its regulations , with a further requirement to refer hard - to - resolve cases to the fbi .

for foreign nationals for whom a comprehensive background investigation cannot be performed in a reasonable time or expense , permit access to category 1 and 2 sources only when escorted by an individual cleared for unescorted access .

modify a materials - protection program: the gtri domestic materials protection program visits facilities requesting the service , examines the security situation , and installs devices to enhance security .

it provides this service on a voluntary basis at no initial cost to the facilities .

as of february 2011 , this program had "identified more than 2,700 vulnerable buildings … with high - priority radioactive material in the united states" and had completed security enhancements at 251 of them "with the remainder aiming to be completed by 2025. .

other upgrades will take several years as well , as detailed in appendix b .

congress could maintain the program at its current level .

one alternative is to expand it , completing the upgrades sooner in an effort to reduce the risk that terrorists could seize radioactive material in the united states and quickly use it in an rdd .

other alternatives include eliminating the program or making it mandatory .

according to an nrc - nnsa document , the nrc and state regulatory "framework provides a common baseline level of security to ensure adequate protection of public health and safety and the common defense and security. .

further , nnsa "build[s] on the existing regulatory requirements by providing voluntary security enhancements " that "are complementary to and do not replace the licensees obligation to meet nrc and agreement state regulatory requirements. .

if these requirements are sufficient , are the gtri enhancements needed ? .

if they are not sufficient , why are the enhancements voluntary and who should bear their cost ? .

radiological forensics: congress has given nuclear forensics overwhelming support .

for example , the nuclear forensics and attribution act ( h.r .

730 ; p.l .

111-140 , feb. 16 , 2010 ) passed the house , 402-16 , and the senate by unanimous consent .

it focused on radiological as well as nuclear weapons and materials .

given this congressional support , options likely to be of interest to congress involve how to strengthen radiological forensics capability , not whether to do so .

options include: recognize that nuclear forensics and radiological forensics have important differences .

this is the basis for addressing radiological forensic measures separately .

require a report .

radiological forensics is typically grouped together with nuclear forensics and rarely considered separately .

to examine its unique aspects and requirements , congress could direct the department of energy or dndo's national technical nuclear forensics center to task an outside panel to conduct a study on this topic and how its science and technology might be advanced .

support the buildout of archives of physical samples relevant to rdds .

in the course of crs discussions with multiple government agencies , experts who were in a position to know said that their agencies did not have an archive of sealed sources or of radioactive materials that might be of interest for an rdd .

such archives would be valuable for matching rdd debris against samples and would provide an investigation with other clues as well .

it would be important to maintain archives on an ongoing bases , as designs , manufacturing processes , and materials change over time .

consider mandating u.s. producers of radioactive material and sealed sources to include trace amounts of impurities , differing from one batch to the next , to distinguish between batches of materials .

when matched with records of sales , these "fingerprints" would provide clues to the provenance of the items .

consider requesting other countries to direct their producers to do likewise .

maintain liaison with manufacturers of radioactive materials and sealed sources to expedite communication between them and the government in the event of an rdd attack .

several bills enacted into law in the 111 th congress dealt with radiological terrorism: h.r .

2647 ( p.l .

111-84 ) , fy2010 national defense authorization act ( skelton ) .

section 1036 called for the president to develop a five - year plan for improving u.s. nuclear forensic and attribution capabilities , including recommendations with respect to "methods for the attribution of nuclear or radiological material to the source when such material is intercepted by the united states , foreign governments , or international bodies or is dispersed in the course of a terrorist attack or other nuclear or radiological explosion. .

the bill was signed into law october 28 , 2009 .

h.r .

730 ( p.l .

111-140 ) , nuclear forensics and attribution act ( schiff ) , sought to augment u.s. capability to identify the source of nuclear and other radioactive material used in a terrorist attack by establishing the national technical nuclear forensics center ( ntnfc ) within the domestic nuclear detection office of the department of homeland security .

this center would coordinate u.s. capability to conduct forensics analysis .

the act also provided for scholarships , fellowships , and grants to develop expertise in this area .

the bill was signed into law february 16 , 2010 .

h.r .

2701 ( p.l .

111-259 ) , fy2010 intelligence authorization act ( reyes ) .

section 344 provided , "not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the director of national intelligence , in consultation with the nuclear regulatory commission , shall submit to congress a report summarizing intelligence related to the threat to the united states from weapons that use radiological materials , including highly dispersible substances such as cesium - 137. .

the bill was signed into law on october 7 , 2010 .

several bills in the 112 th congress deal with radiological terrorism: s. 860 ( levin ) .

the bill would "ensure that methodologies and technologies used by the bureau of customs and border protection to screen for and detect the presence of chemical , nuclear , biological , and radiological weapons in municipal solid waste are as effective as the methodologies and technologies used by the bureau to screen for those materials in other items of commerce entering the united states through commercial motor vehicle transport. .

introduced april 14 , 2011 and referred to the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

h.r .

1411 ( bilirakis ) , metropolitan medical response system program act of 2011 .

the bill would , among other things , provide grants "to strengthen chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and explosive detection , response , and decontamination capabilities. .

introduced april 7 , 2011 , and referred to the committee on energy and commerce .

appendix a .

technical background this appendix presents technical aspects connected with rdds .

it offers a stand - alone tutorial for those desiring a more in - depth treatment of this subject .

in expanding on the material in the main text , this appendix repeats some of the material presented there .

radiation atoms have a nucleus that is surrounded by electrons .

the nucleus is made up of protons , which have a positive electrical charge , and ( with one exception ) neutrons , which have no charge .

electrons have a negative charge .

atoms typically have an equal number of protons and electrons , and are thus electrically neutral .

isotopes are forms of a chemical element with the same number of electrons and protons but different numbers of neutrons .

for example , all three isotopes of hydrogen have one proton and one electron , but the most common form of hydrogen has no neutrons , while deuterium has one neutron and tritium has two .

most atoms that make up the earth's crust are stable: they will remain in their current form indefinitely .

each chemical element , however , has one or more unstable isotopes .

these elements disintegrate or "decay," usually transforming into an atom of a different element .

atoms that decay are "radioactive," radioactive atoms are called "radionuclides. .

decay is typically accompanied by emission of particles , and often photons as well ; such emissions are called radiation .

"radionuclide" refers to the properties of atoms , such as the types and energies of particles given off by decay , while "radioactive material" refers to bulk properties of radionuclides , such as the amount that would contaminate a certain area .

rate of decay is measured in units of curies ( ci ) , where 1 ci = 3.7 x 10 10 disintegrations per second .

a related measure , specific activity , counts disintegrations per gram of material per second , eg , in curies per gram ; the higher the specific activity , the more disintegrations there are per gram of material per second .

specific activity permits comparison of the radioactivity of different materials .

curies and specific activity measure number of disintegrations , not their energy .

a related measure is the half - life , the time for half the atoms of a radioactive material to decay .

radiation takes several main forms .

alpha particles ( two protons and two neutrons ) : because they are massive by subatomic standards , alpha particles must carry off a considerable amount of energy to escape the nucleus ; at the same time , because of their mass they can travel only an inch in air .

they are stopped by a sheet of paper or the dead outer layers of skin .

beta particles ( an electron or a positron , the latter being a positively - charged electron ) : these are much less massive than alpha particles , so they can travel up to several feet in air , but are less energetic than alpha particles .

some are stopped by outer layers of skin , while others can penetrate a few millimeters .

neutrons .

some radionuclides decay by emitting a neutron .

neutrons are lighter than alpha particles but much heavier than beta particles .

they can travel tens of meters in air .

neutrons are also emitted when atoms of heavier elements fission , or split into two or more pieces ; fission also releases large quantities of energy .

neutrons are typically stopped by hydrogen - containing material , such as water or plastic .

energetic neutrons can penetrate the body .

gamma rays: these are photons released during radioactive decay .

photons may be thought of as packets of electromagnetic energy ( discussed next ) , and have no rest mass .

gamma rays have a wide range of energies ; more energetic ones can travel hundreds of meters in air .

they can be stopped by dense material like lead .

the electromagnetic spectrum includes the entire range of electromagnetic energy , such as , in order of increasing energy , radio waves , infrared , visible light , ultraviolet , and x - rays and gamma rays .

photons transmit electromagnetic energy ; a photon's energy determines whether it is , say , a radio wave or visible light .

gamma rays have a range of energies , but those from materials that might be used for rdds have medium to high energies and can penetrate the human body , causing biological damage .

the higher the energy , the more material they can penetrate and the greater the damage .

gamma ray energy is measured in electron volts or , more commonly , thousands of electron volts , abbreviated kev .

different materials emit gamma rays at different energies .

figure a - 1 plots the number of gamma rays counted in 5 minutes ( vertical axis ) against their energies ( horizontal axis ) .

it shows that cobalt - 60 emits two main gamma rays when it decays , at 1,173 kev and 1,333 kev , while cesium - 137 emits ( through an intermediate step ) mainly gamma rays at 662 kev .

each radionuclide emits its own unique gamma - ray spectrum when it decays , as exemplified by figure a - 1 , a characteristic of great use for identifying radionuclides .

each radionuclide decays in a specific way .

strontium - 90 emits beta particles when it decays , but not gamma rays .

cobalt - 60 emits high - energy gamma rays , making it readily detectable ; it also emits beta particles .

americium - 241 decays by emitting alpha particles , and also emits some gamma rays , mainly of low energy .

biological effects of ionizing radiation understanding an rdd's potential effectiveness — whether in terms of biological damage , area denial , or as a weapon of terror — requires understanding the physiological effects of radiation .

radiation strikes people constantly , but most of it , like radio waves and light , is not "ionizing. .

ionizing radiation has enough energy to knock electrons out of atoms , creating electrically - charged particles called ions that can damage cells .

"[o]nly a very small amount of energy needs to be deposited in a cell or tissue to produce significant biological change. .

there is a very low risk of effects at very low doses of radiation , but higher doses may lead to cancer , genetic mutations , sickness , or death .

effects may be of two types .

"deterministic effects are those for which the severity of the effect varies with the dose , and for which a threshold may therefore occur .

stochastic effects are those for which the probability that an effect will occur , rather than the severity of the effect , is regarded as a function of the dose , without threshold. .

deterministic effects include nausea , vomiting , diarrhea , hemorrhage , and , at high doses delivered in a short time over the whole body , death within hours to weeks ; stochastic effects include cancers and genetic damage .

contamination from an rdd is unlikely to produce deterministic effects in many people .

the concern is that residual contamination may produce stochastic effects , so that some ( if not many ) people will not want to reoccupy the area .

while there is much public fear of any level of radiation , the physiological effects of an rdd , as well as the requirements for cleanup , depend on dose .

certain concepts and their units of measure are needed to discuss dose .

the roentgen ( r ) measures how much ionization a gamma ray produces when traveling through air .

the rad , for radiation absorbed dose , is used to correct a roentgen value for the amount of energy deposited into a substance , such as wood or human tissue .

another measure , the rem , or roentgen equivalent man , weights the cancer risk from different types of radiation deposited in human tissue .

one rad of absorbed dose from x - rays , gamma rays , and beta particles is 1 rem .

because alpha particles and neutrons are much more massive , 1 rad of absorbed dose from them is much more harmful , so the weighting factor is 10 for neutrons and 20 for alpha particles .

people are exposed to background levels of ionizing radiation every day from such sources as dirt and granite ( which often contain traces of uranium , radium , and radioactive potassium ) , radon gas , and cosmic rays .

food and drinking water generally contain trace amounts of radioactive materials .

the radiation dose from a jet airplane flight is 0.5 millirems ( mrem ) per hour in the air ; from a chest x - ray , 6 mrem ; and from living at an altitude of one mile , about 50 mrem / year .

a 2009 report shows an average annual dose of 620 mrem for the u.s. population , of which 48 percent ( 298 mrem ) is from exposure to radiation for medical purposes .

an rdd attack is likely to expose few people to a dose of more than a few rem per year , even using the unrealistic assumption that they remain in the affected area without sheltering for a year .

any effects from a dose of a few rem per year are likely to be stochastic .

views differ on the harm from that dose ( see sidebar ) .

further , various standards imply different degrees of harm from a dose of a few rem per year .

for dose to the public resulting from the nuclear fuel cycle ( eg , nuclear power plants ) , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) uses a standard of 25 mrem per year of whole - body dose .

nrc adopts that standard , and in addition has a dose standard of 100 mrem per year for members of the public from operations licensed by nrc .

that agency also has established an occupational dose limit of 5 rem per year .

the occupational dose limit in japan was reportedly 10 rem per year , a figure raised to 25 rem per year in the wake of the fukushima daiichi incident .

according to one expert , doses greater than 25 rem are often received in a short period of time , producing deterministic effects , the severity of which increases with dose .

exposure to radiation from an rdd can occur through four pathways .

epa lists three: direct , from sources external to the body ; inhalation , breathing in particles of radioactive material ; and ingestion , such as drinking water or eating food that contains radioactive material .

a fourth is through the skin .

according to william rhodes iii , senior manager , international security systems group , sandia national laboratories , "skin is a very good barrier against many chemicals .

however , certain radioactive chemicals , such as various compounds of tritium or iodine , can penetrate through intact skin and be taken up by the bloodstream and distributed throughout the body .

radioactive materials can also enter through the skin through wounds. .

figure a - 2 illustrates some of these pathways .

total dose is a combination of internal and external dose .

the former is that portion of dose from radiation sources inside the body , while the latter is the portion from outside the body .

nuclear weapons generate massive amounts of radiation , both as prompt neutrons , gamma rays , x - rays , light , infrared , etc. , near the explosion , and as gamma rays and other forms of radiation emitted by fallout over a wide area .

the resulting doses can cause sickness or death in hours to months .

rdds do not involve a nuclear explosion and might contain some tens of grams of radioactive material , enough to contaminate several square miles , though many factors influence the effectiveness of an attack , as discussed under " value of rdds for terrorists . .

as such , an rdd would generate a hazardous dose of radiation over a much smaller area than would a nuclear weapon .

in the affected area , an rdd attack would elevate the radiation level , and thus the dose , beyond background .

epa issued guidance in 1991 for protective actions following nuclear and radiological incidents except nuclear war , and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) issued guidance in 2008 for protection and recovery following rdd and improvised nuclear device ( ind , i.e. , a terrorist - made nuclear weapon ) incidents .

both agencies recommended "protective action guides" ( pags ) .

a pag is "the projected dose to a reference individual , from an accidental or deliberate release of radioactive material , at which a specific protective action to reduce or avoid that dose is recommended .

thus , protective actions are designed to be taken before the anticipated dose is realized. .

the dose is that resulting from all pathways , not just external sources .

pags use predicted dose rates to provide guidance on emergency actions like sheltering in place or evacuation .

fema divides the incident response into three phases .

the early phase starts "at the beginning of the incident when immediate decisions for effective protective actions are required , and when actual field measurement data generally are not available. .

the beginning is not necessarily clear .

while an explosive - driven dirty bomb would announce its presence , fema observes that "in the event of a covert dispersal , discovery or detection may not occur for days or weeks. .

for the early phase , for a pag of 1 to 5 rem , the protective action recommendation is sheltering in place or evacuation .

the intermediate phase may follow in as little as a few hours .

it "is usually assumed to begin after the incident source and releases have been brought under control and protective action decisions can be made based on measurements of exposure and radioactive materials that have been deposited. .

for that phase , fema recommends "relocation of the public" for a projected dose of 2 rem for the first year and 0.5 rem per year for any subsequent year .

pags assume that a person is in the affected area , unprotected , 24 hours a day , 7 days a week , for the entire period .

this is unrealistic ; epa expects , in the event of a nuclear reactor accident , that sheltering , radioactive decay , weathering , and simple decontamination techniques should reduce the actual dose in the 2-rem area to "less than one rem. .

the late phase starts when recovery and cleanup begin , and ends when such actions have been completed .

an interagency group determined that the epa pags for the early and intermediate phases were appropriate for use in an attack using an rdd or an improvised nuclear device ( ind , a terrorist - made nuclear weapon ) .

epa includes as "an objective of these pags to assure that … the cumulative dose over 50 years ( including the first and second years ) will not exceed 5 rem. .

fema does not include a pag for the late phase because it would not be an emergency situation and because authorities would need to optimize among many factors ( economic , land use , technical feasibility , etc. ) .

in determining which areas need to be remediated to what levels .

another set of guidelines for emergency workers in the early phase covers doses at and above 5 rem , depending on the activity performed .

the condition for exposure resulting in a 5-rem dose is that "all reasonably achievable actions have been taken to minimize dose. .

the activity that may warrant a 10-rem dose is "protecting valuable property necessary for public welfare ( eg , a power plant ) ," and for a 25-rem dose , "lifesaving or protection of large populations .

it is highly unlikely that doses would reach this level in an rdd incident. .

the conditions for exposure at both these levels are that the dose is unavoidable , responders are fully informed of risks , exposure is on a voluntary basis , appropriate personal protection like respirators is provided and used , and dose monitoring is available .

as noted earlier , even at the 25-rem level , there are "no detectable clinical effects [and a] small increase in the risk of delayed cancer and genetic effects." .

however , the guidance states that "it is impossible to develop a single turn - back dose level for all responders to use in all events , especially those that involve lifesaving operations. .

a small amount of certain radioactive materials , if effectively dispersed , could contaminate a large area .

if the bottle in figure a - 3 contained radioactive cesium - 137 chloride instead of nonradioactive cesium - 133 chloride , it would have about 1,000 curies .

if the vial in figure a - 4 held pellets of radioactive cobalt - 60 instead of nonradioactive cobalt - 59 , its curie count would be similar .

even this small amount of material can contaminate a substantial area to a high enough level to pose a threat to health .

figure a - 5 illustrates the point ; it models a possible rdd attack on washington , dc , using 1,000 curies of cesium - 137 chloride .

biological effects of radioactive material in an rdd depend on several factors in addition to dose .

type of radiation .

gamma emitters are the main source of direct exposure to radiation .

materials often mentioned as "candidates" for rdds , like cobalt - 60 and cesium - 137 , pose a threat mainly because even a fraction of a gram emits a huge number of high - energy gamma rays ; such material is harmful whether outside or inside the body .

neutrons are also harmful whether inside or outside the body .

an americium - beryllium mixture , used in oil well logging devices , is a neutron - emitting material in industrial use .

in contrast , alpha emitters like americium - 241 and polonium - 210 are generally not harmful outside the body but are very harmful when taken into the body , where their energy is absorbed by live internal tissue .

type of radionuclide .

different nuclides ( radioactive or otherwise ) behave differently in the body .

iodine concentrates in the thyroid gland .

according to epa , "strontium - 90 is chemically similar to calcium , and tends to deposit in bone and blood - forming tissue ( bone marrow ) . .

polonium does not concentrate in an organ but circulates throughout the body .

physical and chemical characteristics .

is the material in metallic , ceramic , or granular form ? .

is it soluble in water ? .

is it a pure element with one set of properties , or part of a chemical compound with different properties ? .

sources of long - term exposure .

some rdd materials would retain much of their radioactivity for years .

material remaining after cleanup , especially gamma emitters , would increase dose to people in the affected area .

filtering might not remove radioactive material from drinking water .

plants grown on contaminated land might take up radioactive material , and cattle eating contaminated plants might retain such material .

ingesting food or water with radioactive material would increase dose .

radioactive materials and sources how large a source is required for an rdd , and what materials are most suitable ? .

the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) has established thresholds for quantities of material requiring certain protective measures: "the theft or diversion of risk - significant quantities of radioactive materials could lead to their use in a radiological dispersal device ( rdd ) or a radiological exposure device ( red ) . .

table a - 1 presents the risk - significant quantities of 16 materials that might be of use in an rdd .

note that these quantities are very small , often a fraction of a gram .

these materials and quantities are from the international atomic energy agency's code of conduct on the safety and security of radioactive sources , which that agency's board of governors approved in 2003 and which nrc helped prepare .

the iaea decided that the code "should serve as guidance to states for — inter alia — the development and harmonization of policies , laws and regulations on the safety and security of radioactive sources. .

for each radionuclide , the code lists three categories of radiation ( expressed in curies and terabecquerels ) and the threshold radiation value for each category based on potential to cause deterministic effects .

category 1 sources are those that , if not safely managed or securely protected , could cause permanent injury to someone who handled them for a few minutes , and death to someone who handled them unshielded for a few minutes to an hour .

for category 2 sources , the corresponding figures are minutes to hours and hours to days .

category 3 sources , if not safely managed or securely protected , could cause injury to someone handling them for some hours .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 , section 651 ( d ) ) mandates use of category 1 or 2 sources as defined by the code of conduct as the basis for protecting radiation sources .

separately , the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) commissioned a study by sandia national laboratories to identify radionuclides suitable for use in an rdd .

sandia started with all 3,715 nuclides discovered so far and eliminated all but 14 radionuclides plus nuclear reactor spent fuel .

the code of conduct , while nonbinding , sets worldwide standards for protection of radioactive sources .

the united states adopted its categories to make its practice consistent with the code even though the sandia study arrived at a slightly different list of radionuclides .

the code urges all states to have an effective system of legislative and regulatory control of the specified radioactive sources .

the iaea selected the radionuclides based on their availability , radioactivity , and other characteristics .

further , according to nrc , "of the 16 radionuclides , only four are widely used in civilian applications in this country: cobalt - 60 , cesium - 137 , iridium - 192 , and americium - 241. .

an expert panel highlighted the risk from cesium - 137 chloride: because of its dispersibility , solubility , penetrating radiation , source activity , and presence across the united states in facilities such as hospitals , blood banks , and universities , many of which are located in large population centers , radioactive cesium chloride is a greater concern than other category 1 and 2 sources for some attack scenarios .

this concern is exacerbated by the lack of an avenue for permanent disposal of high - activity cesium radiation sources , which can result in disused cesium sources sitting in licensees' storage facilities .

as such , these sources pose unique risks .

similarly , nrc stated: cscl [cesium chloride] sources comprise approximately 3% of the iaea category 1 and 2 quantity sources in the u.s .

many in the medical and scientific communities indicate that these cscl sources are important due to their application in blood irradiation , bio - medical and industrial research , and calibration of instrumentation and dosimetry , especially for critical reactor and first responder equipment .

… the cscl used in these applications is in a compressed powder form that is doubly - encapsulated in two stainless steel capsules to ensure safety and security in normal use .

this physical form is used because of its high specific activity ( gamma emission per unit volume ) and manufacturability .

however , the powder is highly soluble and dispersible , which presents security concerns .

on the other hand , there are reasons for the use of cesium - 137 chloride: the widespread use of cesium chloride is a vital component of radiobiological and medical research and of clinical medicine … currently , and for the near future , there is no alternative to it in many applications .

the [cesium - 137 single - energy] spectrum has been the reference standard for radiobiological research for over 60 [years] and is the basis for national and international standards for dosimetry and instrument calibration ; it cannot simply be replaced by x - rays .

indeed , any move away from using the [cesium - 137] spectrum would necessitate years of repetition of impractical and fundamental radiobiological studies to redefine and verify another standard .

its elimination would impose great difficulties and financial hardship on clinical - medical applications .

while the iaea selected the thresholds in the code of conduct based on the potential to cause deterministic effects , these thresholds can also be used to calculate the relative effectiveness ( as measured by area contaminated ) of different materials when used in an rdd by showing how much material is needed to contaminate a specified area to a specified level .

for example , under ideal conditions that could not be achieved in the real world , a category 2 source of cobalt - 60 , 0.007 grams , could contaminate 0.74 square km ( 0.29 square miles ) to the extent that people in that area could be expected to receive a dose of 2 rem in the first year following an attack or 0.5 rem in any succeeding year , the pags for which fema recommends relocating people from an area .

in contrast , it would take 0.36 grams of cesium - 137 ( and a somewhat larger amount of cesium chloride ) or 16.77 grams of americium - 241 to contaminate the same area .

note that the amounts of material in the foregoing examples are less than 1 ounce , and that a dose of 2 rem / year would not cause deterministic effects .

terrorists could not manufacture material of greatest concern for use in an rdd because it is made in nuclear reactors .

some such materials are specially manufactured by bombarding stable ( nonradioactive ) atoms with neutrons produced by nuclear reactors , increasing the number of neutrons in the nucleus .

in this way , stable cobalt - 59 , with 32 neutrons , is transformed into radioactive cobalt - 60 , with 33 .

other radionuclides are byproducts of a nuclear reactor .

when uranium fissions in a reactor , two of the many resulting radionuclides are cesium - 137 and strontium - 90 , which are chemically separated from spent fuel .

only a few reactors worldwide produce cobalt - 60 , cesium - 137 , and some other radionuclides for commercial sale .

for example , "separated radioactive cesium sold internationally is produced only by the production association mayak ( pa mayak ) , in the chelyabinsk region of russia and sold through the u.k. - based company , reviss. .

as a result , terrorists would have to obtain this material through theft , purchase , or transfer from sympathetic insiders .

most likely , they would try to obtain "sealed" sources , such as shown in figure a - 6 .

sealed sources , a common form in which radioactive material is sold , enclose radioactive material in a metal capsule to make sure it does not leak and contaminate people or the environment .

sealed sources have many beneficial uses .

they treat cancers , irradiate food , monitor wells for oil , have military applications , create radiographs ( x - ray - like images ) for inspecting cargo containers , and are used in research .

as a result of this utility , millions are in use worldwide .

they vary widely in number of curies .

some food irradiators have millions of curies ; blood irradiators have several thousand curies ; and many , such as household smoke detectors , have a tiny fraction of a curie .

the latter do not pose a terrorist threat .

because of the threat and wide distribution of risk - significant sources , the united states and other countries have taken steps , discussed in the next section , to protect these sources .

radioisotopic thermal generators ( rtgs ) in russia are of special concern .

these devices , powered by several thousand curies of strontium - 90 , produce heat that is converted to electricity for use at remote locations , such as to power lighthouses .

a 2007 paper by nnsa staff said , "these [russian] rtgs likely represent the largest unsecured quantity of radiological material in the world. .

to counter the threat of terrorists taking rtgs for use in an rdd , the united states , russia , norway , france , and other countries have been securing these devices .

 ( see " g8 global partnership: ." ) .

nnsa expects that by the end of fy2011 , 646 of 851 rtgs will have been recovered .

might uranium or plutonium , the essential fuels of nuclear weapons , be used in an rdd ? .

terrorists could use a relatively innocuous radioactive material like uranium in an rdd in an attempt to create panic , but authorities would surely take steps to counter panic , so the net result is unknown .

however , technical experts rarely if ever consider uranium as an rdd material because the amount of radiation emitted per gram is extremely small , most of its gamma rays are of relatively low energy , and it poses less of a biological hazard than plutonium .

plutonium could be used in an rdd because of the biological hazards from alpha particles if inhaled .

however , a terrorist group seeking materials for an rdd would probably find it easier to obtain radionuclides with common industrial uses , a terrorist group seeking to build a nuclear bomb would probably try to acquire uranium highly enriched in isotope 235 ( "highly enriched uranium" ) rather than plutonium because only the former can be used in the simplest type of nuclear bomb , and a terrorist group seeking to build a nuclear bomb using plutonium would probably not squander any plutonium it acquired on an rdd .

on the other hand , spent nuclear fuel , a highly radioactive mixture of many radionuclides including uranium and plutonium , could be used in an rdd .

appendix b .

some u.s. vulnerabilities to rdd .

