almost all borrowing by the federal government is conducted by the treasury department , within the restrictions established by a single , statutory limit ( ceiling ) on the total amount of debt that may be outstanding at any time .

by law , the treasury cannot exceed federal debt limits , so the treasury periodically has had to ask congress to enact new debt limits so it can fulfill its financial commitments .

since 1978 , 58 measures adjusting or suspending the statutory debt limit either as stand - alone legislation or as part of legislation dealing with other matters have been enacted into law .

during the 115 th congress , on march 15 , 2017 , a previously enacted debt limit suspension period expired .

on march 16 , 2017 , the treasury department reset the debt limit at $19,809 billion , and treasury secretary steven mnuchin notified congress that the treasury department would use extraordinary measures to temporarily prevent the united states from defaulting on its obligations .

these measures were in use until september 8 , 2017 , when president trump signed p.l .

115-56 , a measure that included a debt limit suspension through december 8 , 2017 , and reset the debt limit at $20,456 billion .

on december 8 , 2017 , the treasury department again implemented extraordinary measures , which estimates suggested would prevent the united states from defaulting on its obligations until early march of 2018 .

on february 9 , 2018 , a continuing appropriations measure , p.l .

115-123 , was enacted that included the bipartisan budget act of 2018 , and , in ยง30301 , a suspension of the federal debt through march 1 , 2019 .

this report provides tallies of votes on final passage for each enacted measure that adjusted or suspended the statutory debt limit from 1978 to present .

note that because the process for congressional consideration of bills can be complex , attempting to interpret the intent of votes prior to the final vote on passage of a measure may yield various , and sometimes conflicting , interpretations .

for the sake of clarity , this report only provides vote information on the final passage of each measure .

in addition to information on debt limit legislation and votes on final passage in the house and senate , other data elements identified in the tables below include bill numbers ; roll call votes , voice votes , or passage by unanimous consent ; dates of final passage and vote tally information ; dates of enactment and public law numbers for the enacted laws ; and brief background information on whether the measures were considered as stand - alone measures ( i.e. , dealing entirely with just a change to the federal debt limit and not including provisions on other matters ) .

table 1 provides information on all enacted measures to adjust or suspend the federal debt limit from 1978 to 2018 , including data on the specific changes to the federal debt limit set at the time of enactment .

the bill number and public law columns of the table provide links to congress.gov bill summary and status information for each measure .

roll call votes on final enactment can be extracted through the actions tab for each measure within congress.gov back to 1993 .

table 1 also contains cross - references to the notes columns in table 2 and table 3 .

the notes columns in those tables provide additional details on how each measure was considered .

table 2 identifies stand - alone measures from the period .

table 3 identifies bills considered as other than stand - alone measures and provides brief background information on the nature of each measure and by what means the measures were considered .

crs report r44874 , the budget control act: frequently asked questions , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31967 , the debt limit: history and recent increases , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43389 , the debt limit since 2011 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21519 , legislative procedures for adjusting the public debt limit: a brief overview , by [author name scrubbed .

