historically , the federal government has been a primary provider of authoritative geospatial information , but some argue that consumer demand for spatial information has triggered a major shift toward local government and commercial providers .

the federal government has shifted , with some important exceptions , to consuming rather than providing geospatial information from a variety of sources .

as a result , the federal government's role has shifted as well toward coordinating and managing geospatial data and facilitating partnerships among the producers and consumers of geospatial information in government , the private sector , and academia .

the challenges to coordinating how geospatial data are acquired and used — collecting duplicative data sets , for example — at the local , state , and federal levels , in collaboration with the private sector , are long - standing and not yet resolved .

in 2003 and 2004 the subcommittee on technology , information policy , intergovernmental relations , and the census , part of the house committee on government reform , held two hearings on the nation's geospatial information infrastructure .

a common theme to both hearings was the challenge of coordinating and sharing geospatial data between the local , county , state , and national levels .

quantifying the cost of geospatial information to the federal government has also been an ongoing concern for congress .

at the hearing in 2003 , representative adam putnam stated: we need to understand what programs exist across the government , how much we're spending on those programs , where we're spending that money , how efficiently , or perhaps inefficiently , we share data across federal agency boundaries , how we separate security - sensitive geospatial data from those open for public use , and how we efficiently , or perhaps inefficiently , coordinate with state and local governments and tribes .

the explosion of geospatial data acquired at the local and state levels , for their own purposes and in conjunction with the private sector , underscores the long - recognized need for better coordination between the federal government and local and state authorities .

at the same time , coordinating , managing , and facilitating the production and use of geospatial information from different sources , of different quality , and which was collected with specific objectives in mind has been a challenge .

the federal government has recognized this challenge since at least 1990 , when the office of management and budget ( omb ) revised circular a - 16 to establish the federal geographic data committee ( fgdc ) and to promote the coordinated use , sharing , and dissemination of geospatial data nationwide .

executive order 12906 , issued in 1994 , was intended to "strengthen and enhance" the general policies in circular a - 16 .

executive order 12906 specified that the fgdc shall coordinate the federal government's development of the national spatial data infrastructure ( nsdi ) .

further , eo12906 called for the establishment of a national geospatial data clearinghouse to address data standardization , make geospatial data publically available , and address redundancy and incompatibility of geospatial information .

circular a - 16 was itself revised in 2002 , adding the deputy director of management at omb as the vice - chair of the fgdc to serve with the secretary of the interior , who chairs the committee .

the high - level leadership and broad membership of the fgdc — 10 cabinet - level departments and 9 other federal agencies — highlights the importance of geospatial information to the federal government .

in fact , supplemental guidance to circular a - 16 , issued by federal chief information officer vivek kundra on november 10 , 2010 , referred to federal geospatial data as a capital asset .

questions remain , however , about how effectively the fgdc is fulfilling its mission .

has this organizational structure worked ? .

can the federal government account for the costs of acquiring , coordinating , and managing geospatial information ? .

how well is the federal government coordinating with state and local entities that increasingly rely on geospatial information ? .

what is the role of the private sector ? .

in its oversight capacity , the 112 th congress may consider these questions from the viewpoint of reducing duplication and costs to the federal government .

this report discusses issues that may be of interest to congress — managing , sharing , and coordinating geospatial information — and includes examples of legislation .

this report also summarizes a diverse set of recommendations and proposals from different non - governmental organizations for how to improve the coordination and management of geospatial information at the federal and state levels .

a separate report , crs report r41825 , geospatial information and geographic information systems ( gis ) : an overview for congress , discusses geospatial information and gis ; provides several examples of their use ; and describes the fgdc , nsdi , and their various activities and programs .

this report is limited to discussions of non - classified geospatial information .

producing floodplain maps ; conducting the census ; planning ecosystem restoration ; and assessing vulnerability and responding to natural hazards such as hurricanes , earthquakes , and tsunamis are examples of how federal agencies use gis and geospatial information to meet national needs .

some view federal government data as inherently geospatial .

according to the department of the interior , the amount of government information that has a geospatial component — such as address or other reference to a physical location — is as much as 80% .

given the ubiquity of geospatial information throughout the federal government , and despite the long history of efforts to manage and coordinate such data articulated in omb circular a - 16 and its antecedents ( see appendix for a history of circular a - 16 and its federal policy lineage ) , ongoing challenges to handling federal geospatial information can generally be divided into three overarching questions: what is the best way to organize and manage the vast array of geospatial information that is acquired at many levels and that has a variety of potential uses ? .

what is the best way to share data , particularly among local , state , and federal stakeholders , each of whom may have a need for the same or similar data ? .

what is the best way to coordinate among federal agencies , such as the administration and management by different agencies of all the federal lands in the united states ? .

nonfederal organizations and institutions have increasingly participated with federal agencies in communicating their concerns regarding geospatial information management , data sharing , and coordination .

the national geospatial advisory committee directly advises the fgdc .

the national states geographic information council and private sector geospatial organizations , such as the management association for private photogrammetric surveyors , provide views of state geospatial organizations and the private sector respectively .

in early 2009 , several proposals were released calling for efforts to create a national gis , or for renewed investment in the national spatial data infrastructure , or even to create a "nsdi 2.0. .

the language in the proposals attempted to make the case for considering such investments part of the national investment in critical infrastructure , both by directly supporting these national gis and geospatial efforts , but also via secondary effects .

for example , one proposal indicated that organizations rebuilding roads , bridges , and schools need updated online information networks "to rebuild in a smart , efficient , environmentally conscious and sustainable way. .

another proposal touted a national gis as a tool to speed economic recovery , which could also "leave the country with a public utility , a modern geospatial information system , that itself can become a foundation for new generations of industries and technologies in the future. .

their call for efforts to build a "national" gis , or a new version of the nsdi , or for an investment in a national spatial data infrastructure , raises questions about the current efforts to build the nsdi .

efforts to construct the nsdi began in 1994 with executive order 12906 , or even earlier when omb revised circular a - 16 in 1990 to establish the federal geographic data committee .

the recent proposals imply that efforts which began 20 years ago and continue today are not sufficiently national in scope , planning , coordination , sharing , or implementation , despite the existence of the fgdc , nsgic , or other entities such as the coalition of geospatial organizations or mapps that are forums for organizations concerned with national geospatial issues .

congress may consider how a national gis or geospatial infrastructure would be conceived , perhaps drawing on proposals for these national efforts as described above , and how they would be similar to or differ from current efforts .

congress may also examine its oversight role in the implementation of omb circular a - 16 , particularly in how federal agencies are coordinating their programs that have geospatial components .

in 2004 , gao acknowledged that the federal government , through the fgdc and geospatial one - stop project , had taken actions to coordinate the government's geospatial investments , but that those efforts had not been fully successful in eliminating redundancies among agencies .

as a result , federal agencies were acquiring and maintaining potentially duplicative data sets and systems .

since then , it is not clear whether federal agencies are successfully coordinating among themselves and measurably eliminating unnecessary duplication of effort .

were congress to take a more active oversight role overseeing the federal geospatial enterprise , it could evaluate whether specific recommendations from nonfederal stakeholders have been addressed .

for example , the national geospatial advisory committee recommended that omb and fgdc strengthen their enforcement of circular a - 16 and executive order 12906 .

however , enforcement alone may not be sufficient to meet the current challenges of management , coordination , and data sharing .

the issuance of supplemental guidance to circular a - 16 by omb in november 2010 may instigate new activity among and between agencies , which could spill over into better coordination with the state and local governments and the private sector .

it will likely take some time , and several budget cycles , to track whether agencies are adhering to the "portfolio - centric model" of geospatial data management outlined in the supplemental guidance .

it may also take time to evaluate whether the "portfolio - centric model" is the best available model for managing the federal geospatial assets .

this circular was originally issued in 1953 , revised in 1967 , and revised again in 1990 .

the bureau of the budget ( now the omb ) issued circular no .

a - 16 on january 16 , 1953 .

appended to this circular were exhibits , occasionally revised , that dealt with procedures for programming and coordinating of federal topographic mapping activities , national atlas , geodetic control surveys and international boundaries .

the purpose of the 1953 circular was "to insure ( sic ) that surveying and mapping activities may be directed toward meeting the needs of federal and state agencies and the general public , and will be performed expeditiously , without duplication of effort. .

the original circular references executive order no .

9094 , dated march 10 , 1942 .

this executive order directs the director of the bureau of the budget to coordinate and promote the improvement of surveying and mapping activities of the government .

furthermore , it passes on functions carried out by the federal board of surveys and maps , established by executive order no .

3206 , dated december 30 , 1919 .

thus , the omb is directed to make recommendations to agencies and to the president regarding the coordination of all governmental map making and surveying .

executive order no .

3206 superseded an executive order , dated august 10 , 1906 , that granted advisory power to the united states geographic board to review mapping projects to avoid duplication and to facilitate standardized mapping .

a revised circular a - 16 was issued on may 6 , 1967 .

the most significant change in this revision is the addition of a new section on responsibility for coordination .

this section outlines the responsibilities of three federal departments ( department of the interior ( doi ) , department of commerce ( doc ) and department of state ( dos ) ) .

both the original and the 1967 revision of the circular focus on providing a guide for the development of annual programs of the individual agencies and , through the exhibits , established extensive reporting requirements .

a second revised circular a - 16 was issued on october 19 , 1990 .

this revision expanded the circular to include not only surveying and mapping , but also the related spatial data activities .

specifically , it included geographically referenced computer - readable ( digital ) data .

in addition , the exhibits are no longer referenced and a short reporting requirements section is added .

the 2002 updated circular calls for continued improvements in spatial data coordination and the use of geographical data .

objectives for this revision are to reflect the changes that have taken place in geographic information management and technology , and to clearly define agency and fgdc responsibilities .

the proposed revision displays an integrated infrastructure system approach to support multiple government services and electronic government .

