deoxyribonucleic acid , or dna , is the fundamental building block for an individual's entire genetic makeup .

dna is a powerful tool for law enforcement investigations because each person's dna is different from that of every other individual ( except for identical twins ) .

by analyzing selected dna sequences ( called loci ) , a crime laboratory can develop a profile to be used in identifying a suspect .

dna can be extracted from a number of sources , such as hair , bone , teeth , saliva , and blood .

because the human body contains so many copies of dna , even a minuscule amount of bodily fluid or tissue can yield useful information .

obtaining a dna sample is not complicated ; it can be as simple as a swab of the inside of the mouth to obtain cheek cells and white blood cells in saliva .

state and federal dna databases have proved instrumental in solving crimes , reducing the risk of convicting the wrong person , and establishing the innocence of those wrongly convicted .

dna evidence is used to solve crimes in two ways: in cases where a suspect is known , a sample of that person's dna can be compared to biological evidence found at a crime scene .

the results of this comparison may then help establish whether the suspect was at the crime scene or whether he / she committed the crime .

in cases where a suspect is not known , biological evidence from the crime scene can be analyzed and compared to offender profiles contained in existing dna databases to assist in identifying the perpetrator .

through the use of dna databases , biological evidence found at one crime scene can also be connected to other crime scenes , linking them to the same perpetrator or perpetrators .

this report provides an overview of how dna is used to investigate crimes and help protect the innocent .

it also reviews current statutory law on collecting dna samples , sharing dna profiles generated from those samples , and providing access to postconviction dna testing .

the report also includes a summary of grant programs authorized by congress to assist state and local governments with reducing dna backlogs , provide postconviction dna testing , and promote new technology in the field .

federal law authorizes the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) to operate and maintain a national dna database where dna profiles generated from samples collected from people under applicable legal authority and samples collected at crime scenes can be compared to generate leads in criminal investigations .

statutory provisions also authorize the collection of dna samples from federal offenders and arrestees , district of columbia offenders , and military offenders .

state law dictates which arrestees and convicted offenders will have profiles entered into state dna databases , but federal law dictates which profiles entered into state databases can be uploaded into the national dna database .

increased awareness of the power of dna testing to solve crimes has led to increased demand for dna analysis , which has resulted in a backlog of casework for laboratory personnel .

in addition to solving crimes , dna analysis can also help exonerate people incarcerated for crimes they did not commit .

while state law dictates which profiles will be included in each state's dna database , federal law provides for the collection of dna samples from certain federal offenders for analysis and inclusion in the ndis .

federal law also dictates which profiles included in sdis can be uploaded into the ndis .

federal law also states that agencies participating in the ndis must meet certain specified standards .

in addition , federal law provides for postconviction dna testing for federal offenders .

the following section summarizes current federal law as it pertains to dna used in a criminal justice capacity .

several grant programs provide assistance to state and local governments for forensic sciences .

a bulk of the programs focus on providing state and local governments with funding to reduce the backlog of forensic and convicted offender samples waiting to be processed and entered into the ndis .

however , some grant programs provide funding for other purposes , such as offsetting the cost of providing postconviction dna testing .

this section of the report provides a brief overview of grants for forensic sciences .

the debbie smith dna backlog grant program ( hereinafter , "debbie smith grants" ) provides grants to state and local governments for five major purposes: ( 1 ) conducting analyses of dna samples collected under applicable legal authority for inclusion in the ndis , ( 2 ) conducting analyses of forensic dna samples for inclusion in the ndis , ( 3 ) increasing the capacity of state and local laboratories to carry out dna analyses , ( 4 ) collecting dna samples from people required to submit them and forensic samples from crimes , and ( 5 ) ensuring that analyses of forensic dna samples are carried out in a timely manner .

the katie sepich enhanced dna collection act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-253 ) amended the debbie smith program to set aside up to $10 million of the amount appropriated for debbie smith grants for fy2013-fy2015 to assist states with the costs associated with collecting dna samples from arrestees ( assuming there is statutory authority in the state to collect dna sample from people arrested for certain offenses ) .

the sexual assault forensic evidence reporting act of 2013 ( the safer act of 2013 , title x of p.l .

113-4 ) added two new purposes for which debbie smith grants can be used: to conduct an audit of sexual assault evidence samples in the possession of a state or unit of local government that are awaiting testing and to ensure that the collection and processing of dna evidence by law enforcement is carried out in a timely manner and in accordance with the protocols and practices the fbi is required to develop under the act .

the attorney general is required to award these funds using a formula .

the formula distributes funds among state and local governments to maximize the effective utilization of dna technology to solve crimes and protect public safety .

the formula must also allocate funding among state and local governments to reduce backlogs by considering the number of offender and forensic samples awaiting dna analysis in the jurisdiction along with the population and number of violent crimes in the jurisdiction .

current law requires doj to award not less than 0.5% of the total amount appropriated each fiscal year to each state and the district of columbia .

the territories are to receive 0.125% of the total appropriation .

agencies receiving a grant under the program are required to certify that dna analyses are conducted in laboratories that satisfy the fbi's qas and are operated either by a state or local government or by a private laboratory under contract with the state or local government .

grants for conducting analyses of dna samples collected under applicable legal authority for inclusion in the ndis , conducting analyses of forensic casework for inclusion in the ndis , and ensuring that analyses of forensic dna samples are carried out in a timely manner can be made in the form of a contract or voucher for laboratory services that can be redeemed by nonprofit or for - profit laboratories that satisfy the qas and have been approved by the attorney general .

state and local governments receiving funding under the program are required to submit a report to doj with a summary of the activities carried out under the grant and an assessment of whether such activities are meeting the needs identified in the grant application , as well as other information the attorney general may require .

doj may award not more than 1% of grant funding each fiscal year to states , units of local government , and nonprofit professional organizations of persons actively involved in forensic science and nationally recognized within the forensic science community to help offset the cost of accrediting and auditing laboratories .

the safer act of 2013 established a series of conditions for states or units of local government receiving a grant under the debbie smith program for the purposes of conducting an audit of sexual assault evidence .

the act , among other things , requires states and local governments receiving grants for this purpose to ( 1 ) submit a plan for performing an audit of samples , ( 2 ) provide an estimate of the number of samples , ( 3 ) complete the audit within one year of receiving the grant , and ( 4 ) submit a report to doj every 60 days for at least one year after the audit is completed that provides data on the number of samples in the state's or unit of local government's possession along with data on new sexual assault evidence the state or local government receives and how those samples are being processed .

the safer act of 2013 also requires the fbi , in consultation with federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies , to develop protocols and practices for the accurate , timely , and effective collection and processing of dna evidence , including protocols and practices specific to sexual assault cases .

the protocols and practices are required to address ( 1 ) what evidence should be collected by law enforcement and forwarded for testing and the order in which that evidence should be tested , ( 2 ) a reasonable period of time for evidence to be forwarded to a laboratory for testing , ( 3 ) a reasonable period of time in which each stage of laboratory testing should be conducted , ( 4 ) a system to encourage communication between actors in the criminal justice system ( eg , law enforcement , courts , and laboratory personnel and crime victims ) about the status of evidence testing , and ( 5 ) standards for audits of sexual assault evidence in the possession of state and local governments .

debbie smith grants were originally authorized under the justice for all act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-405 ) .

this law amended the dna backlog elimination act of 2000 , authorizing appropriations of $151 million for each of fy2004-fy2009 .

the program was reauthorized under the debbie smith reauthorization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-360 ) , which includes authorized appropriations of $151 million for fy2009-fy2014 .

the debbie smith reauthorization act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-182 ) extended the $151 million per fiscal year authorization until fy2019 .

the kirk bloodsworth dna post - conviction dna testing grant program was authorized by the justice for all act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-405 ) .

the act authorized the attorney general to make grants to states to help defray the costs of postconviction dna testing programs .

the act authorized appropriations of $5 million for fy2005-fy2009 .

the justice for all reauthorization act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-324 ) reauthorized appropriations for this program at $5 million per year for fy2017-fy2021 .

the sexual assault forensic exam program grants were authorized under the justice for all act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-405 ) .

the program provides grants for training , technical assistance , education , equipment , and information relating to the identification , collection , preservation , analysis , and use of dna samples and evidence by medical personnel and those treating victims of sexual assault .

under the program , entities eligible to receive grants include states , units of local government , and sexual assault examination programs .

the act authorized appropriations of $30 million for each of fy2005-fy2009 .

p.l .

110-360 extended the same authorized amount through fy2014 .

the debbie smith reauthorization act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-182 ) extended the $30 million per fiscal year authorization until fy2019 .

the justice for all act of 2004 authorized grants for research and development for improving forensic dna technology , including increasing the accuracy and efficiency of dna analysis , decreasing the time and expense of conducting dna analysis , and increasing its portability .

in addition , the law authorized grants for demonstration projects to evaluate the use of dna technology in conjunction with other forensic analyses .

the act authorized funding of $15 million for each of fy2005-fy2009 .

the justice for all reauthorization act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-324 ) reauthorized appropriations for this program at $5 million per year for fy2017-fy2021 .

under this program , the attorney general is required to make grants to provide training , technical assistance , education , and information regarding the identification , collection , preservation , analysis , and use of dna samples and evidence by law enforcement personnel , court officers , forensic science professionals , and corrections personnel .

the program was originally authorized under the justice for all act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-405 ) , which authorized $12.5 million for each of fy2005-fy2009 .

p.l .

110-360 extended the same authorized amount through fy2014 .

the debbie smith reauthorization act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-182 ) extended the $12.5 million per fiscal year authorization until fy2019 .

