many voices , domestic and international , have called upon the united states and other industrialized countries to increase foreign assistance to lower - and middle - income countries to address climate change .

proponents maintain that such assistance could help promote climate - friendly and high - growth economic development in these countries , while simultaneously protecting the more vulnerable nations from the effects of a changing climate .

for their part , most , if not all , lower - income countries have stated that their success at combating climate change depends critically on receipt of international financial support .

they argue that mitigating climate change pollutants , adapting to the effects of climate change , and building climate resilience into their development agendas incur costs above and beyond their normal economic growth trajectories .

these costs are particularly challenging to nations that have scant resources compared to industrialized countries , do not recognize themselves as the historical sources of climate pollution , and consider alleviating poverty as their first priority .

the green climate fund ( gcf ) is an international financial institution connected to the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) .

the gcf was proposed by parties to the unfccc during the 2009 conference of parties ( cop ) in copenhagen , denmark , and its design was agreed to during the 2011 cop in durban , south africa .

the fund aims to assist developing countries in their efforts to combat climate change through the provision of grants and other concessional financing for mitigation and adaptation projects , programs , policies , and activities .

the gcf is capitalized by contributions from donor countries and other sources , potentially including innovative mechanisms and the private sector .

the gcf currently complements many of the existing multilateral climate change funds ( eg , the global environment facility , the climate investment funds , and the adaptation fund ) ; however , as the official financial mechanism of the unfccc , some parties believe that it may eventually replace or subsume the other funds .

expectations by many countries , specifically developing countries , are that the gcf becomes very large ( i.e. , in the range of several tens of billions to over $100 billion annually ) and serves as the predominant institution for climate change assistance in the developing world .

these countries believe that the agreement to establish the gcf has been a key success in the recent international negotiations .

but others caution that ambitious steps need to be taken to ensure that the fund is operated correctly in order to achieve an adequate buy - in by donor countries of its effectiveness and by recipient countries of its legitimacy .

the gcf was made operational in the summer of 2014 .

parties called for an immediate capitalization of between $10 billion and $15 billion over the course of the first year .

initial funding came from germany , france , and a dozen other countries who pledged approximately $2.3 billion during the united nations climate summit in september 2014 .

further pledges brought the total to approximately $10 billion by the close of 2014 .

the obama administration announced a pledge of $3 billion over four years during the g - 20 meetings in australia on november 15 , 2014 .

the administration's fy2016 budget requested $500 million for the fund .

notwithstanding these financial pledges , details remain to be worked out .

while the governing board , a host city , and the basic design of the fund have been agreed to by parties , many structural aspects have yet to be clarified , some involving long - standing and contentious debate .

they include what role the gcf would play in providing sustained finance at adequate levels ; how it would fit into the existing development assistance and climate financing architecture ; whether sources beyond public funding would successfully contribute to it ; and how it would allocate and deliver assistance efficiently and effectively to developing countries .

the u.s. congress — through its role in authorizations , appropriations , and oversight — would have significant input on u.s. participation in the fund , including whether and when to participate in the fund ; whether and how much to contribute to the fund , and with what source or sources of finance ; whether fund contributions would carry specific guidance in distribution and use ; how contributions to the fund would relate to other u.s. bilateral , multilateral , and private sector climate change assistance ; and whether and when to consent to negotiated treaty obligations , if submitted .

the unfccc was the first formal international agreement to acknowledge and address human - driven climate change .

the u.s. senate provided its advice and consent to the convention's ratification in 1992 , the same year it was concluded .

for the united states , the unfccc entered into force in 1994 .

as of november 2014 , 196 governments are parties .

as a framework convention , the unfccc provides a structure for international consideration of climate change but does not contain detailed obligations for achieving particular climate - related objectives in each party's territory .

it recognizes that climate change is a "common concern to humankind," and , accordingly , requires parties to ( 1 ) gather and share information on greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions , national policies , and best practices ; ( 2 ) launch national strategies for addressing ghg emissions and adapting to expected impacts ; and ( 3 ) cooperate in preparing for the impacts of climate change .

the unfccc did not set binding targets for ghg emissions ; however , it did commit the higher - income parties ( i.e. , those listed in annex ii of the convention ) to provide unspecified amounts of financial assistance to help lower - income countries meet the broad , qualitative obligations common to all parties .

as the treaty entered into force and the unfccc conference of the parties ( cop ) met for the first time in 1995 , the parties agreed that achieving the objective of the unfccc would require new and stronger ghg commitments .

as a first step toward meeting this objective , the 1997 kyoto protocol was drafted and entered into force with a stated aim to reduce the net ghg emissions of industrialized country parties ( annex i parties ) to 5.2% below 1990 levels in the period of 2008 to 2012 .

the united states signed the kyoto protocol in december 1997 .

however , at the time , opposition in congress was strong .

the kyoto protocol was not submitted to the senate by president bill clinton or by his successor , president george w. bush .

thus , the united states is not a party to the protocol .

in 2007 , unfccc parties reconvened negotiations for further commitments beyond the kyoto protocol , and agreed to negotiate a suite of agreements that included new ghg mitigation targets for annex i parties , "nationally appropriate mitigation actions" for non - annex i parties , and other commitments for the post - 2012 period .

the mandates ( referred to as the bali action plan ) specified that the products of negotiation should be ready by the end of 2009 .

due perhaps to high expectations , as well as continued divergence among parties on some key issues , the 2009 cop in copenhagen , denmark , did not produce a legally binding treaty , but a short , non - legally binding political document called the copenhagen accord .

the copenhagen accord was a policy document drafted by leaders of about two dozen countries in the final hours of the 2009 cop , and subsequently acknowledged by 114 countries .

the accord sat in sharp contrast to the kyoto protocol , as its bottom - up and nationally appropriate model differed greatly from the top - down implementation of the protocol .

provisions in the accord included voluntary ghg mitigation efforts by all parties , adaptation and forestry actions , technology transfer mechanisms , and transparency and reporting standards , as well as financial provisions by developed country parties .

the accord also proposed the "green climate fund" ( gcf ) to serve as the operating entity of the financial mechanism of the convention .

the gcf has confronted many challenges in design , scope , governance , and implementation , the details of which are still being finalized .

the following sections provide a brief outline of some of the more significant issues .

the relationship of the gcf to other climate finance commitments by the united states can be outlined as follows: unfccc 2020 pledges .

the collective pledge by developed country parties to the goal of mobilizing jointly $100 billion per year by 2020 is not tied directly to the gcf .

the cancun negotiating text makes clear that "funds provided to developing country parties may come from a wide variety of sources , public and private , bilateral and multilateral , including alternative sources" ( 1 / cp.16§99 ) .

the gcf is one of many possible public and multilateral sources .

while any financial assistance that is channeled through the gcf would likely be considered a part of the $100 billion goal , the entirety of the $100 billion goal is not expected to be provided solely by the gcf , and no estimation of the gcf's presumed share has been suggested officially .

many parties , as well as the agf report , have suggested that development bank instruments , carbon markets , and — especially — private capital would be critical to mobilizing assistance at the level pledged .

bilateral aid .

the gcf would not necessarily interfere with current or proposed bilateral climate change assistance to developing countries .

the gcf would be another multilateral mechanism for climate change assistance that would exist alongside bilateral activities , much the way that the global environment facility and the climate investment funds currently do .

u.s. allocations between and among bilateral and multilateral assistance channels would continue through authorized congressional appropriations .

other multilateral aid .

the gcf board has been tasked with determining the complementarity of the gcf with respect to other u.n. multilateral mechanisms .

thus , the negotiations may produce some alteration in the landscape of the multilateral choices provided by the unfccc .

development bank mechanisms such as the climate investment funds are currently being reevaluated by their governing boards in light of the final implementation of the gcf .

presumably , choices would remain available to donor countries .

u.s. allocations among multilateral assistance channels would remain based on congressional guidance and would continue through authorized congressional appropriations .

members of congress hold mixed views about the value of international financial assistance to address climate change .

while some members are convinced that human - induced climate change is a high - priority risk that must be addressed through federal actions and international cooperation , others are not as convinced .

some are wary , as well , of international processes that could impose costs on the united states , redirect funds from domestic budget priorities , undermine national sovereignty , or lead to competitive advantages for other countries .

regardless of current views , the united states is a party to the unfccc and has certain obligations under the treaty .

the executive branch continues negotiations and implementation of the unfccc obligations , while committees of congress engage in oversight ( from home and at the international meetings ) , providing input to the executive branch formally and informally , and deciding program authorities and appropriations for these activities .

as congress considers potential authorization and / or appropriations for the gcf , it may raise concerns regarding the cost , purpose , direction , efficiency , and effectiveness of the unfccc and existing international financial institutions .

these concerns may be weighed against the design characteristics of the gcf in an effort to assess its potential performance .

congress may then be required to determine the allocation of funds between bilateral and multilateral climate change assistance as well as among the variety of multilateral mechanisms .

congress may also wish to gauge and give guidance to the new fund's relationship with domestic industries and private sector investment , as well as the spillover effects of u.s. participation on technological innovation , humanitarian efforts , national security , and international leadership .

potential authorizations and appropriations for the gcf would rest with several committees , including the u.s. house of representatives committees on foreign affairs ( various subcommittees ) ; financial services ( subcommittee on international monetary policy and trade ) ; and appropriations ( subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related programs ) ; and the u.s. senate committees on foreign relations ( subcommittee on international development and foreign assistance , economic affairs , and international environmental protection ) ; and appropriations ( subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related programs ) .

additional issues for congress concerning the climate negotiations in general , and the gcf in particular , may include the means to establish a more desirable form of agreement ( or lack thereof ) ; the compatibility of any international agreement with u.s. domestic policies and laws ; the adequacy of appropriations and fiscal incentives to achieve any commitments under the agreement ; and any requirements for potential ratification and implementing legislation , should a formal treaty emerge from the negotiations .

