the broadest mission of public child welfare agencies is to strengthen all families in ways that ensure children can depend on their parents to keep them safe , give them a stable and permanent home , and , overall , enhance their well - being .

under title iv - b of the social security act , the federal government provides funds to states , tribes , and territories for the provision of services to children and their families , whether those children are living in their own homes ( biological , adoptive , or extended ) ; have been removed from their homes and placed in temporary foster care settings ; or have left foster care for any reason .

title iv - b funds are provided primarily through two formula grant programs .

states may use funding provided under the stephanie tubbs jones child welfare services ( cws ) program ( title iv - b , subpart 1 of the social security act ) to support a broad range of services designed to protect children and strengthen their families .

they are required to use funding received under the promoting safe and stable families ( pssf ) program , ( title iv - b , subpart 2 of the social security act ) for four categories of services: family support , family preservation , time - limited family reunification , and adoption promotion and support .

 ( hereinafter , any mention of a section , part , or title of the law is made with reference to the social security act. ) .

figure 1 shows the purposes for which states planned to spend federal title iv - b funding in fy2013 .

figure 1 .

states planned use of federal title iv - b funding for fy2013 , by purposebased on estimated fy2013 title iv - b services funding of $589 million in 50 states , dc , and puerto rico source: figure prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on data included in u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , administration for children and families ( acf ) , administration on children , youth and families ( acyf ) , children's bureau , report to congress on state child welfare expenditures 2013.note: funding level differs from the actual federal funding provided for cws and pssf in fy2013 both because the plans were required to be submitted before final funding levels were determined and because , as described in the report , most but not all of the funding appropriated for these programs is distributed to state child welfare agencies .

in fy2014 , these two programs received combined federal funding of $649 million , of which $269 million was for cws and $380 million was for the pssf program .

as shown in figure 2 , nominal dollar funding for cws has been relatively flat for roughly two decades .

across that same time period , the nominal dollar funding for the pssf program grew from its initial year of authorization in fy1994 through the middle 2000s , but has generally been in decline since fy2007 .

the dotted trend line shown in figure 2 represents funding for the two programs combined as shown in inflation - adjusted ( constant ) dollars .

this trend line shows that purchasing power of federal cws and pssf dollars , combined , peaked in fy2003 and has since declined .

consequently , viewed in constant fy2013 dollars , current funding is roughly equivalent to funding provided for these programs in fy1995 .

 ( for a table showing data used to make this chart , see appendix a . ) .

figure 2 .

funding for the stephanie tubbs jones child welfare services ( cws ) and promoting safe and stable families ( pssf ) programs , fy1990-fy2014nominal dollars are shown in columns .

trend line shows inflation - adjusted ( constant fy2013 ) dollars.source: figure prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) .

for data used to create this chart , see appendix a.notes: funding levels reflect final appropriations and after any rescission or sequestration .

funding for cws was first authorized for fy1936 .

funding for the pssf program was first authorized for fy1994 .

the primary focus of this report is on the cws and pssf programs , under which the large majority of title iv - b funds are appropriated .

both the cws and pssf provide formula grants to states , territories , and tribes for provision of child welfare - related services to children and their families .

those grant programs are discussed in this report .

in addition , funds appropriated for the pssf program support ( 1 ) grants to state or tribal highest courts under the court improvement program ; ( 2 ) grants to regional partnerships to improve the outcomes of children affected by their parents' substance abuse ; ( 3 ) grants to states and territories for monthly caseworker visits of children in foster care ; and ( 4 ) program - related research , evaluation , training , or technical assistance .

each of those pssf - funded activities is also discussed in this report .

title iv - b includes several additional programs or activities for which separate funds are , or have been , authorized .

these include family connection grants , child welfare training , research and demonstration projects , the national random sample study of child welfare , and the mentoring children of prisoners program .

all of these programs or activities are listed in table 1 ; however , not all received funding in fy2014 and none are discussed further in this report .

currently funded title iv - b programs are administered by the children's bureau within the administration on children youth and families ( acyf ) , administration for children and families ( acf ) , at the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

funding authorization for the cws and pssf programs was most recently extended ( through the last day of fy2016 ) by the child and family services improvement and innovation act ( 2011 , p.l .

112-34 ) .

funding expiration dates for all title iv - b programs and activities are shown in table 1 .

this report begins by outlining the federal - state framework with regard to child welfare , and then discusses the activities public child welfare agencies are expected to perform , as well as the children and families who may be served via the cws and pssf programs .

this is followed by separate descriptions of those formula grant programs and additional activities supported with pssf funds .

under the u.s. constitution , states are believed to have the primary obligation to ensure the welfare — sometimes referred to as the health and well - being of children and their families .

at the same time , the federal government has demonstrated longstanding interest in working with states to strengthen their child welfare services and supports .

further , through the provision of funding to states , the federal government is able to require certain standards for those services and supports .

federal child welfare funding is largely distributed to state - level child welfare agencies and most federal child welfare program requirements apply to those same agencies .

at the state level , the child welfare "system" consists of workers at state and county child welfare agencies who together with private - agency child welfare workers , state and local judges , attorneys , prosecutors , law enforcement personnel , and workers at a wide variety of public and private social services agencies carry out child welfare duties .

title iv - b , subpart 1 of the social security act ( sections 420-425 , 428 ) the cws program provides funds to states , territories , and tribes and is intended to "promote state flexibility" to develop and expand a program of services to children and families that uses community - based agencies and works to protect and promote the welfare of all children ; prevent abuse , neglect or exploitation of children ; permit children to remain in their own homes , or to return to those homes whenever it is safe and appropriate ; promote safety , permanency , and well - being for children in foster care or those in adoptive families ; and provide training , professional development , and support to ensure a well - qualified child welfare workforce .

the cws program was first authorized in 1935 as part of the original social security act and has been amended many times since then , including most recently by the child and family services improvement and innovation act ( 2011 , p.l .

112-34 ) .

funding for this program is authorized on a discretionary basis and that authorization is set to expire with the last day of fy2016 .

congress provided $269 million for the cws program for fy2014 .

title iv - b , subpart 2 , sections 430-438 the promoting safe and stable families ( pssf ) program provides funds to states , territories , and tribes to enable them to develop , establish , expand , or operate a coordinated set of community - based family support services , family preservation services , time - limited family reunification services , and adoption promotion and support services .

the objectives of these coordinated service programs are to prevent maltreatment among at - risk families through provision of support services ; assure children's safety within the home and preserve intact families in which children have been maltreated ; address problems of families whose children have been placed in foster care — in a timely manner — so reunification can occur ; and support adoptive families by providing support services necessary for them to make a lifetime commitment to children .

this program was enacted in 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) to provide support to states for the provision of "family preservation and support services. .

congress renamed these grants to states as the promoting safe and stable families program in 1997 ( p.l .

105-89 ) and , at the same time , required states to use these funds to additionally support "time - limited family reunification" and "adoption promotion and support" services .

the program's funding authorization was again extended , and other program changes were made by the promoting safe and stable families amendments of 2001 ( p.l .

107-133 ) , by the child and family services improvement act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-288 ) , section 133 of the continuing appropriations act , fy2011 ( enacted 2010 , p.l .

111-242 ) and , most recently , by the child and family services improvement and innovation act ( enacted 2011 , p.l .

112-34 ) .

for fy2014 , states , territories and tribes received $305 million in federal funds to support four categories of services: family support services are meant to strengthen families and enable children to safely remain in their own homes ; family preservation services target the same kinds of services on families where a child is at high risk of being removed from the home , or where the child has been removed and the goal is to reunite the child and his / her parents .

time - limited reunification services are also available to enable a parent and child to be reunited , but only during the first 15-17 months during which the child is placed in foster care .

adoption promotion and support services are intended to encourage more adoptions from foster care when this is in the best interest of children and to support pre - and post - adoptive services to families .

 ( for a description of the activities that may be funded under each of the service categories , see table 2 . ) .

states are required to spend a "significant portion" of program funding on each of those four categories of child and family services and , their combined spending on all four categories must be no less than 90% of the federal pssf child and family services funding they receive .

hhs has interpreted "significant portion" to mean that states must generally spend no less than about 20% on each service category .

combined , states planned to spend roughly half of all federal fy2013 pssf services funding on family support ( 26% ) and family preservation ( 25% ) services .

as described in table 2 , services that may be funded in these categories are wide ranging .

further , they may be offered to the broadest group of children and families .

spending for adoption promotion and support and time - limited family reunification services , which are designed to serve more narrow populations and / or for more narrow purposes , was expected to make up 21% and 20% , respectively , of the federal funding .

states planned to spend the remaining funds for program administration ( 6% ) and "other" service - related costs ( 3% ) ( see figure 8 ) .

this plan for spending federal fy2013 pssf dollars tracked closely with states' actual spending of those dollars for fy2010 .

viewed by individual state , the share of spending by purpose was more varied and there were some states that reported they planned to spend ( fy2013 ) or actually spent ( fy2010 ) less than 20% in a given category .

according to hhs , the rationale provided by most states for this lesser spending was that money from another source was available , and being used , for the given purpose .

the pssf program is available for states to spend on a somewhat more limited set of child welfare purposes than is true of the cws program ( compare figure 4 to figure 8 ) .

further , as discussed below , pssf plan requirements are considerably less focused on children in foster care than those included in the cws plan .

at the same time , three of the four categories of services for which states must spend the majority of their federal pssf funds target services , in whole or in part , on children in , or formerly in , foster care and the families of those children .

 ( only the service category described as "family support" does not explicitly target at least some of its services for children in , or formerly in , foster care and their families. ) .

support for child and family services provided , or funded , by states , tribes , and territories is the primary purpose for which pssf funds are appropriated and spent .

however , federal law also requires that certain pssf funds be reserved and used for additional programs or activities .

these include grants to state and tribal highest courts under the court improvement program ; grants for two targeted purposes ( to improve outcomes for children affected by their parents' substance abuse and to support monthly caseworker visits of children in foster care ) ; and research , evaluation , and technical assistance related to programs and purposes supported by the pssf program .

each of these programs or activities is described below .

under the court improvement program ( cip , section 438 of the social security act ) the highest court in any state operating a title iv - e program is entitled to an allotment of formula grant funding to make improvements in their handling of child welfare - related proceedings .

as provided by the child and family services improvement and innovation act ( 2011 , p.l .

112-34 ) , $1 million of the annual cip funding must be reserved for competitive grants for tribal courts .

under current law , all of cip funding is provided by a set - aside of pssf program funds , and for fy2014 , $30 million in pssf funds were reserved for the program ( $29 million for state highest courts and $1 million for tribal courts ) cip grants are provided for three kinds of court improvement purposes .

states highest courts seeking to spend money on each of the purposes must indicate this in their single application for cip funds and funds provided must be spent on the specific cip purpose for which they are granted .

tribal grantees receive a single sum of cip funds that may be spent on any of these purposes: basic: grants to assess and improve handling of child abuse and neglect proceedings ; training: grants to train judges and legal personnel and attorneys in handling of child welfare cases ; and data: grants to improve the timeliness of court decisions regarding the safety , permanence , and well - being of children ( through collection and analysis of relevant data ) .

as stipulated by the 2011 amendments to cip ( p.l .

112-34 ) , both basic and training grants may support activities that increase and improve engagement of families in court proceedings related to child welfare generally , including proceedings concerning family preservation , reunification , or adoption .

the statute requires that each year $40 million in mandatory pssf program funds must be reserved for two "targeted purposes": ( 1 ) competitive grants to regional partnerships to improve the outcomes of children affected by parental substance abuse ; and ( 2 ) formula grants to state child welfare agencies to improve the quality and frequency of caseworker visits with children in foster care .

targeting of pssf funds for these purposes was first included in the child and family services improvement act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-288 ) .

at that time congress responded to new evidence about the significance of regular caseworker visits in achieving good outcomes for children in foster care , and , separately , to longstanding concerns about the frequency with which parental substance abuse brings children to the attention of the child welfare agency and the difficulties those agencies face in ensuring positive outcomes for the affected children .

with the 2011 child and family services improvement and innovation act ( p.l .

112-34 ) , congress extended the provisions targeting pssf funds for these purposes through fy2016 .

hhs is required to annually reserve some pssf funds to support evaluation of family support , family preservation , time - limited family reunification , and adoption promotion and support services funded through the pssf program or any other program designed to achieve the same purposes as the pssf program .

further , hhs is specifically instructed to support evaluation , research , and technical assistance related to the targeted purposes under the pssf program ( i.e. , improved monthly caseworker visits with children in foster care and improved outcomes for children affected by parental / caretaker substance abuse ) .

finally , to the extent funds are available for this purpose , hhs is specifically required to provide technical assistance to help states and indian tribes or tribal consortia to ( 1 ) better identify families where children are at risk of child abuse and neglect ; ( 2 ) develop treatment models to improve services to those families , especially those where substance abuse is an issue ; ( 3 ) implement well - designed treatment models that clearly state how the services will result in desired changes for families served ; ( 4 ) establish mechanisms to ensure services delivered match the identified treatment models ; and ( 5 ) establish mechanisms to ensure that post - adoption services meet the needs of individual families and develop models to reduce the rate of disrupted adoptions .

the total annual set - aside authorized for this purpose is $6 million in mandatory pssf funds plus 3.3% of any discretionary funds appropriated for the program .

in recent years , the research set - aside has totaled between $7 million and $8 million annually .

pssf research and evaluation funding is awarded competitively ( via contracts , grants , and cooperative agreements ) .

fy2009-fy2013 funding was used to fully or partially fund several national child welfare resource centers that provided technical assistance and training to state and tribal public child welfare agencies .

specifically , these included the national child welfare resource centers concerned with organizational improvement , youth development , permanency and family connections , and legal and judicial issues .

during those same five years these pssf funds were also used to provide partial support to the child welfare information gateway , which acts as a single web - based information clearinghouse on a full continuum of child welfare topics , and to co - sponsor ( with the hhs substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) ) the national center on substance abuse and child welfare .

additionally , in late fy2011 hhs awarded four grants related to improving services delivery to youth in the child welfare system .

the grants are expected to be funded for five years and were made to public and private agencies in four states .

hhs , through the children's bureau , has recently announced a major re - organization of its training and technical assistance network , which has included multiple national resource centers , regional implementation centers , and an information clearinghouse known as the child welfare information gateway .

beginning with fy2015 , the work of nine national resource centers ( including three of the five that had been funded with pssf dollars ) , five regional implementation centers and the training and technical assistance coordination center is transferred to a single national capacity building center for public child welfare agencies .

however , the child welfare information gateway and a number of national resource centers , including all those that are statutorily mandated , will continue to be supported through separate competitively awarded contracts or agreements .

accordingly , beginning september 30 , 2014 , pssf funding is being used to support the national capacity building center for public child welfare agencies .

it continues to provide funding for the separately operating national child welfare resource center on legal and judicial issues .

additionally , partial support for the child welfare information gateway , co - sponsorship of the national center of substance abuse and child welfare , and previously awarded grants related to improving services delivery for youth in the child welfare system will continue to be supported with this pssf funding .

hhs is required to report to congress every two years on the effectiveness of the pssf programs .

the report is to discuss any technical assistance provided and , with regard to program evaluations , include funding level , status of any ongoing evaluations , and findings to date .

the most recent report was submitted to congress in april 2012 ( and covered activities funded in fy2007 and fy2008 ) .

appendix a .

title iv - b funding appendix b .

services or activities that may be supported under title iv - b appendix c. title iv - b funding by state appendix d. promoting safe and stable families program funding history and reservations appendix e. court improvement program ( cip ) : funding history and funding by grant type and state appendix f. regional partnership grants children and adults served most of the children served lived at home with their parent or other caretaker ( 71% ) and did not enter foster care during the time they were served by the regional partnerships .

a sizeable share of children served ( 39% ) had a past history of child maltreatment that was not associated with their current enrollment in the regional partnership grant program .

the average age of children served was 5.7 years , although close to half ( 47% ) were three years of age or younger .

among children served , close to 44% were white , a little more than 21% were hispanic , more than 16% were black , 13% were alaska native or american indian , close to 5% were of two or more races , and a more than 1% were asian , native hawaiian , or other pacific islander .

the majority of adults served were women ( 73% ) , the biological parent of a child served in the program ( 71% mothers ; 20% fathers ) , the child's primary caregiver ( 81% ) , and never married ( 55% ) or currently separated / divorced ( 19% ) .

many ( 40% ) had less than 12 years of education , although the majority ( 56% ) had 12 to 15 years of schooling .

close to half ( 47% ) were unemployed , 29% were not in the labor force , and the remaining share ( 24% ) had full or part - time employment .

a sizeable minority ( 37% ) noted public assistance as their primary source of income or support and roughly equal shares cited no primary source of income ( 27% ) or wages / salaries ( 27% ) .

the race / ethnicity of the adults served was 62% white , 15% hispanic , 12% black , 9% alaska native / american indian , a little more than 1% asian , native hawaiian / other pacific islander , and a little less than 1% two or more races .

most served adults ( 71% ) received substance abuse services , although not all the served adults needed such services ( eg , adult family members of a primary caregiver needing treatment ) .

for served adults who needed substance abuse services , the primary substance problem at admission to treatment for adults was methamphetamine ( 32% ) , marijuana ( 21% ) , alcohol ( 19% ) , heroin / opiates ( 16 % ) , cocaine / crack ( 10% ) , and "other" ( 3% ) .

findings related to performance indicators as of program year four safety of children most children were in their own homes when they entered program services , and of those children the large majority ( 93% ) continued to live at home .

across the full four years of the project , 4.3% of children served experienced a recurrence of maltreatment within 6 months of entering the program and 9.4% experienced maltreatment within 24 months of entry .

efforts to keep children served by the regional partnership program safe appear to have improved as the program advanced .

among those children , recurrence of maltreatment ( within six months ) became less common over the four years ( declining from 6.5% of children served in year one of the grant program to 3.4% in year four ) .

permanency for children as noted earlier , most children served in the program were not in , or did not enter , foster care .

however , a sizeable minority ( close to 30% ) were served in foster care during the first four years of the grant program .

among those children , the median length of stay in foster care was nine months , and that median decreased over the course of the regional partnership grant .

the most common reason for leaving foster care was to be reunited with parents , and 70% of those leaving to be reunited did so in 12 months or less .

among the children served who were in foster care , 12% exited to a new permanent home through adoption or legal guardianship .

most of these children did so within 24 months of entering foster care ( 53% of those leaving to adoption and 85% of those leaving to legal guardianship ) .

by comparison , just 32% of foster children in the regional partnership grant states who left care for adoption did so in 24 months or less .

among the children who were discharged from foster care 7.5% re - entered care within 24 months across the four years .

the re - entry rate showed a steady decline across the four - year project period studied , changing from 9.8% in year one to 3.5% in year four .

promote and sustain recovery for adults generally , adults served were able to access substance abuse treatment services quickly , on average within 11 days of entering a regional partnership grant program .

further , once in treatment , they remained for four months on average .

the percentage completing treatment ( 36.6% ) , however , was roughly the same as the percentage dropping out of treatment before completion ( 35.1% ) .

nonetheless , the large majority of adults served in the regional partnership program ( between 72% and 82% depending on the substance ) reported reduced substance use from treatment admission to discharge .

along with reduced substance use , two - thirds of the adults ( 66% ) served by regional partnership grants showed reduced criminal behavior and the percentage who were employed rose from 30.2% to 42.5%.the large majority of served adults received key supportive services including transportation ( 88% ) ; continuing care ( 88% ) ; parenting training and education ( 86% ) ; mental health services ( 83% ) ; primary medical care services ( 79% ) ; services to address domestic violence ( 70% ) ; and housing assistance , dental care , and employment or vocational training ( 68% for each ) .

well - being the measurement of well - being is less standardized than other measures discussed .

many grantees used some core checklists or standardized measures but , in general , there was wide variety in measurement .

highlights of grantee findings include the following: children regional partnership grantees found that children entering the program had significant physical , social , cognitive , and behavioral challenges .

the majority of children received supportive services in the program , including primary pediatric care , substance abuse prevention and education , mental health or counseling services , educational services , developmental services , and substance abuse treatment .

at their entry to the program , 27.0% of children served were given a "strength" rating for overall well - being ; this increased to 57% by the time the child left the program .

adults at entry to the program , 75% of adults served showed clinical levels of stress related to life situations or circumstances and 19.5% showed this stress level related to their role of being a parent .

additionally , 39% exhibited mild to severe depression symptoms .

between entry and discharge , regional partnership grantees reported significant decreases in parental stress , as well as reduced levels of unemployment , alcohol and drug use , legal issues , family conflict , and psychiatric symptoms ; and they showed improved parental abilities .

families nurturing and attachment between child and parent were seen as the greatest strength of families served , and concrete supports needed to cope with stress was the area most in need of improvement .

between entry and discharge , families showed improvements in overall family interactions , environment , and family safety .

improve system collaboration the large majority ( 91% ) of families served received coordinated case management , including — for most families with open cases for both child welfare and substance abuse treatment services — joint case management and regular cross - agency assessment .

on a standardized checklist to measure collaborative strength , grantees showed continued strong improvement in each of 10 measures .

with regard to service capacity , most grantees fully or nearly met or exceeded their target goals for serving children and families .

most grantees did not focus on providing substance abuse education and training for foster parents or other substitute caregivers .

however , nine grantees reported providing trainings in which foster parents and other caregivers participated .

topics covered included family recovery , substance abuse and addiction , special needs of children , and others .

appendix g. monthly caseworker visits: performance by state a state's monthly caseworker visit percentage is calculated by comparing the total number of monthly caseworker visits the state completed during the year to the total number of caseworker visits that would have occurred in the year ( if every child in foster care was visited no less often than once a month ) .

if one child in foster care is visited more than once in a month , only one of those visits is counted for purposes of the calculation .

children in foster care who are placed in another state must be included in this calculation but children in care at age 18 or older are not .

beginning with fy2012 each state must achieve a monthly caseworker visit percentage of 90% ( 95% as of fy2015 ) .

additionally , each state must ensure that not less than 50% of the visits are conducted where the child lives .

states that fail to meet one or both of these national target percentages must provide additional non - federal funding to receive their full allotment of federal funds under the cws program .

specifically , a state that misses the target ( s ) by fewer than 10% must provide no less than 26% of the overall cws funding ( instead of the regular 25% ) to receive its full federal cws allotment ; a state that misses the target ( s ) by between 10% and 20% must provide no less than 28% of the program funding ; and a state that fails to meet the target ( s ) by 20% or more must provide not less than 30% of the cws program funding .

