ongoing concern surrounding energy security and the environment have led to sustained congressional interest in energy tax policy .

the 111 th congress enacted a number of renewable energy tax incentives as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

a number of expiring renewable energy tax provisions were extended through the end of 2011 in the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) .

as various incentives for renewable energy , renewable fuels , and energy efficiency are scheduled to expire at the end of 2011 , the 112 th congress may want to explore various policy options for encouraging investment in renewable energy .

the obama administration has also repeatedly emphasized the importance of investments in clean energy technologies and infrastructure .

president obama has noted that clean energy investments can enhance domestic energy security , promote environmental objectives , and create jobs .

one barrier to investments in renewable energy projects is that such projects are highly capital intensive .

capital intensive renewable energy projects continue to face a number of challenges with respect to financing .

policymakers have been exploring various options for increasing the availability and decreasing the cost of financing for the renewable energy sector .

one option for attracting additional capital to the renewable energy sector that congress may consider is allowing renewable energy activities access to the master limited partnership ( mlp ) business structure .

this report explores the policy option of extending the master limited partnership ( mlp ) business structure option to renewable energy facilities and related activities .

before evaluating the policy , this report provides a brief overview of the mlp structure , highlighting notable tax issues .

this report also provides background on the legislative origins of the mlp structure , and legislative changes affecting mlps that have been made in recent years .

the final sections of this report highlight how the mlp structure might be able to attract additional capital to the renewable energy sector , while also discussing some potential policy concerns .

master limited partnerships first appeared in the early 1980s .

the tax reform act of 1986 ( tra86 ) reduced the top marginal individual income tax rate to a level lower than the top marginal corporate tax rate .

as a result , the partnership business structure became more favorable for tax purposes than the corporate structure .

other changes enacted as part of the tra86 , however , limited the attractiveness of mlps for investors .

specifically , the tra86 introduced passive loss rules , which prevented investors from using deductions associated with businesses in which they are not actively involved , such as mlps , to offset other types of income .

in 1987 , congress enacted irc ยง 7704 , which modified the rules publicly traded partnerships ( ptps ) and mlps had been using to avoid being subject to corporate taxation .

 , under the new rules , partnerships whose ownership interests were publically traded were to be treated as corporations for tax purposes .

an exception was made , however , that allowed partnerships meeting two criteria to continue being taxed as partnerships .

the two criteria were ( 1 ) the partnership was in existence on december 17 , 1987 , and ( 2 ) at least 90% of its gross income came from passive sources , such as rents , royalties , and natural resource income , among others .

if the income criteria was not met , the partnership could be grandfathered for a 10-year period , after which it would be taxed as a corporation or , in the extreme , cease operations .

the 1987 rules related to ptps and mlps were enacted to address concerns surrounding erosion of the corporate tax base .

in the house report accompanying h.r .

3545 , the 100 th congress noted "to the extent activities that would otherwise be conducted in the corporate form , and earnings that would be subject to two levels of tax ( at the corporate and shareholder levels ) , the growth of publically traded partnerships engaged in such activities tends to jeopardize the corporate tax base. .

further , congress also observed that ptps had been used to avoid corporate taxes , noting that the intent of pre - 1987 tax law was "being circumvented by the growth in publically traded partnerships that are taking advantage of an unintended opportunity for disincorporation and elective integration of the corporate and shareholder levels of tax. .

when irc ยง 7704 was enacted , effectively subjecting most ptps and mlps to corporate taxation , existing ptps and mlps were allowed to continue operating as a partnership for 10 years .

in 1997 , legislation was passed that allowed ptps and mlps that had been grandfathered and allowed to continue operating as partnerships an additional choice .

instead of being forced to choose an alternative organizational form , grandfathered ptps and mlps were given the option of paying a 3.5% tax on gross income , as an alternative to corporate income taxes .

legislative changes enacted as part of the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-357 ) potentially expanded the pool of capital able to invest in mlps .

provisions in this legislation effectively changed rules related to ubit , which had previously made it unattractive for mutual funds to invest in mlps .

specifically , the 2004 jobs act allowed partnership distributions to be considered qualifying income for mutual funds , thus allowing funds to invest in mlps without having to worry about ubit .

this change effectively increased the potential pool of mlp investors .

most recently , the definition of qualifying mlp income was expanded to include the transportation and storage of certain renewable and alternative fuels , including ethanol and biodiesel , and other activities involving industrial source carbon dioxide .

this change was made as part of the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) , at an estimated cost of $119 million over 10 years .

the purpose of this change was to allow biofuels pipelines to receive the same tax treatment as petroleum pipelines .

previously , the statutory definition of qualifying income had not been expanded since ยง 7704 was added to the internal revenue code in 1987 .

as noted above , policies enacted in the 111 th congress were designed to support investment and growth in the renewable energy sector .

these policies were consistent with the objectives of the obama administration , which has emphasized the importance of investments in clean energy technology , including resources and infrastructure .

enhanced use of clean energy resources may be consistent with broader energy policy goals , environmental sustainability , and perhaps domestic energy security .

enhanced investment in and deployment of renewable energy technologies may also have the potential for domestic job creation .

during the 111 th congress , action was taken to address certain challenges in financing renewable energy projects .

in the wake of the recent financial crisis , the renewable energy sector was faced with new challenges in financing investment .

prior to 2008 , renewable energy investors often relied on tax - equity markets to monetize renewable energy tax benefits ( such as the renewable energy production tax credit ( ptc ) ) .

the ability to monetize federal renewable energy tax incentives was important for renewable energy investors to finance these capital intensive projects .

tax - equity financing became increasingly scarce during 2008 and 2009 , leading congress to enact the section 1603 grants in lieu of tax credits program .

under this program , qualified taxpayers could elect to receive a one - time grant from the treasury in lieu of the renewable energy ptc or investment tax credit ( itc ) .

the grant option effectively eliminated the need for tax - equity partnerships for many eligible taxpayers .

it has been argued that the section 1603 grant program prevented what could have been a substantial decline in renewable energy investments , and may have resulted in additional investments in renewable energy generation capacity .

allowing taxpayers to receive a direct grant from the treasury , and avoid the tax - equity market , has been credited with broadening the pool of renewable energy investors .

the success of the section 1603 program has led some to note the potential value of policies that will attract additional capital to the renewable energy sector .

one policy option that proponents note might attract capital to the renewable energy sector would be to allow renewable energy developers to structure as a master limited partnership ( mlp ) .

 , should congress decide to expand the definition of qualifying income to include renewable energy , or make other changes to current tax laws that would allow renewable energy entities to structure as mlps , congress may decide to stipulate which clean or renewable energy activities would qualify .

in the case of the section 1603 grant program , qualifying renewable energy technologies were those that were already eligible for the renewable energy ptc or itc .

the mlp structure could be extended to renewable energy technologies already eligible for other renewable energy tax incentives , or expanded to include other technologies that might support expanded use of renewable energy , such as advanced energy storage and transmission technologies .

additional access to capital has the potential to stimulate investment and growth in the renewable energy sector .

mlps could have the potential to attract additional capital to the renewable energy sector .

mlps could also allow investors to benefit from other renewable energy tax incentives , and thereby avoid tax - equity markets for monetization of renewable energy tax benefits , if changes to existing passive loss restrictions were enacted .

extending the definition of qualifying income to allow renewable energy facilities to structure as mlps might raise policy concerns .

specifically , expanding the definition of mlps to include other types of activity could be viewed as a narrowing of the corporate tax base .

further , if changes in current law regarding qualifying income under the mlp structure are coupled with changes in passive activity loss rules , there are concerns that such changes could lead to tax shelter opportunities .

the mlp universe has grown and changed in recent decades .

in the energy sector alone , the number of energy mlps increased from 6 in 1994 to 72 in 2010 .

over that same time period , total market capitalization of energy mlps grew from $2 billion to roughly $220 billion .

additionally , since the 1990s , the universe of mlps has changed to include a larger proportion of energy mlps , specifically those involved in midstream operations .

figure a - 1 illustrates the proportion of mlps in different industry groups in 1990 and 2010 .

over the 20-year period , the share of mlps in the energy industry has increased .

further , energy mlps have become more likely to be involved in midstream or transportation activities over time , as opposed to extraction and production .

in 1990 , 10% of mlps were oil and gas midstream operations .

by 2010 , this share had increased to 44% .

over the same period , the proportion of mlps involved in oil and gas exploration and production decreased from 21% to 10% .

nearly 90% of market capital in mlps is attributable to energy and natural resources , with more than 70% of total market capitalization attributable to midstream oil and gas operations ( see figure a - 2 ) .

