in many advanced economies , the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 and ensuing recession resulted in large fiscal stimulus packages , the nationalization of private - sector debt , lower tax revenue , and higher government spending .

these factors led to large budget deficits and increased borrowing by governments from capital markets in order to fund these deficits .

figure 1 shows the rapid increase in public debt as a percentage of gdp in the major g - 7 economies ( canada , france , germany , italy , japan , the united kingdom , and the united states ) following the financial crisis .

for the g - 7 economies , sovereign debt rose from 84% of gdp in 2006 to a forecasted 121% of gdp in 2013 .

concerns about high levels of public debt have been most focused on the eurozone , where a debt crisis has been ongoing since late 2009 .

four eurozone countries — greece , ireland , portugal , and cyprus — have had to borrow money from other european countries and the international monetary fund ( imf ) in order to meet obligations and avoid defaulting on their debt .

there are also concerns about the sustainability of their public finances in spain and italy , much larger economies in the eurozone .

however , concerns over rising debt levels are not limited to eurozone countries .

debates about the public debt are central features of political discourse in the united states , japan , and the united kingdom , among others .

high levels of sovereign debt in advanced economies are of interest to congress for a number of reasons .

first , the imf has identified advanced economy debt as a possible threat to the global economic recovery , as countries struggle to find a balance between growth and debt management in an uncertain global economic recovery .

second , congress has and continues to debate a number of fiscal issues , particularly in the context of federal budget and the debt ceiling .

in many of these fiscal debates , parallels are drawn between the united states and other advanced economies , such as greece , ireland , and the united kingdom .

analyzing debt levels and factors that shape debt sustainability can help inform these comparisons .

third , how other countries reduce their debt impacts the u.s. economy .

most advanced economies are implementing fiscal austerity programs to lower their debt levels .

simultaneous austerity programs in the advanced countries , the united states' major trading partners , could depress demand for u.s. exports abroad , as well as deter investment in and from advanced economies .

this report proceeds as follows: the first section provides background information on sovereign debt , including why governments borrow , how sovereign debt differs from private debt , why governments repay their debt ( or not ) , and how sovereign debt is measured .

the second section examines the shift of concerns over sovereign debt sustainability from emerging markets in the 1990s and 2000s to advanced economies following the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 , and the challenges posed by high debt levels .

the third section analyzes the different policy options governments have for lowering debt levels .

it also discusses the current strategy being used by most advanced economies — fiscal austerity — and concerns that have been raised about its global impact .

finally , the fourth section analyzes issues of particular interest to congress , including comparisons between u.s. and european debt levels , how efforts to reduce debt levels could impact the u.s. economy , and policy options available to congress for engaging on this issue .

given the problems that persistent high levels of public debt can create , there has been focus on how governments can lower debt levels .

governments have five major policy tools at their disposal for addressing high debt levels: fiscal consolidation , debt restructuring , inflation , growth , and financial repression .

the pros and cons of each strategy are analyzed below , as well as the current strategies being pursued by the governments of advanced economies to address their debt levels .

some analysts , as well as some members of congress , have expressed concern that the united states is headed towards a debt crisis similar to those experienced by some eurozone countries .

they are concerned about loss of investor confidence and the loss of the united states' ability to borrow at reasonable interest rates .

like these eurozone countries , it is argued , the united states has been reliant on foreign investors to fund a large budget deficit , resulting in rising debt levels and increasing vulnerability to a sudden reversal in investor confidence .

other economists argue that the u.s. debt position is much stronger than that of the eurozone economies in crisis .

unlike individual eurozone countries , the united states has a floating exchange rate and its currency is an international reserve currency , which can alleviate many of the pressures associated with rising debt levels .

additionally , they argue that the stronger levels of economic growth and the lower borrowing costs of the united states put u.s. debt levels on a more sustainable path over time .

the united states also has a strong historical record of debt repayment that helps bolster its reputation in capital markets .

greece , by contrast , has been in a state of default about 50% of the time since independence in the 1830s .

bond market data indicate that investors do not view the united states in a similar light to greece , ireland , or portugal .

figure 5 compares the spreads on greek , irish , portuguese , u.s. , and uk 10-year bonds ( over 10-year german bonds ) since 2008 .

higher bond spreads indicate higher levels of risk .

u.s. bond spreads have remained substantially lower than greek , irish , and portuguese bond spreads throughout the eurozone crisis .

u.s. bond spreads have been much closer in value to uk bond spreads , even during the financial crisis that originated in the u.s. housing market .

additionally , one market research firm ( s&p capital iq ) estimates the likelihood of default over the next five years for a number of governments , and publishes the top 10 most and least risky sovereigns on a quarterly basis .

for the third quarter of 2013 , it estimated the likelihood of the united states defaulting on its debt over the next five years to be 3.07% , and ranks the united states as the ninth least - likely country to default .

markets may perceive the united states favorably not because they believe the deficits are currently at sustainable levels but because they believe that the government will implement policies that reduce the deficit .

however , it is important to note that market perceptions can change quickly , and it can be difficult to predict when markets can lose confidence .

how other advanced economies address their debt levels has implications for the u.s. economy .

most advanced economies are addressing high debt levels through fiscal austerity .

if large austerity packages in advanced economies slow growth in those countries , demand for u.s. exports could fall .

because advanced economies are major trading partners of the united states , this could impact u.s. exports .

slower growth rates in advanced economies could make investment there less attractive , and could lead to u.s. investors shifting their investment portfolios away from advanced economies and toward emerging markets .

investors in those countries also could shift their portfolios away from u.s. debt .

if any advanced economies do default , restructure their public debt , or use inflation to reduce the real value of their debt , u.s. investors could face losses on their investments .

figure 6 shows where u.s. banks have credit committed directly to borrowers overseas in general , not just to sovereign borrowers — also referred to as how heavily u.s. banks are "exposed" overseas .

direct u.s. bank exposure in general is more heavily concentrated among advanced economies than emerging and developing countries .

as of june 2013 , 71% ( $2,299 billion of $3,222 billion ) of u.s. bank exposure overseas was concentrated in advanced economies .

among advanced economies , u.s. banks were most exposed to the united kingdom ( $529 billion ) , japan ( $373 billion ) , france ( $233 billion ) , german ( $204 billion ) , and canada ( $127 billion ) in june 2013 .

direct exposure of u.s. banks to the eurozone countries that have come under the most intense market pressure to date — greece , ireland , portugal , and cyprus — is relatively small .

according to the bank for international settlements ( bis ) , u.s. bank exposure to these three countries , including the sovereign and private sector , totaled $64 billion in june 2013 , or 2.0% of direct u.s. bank exposure overseas .

some of these losses could already have been absorbed in bank balance sheets if they are marking investments to market .

direct u.s. bank exposure to italy and spain ( sovereign and private sector ) totaled an additional $103 billion .

in addition to data on direct u.s. bank exposures , the bis has recently started publishing data on banks' "other potential exposures" overseas , which include derivative contracts , guarantees extended , and credit commitments .

u.s. "other potential exposures" to greece , ireland , italy , portugal , and spain ( sovereign and private sector ) totaled $677 billion in june 2013 .

however , the bis data does not capture any collateral or hedges that u.s. banks may have in place to lower their exposure to a particular borrower , and some argue that this bis data overstates the risks of u.s. banks .

others argue that it is helpful measure , because the amount and quality of collateral is not publicly known , and that it captures the risk facing u.s. banks in a systemic financial crisis where u.s. banks' counterparties on hedging agreements could fail .

bis data capture the exposure of banking institutions , and do not include the exposures of other financial institutions , such as money market , insurance , and pension funds .

they also do not capture secondary exposures , such as u.s. banks that are exposed to uk banks , which are in turn exposed to ireland .

overall , there is a high level of uncertainty surrounding the full exposure of the u.s. financial system to eurozone countries under market pressure , and uncertainty surrounding the full implications of a default or restructuring , particularly if it triggers contagion , for the u.s. financial system .

most advanced economies , including the united states , have focused on addressing high debt levels through fiscal austerity .

the task facing these countries is how to pursue fiscal consolidation without derailing economic recovery .

how to do this is contentious and has sparked debates within congress and more generally at the multilateral level .

some argue that the most helpful course of action in the u.s. congress is to fix its own fiscal problems , although there is disagreement on the appropriate pace of and measures for achieving fiscal consolidation .

additionally , some argue that congress can urge the administration to address the issues related to historically high levels of sovereign debt issues in multilateral discussions , particularly in the context of the g - 20 and the international financial institutions ( ifis ) .

generally , there may be multilateral interest in coordinating fiscal policies in order to prevent large simultaneous fiscal contractions among all the advanced economies , which could lower demand in the advanced economies and undermine a fragile economic recovery .

coordinating fiscal policies , such as encouraging advanced countries that do not have debt problems to pursue more expansionary fiscal policies , could soften the impact of austerity in countries with unsustainable debt levels on the global economy .

the g - 20 and its process of assessing the compatibility of policies across countries ( the "mutual assessment process" [map] ) could be one forum for these discussions .

there may also be interest in revisiting the g - 20 commitments for fiscal consolidation pledged by the advanced economies at the toronto summit in june 2010 , and momentum may be building in the g - 20 to discuss the eurozone debt crisis .

congress may also urge the administration to engage with the ifis , such as the imf , on the challenges posed by high debt levels in advanced economies .

the imf already analyzes fiscal policies and debt levels in its semiannual fiscal monitor reports .

however , ifi engagement on this issue could increase .

following sovereign debt crises in the emerging markets , the imf and the world bank launched an initiative to systematically collect public debt data on a quarterly basis .

the purpose of the initiative is to increase transparency about public - sector debt by facilitating timely dissemination of standardized public debt data .

forty - four countries provide data to the project .

increasing participation could help further increase transparency about public debt levels in major economies .

