experts commonly list pakistan among the most strategically important countries for u.s. policy makers .

the 113 th congress is grappling with troubled and even deteriorated u.s. - pakistani relations , as well as the need to balance pakistan's importance to u.s. national security interests with u.s. domestic budgetary pressures .

in the post - 9 / 11 period , assisting in the creation of a more stable , democratic , and prosperous pakistan actively combating religious militancy has been a central u.s. foreign policy effort .

global and south asian regional terrorism , and a nearly 12-year - long effort to stabilize neighboring afghanistan , are viewed as top - tier concerns .

pakistan's apparently accelerated nuclear weapons program and the long - standing dispute with india over kashmir continue to threaten regional stability .

pakistan is identified as a base for numerous u.s. - designated terrorist groups and , by some accounts , most of the world's jihadist terrorist plots have some connection to pakistan - based elements .

with anti - american sentiments and xenophobic conspiracy theories remaining rife among ordinary pakistanis , persistent economic travails and a precarious political setting combine to present serious challenges to u.s. decision makers .

opinion surveys show a large and consistent majority of pakistanis holding strongly unfavorable views toward the united states .

meanwhile , americans tend to have poor views of pakistan ; one survey — taken soon after the may 2011 bin laden raid — found only 2% identifying pakistan as a u.s .

"ally. .

aware of these and other concerns , the u.s. government has provided large - scale foreign assistance to pakistan with an eye toward short - term u.s. security interests and longer - term interests in realizing a more stable , democratic , and prosperous pakistani state .

the united states has provided significant aid to pakistan over the nearly 66 years since that country's independence , but at levels that fluctuated widely .

major aid flows during some periods and drastic cuts in others contributed to creating a perception among many in pakistan that the united states is not a fully reliable ally .

at the same time , some u.s. lawmakers continue to question providing large amounts of aid to a pakistani government that is seen as an unreliable partner in u.s. counterterrorism efforts — as evidenced in 2011 by revelations that al qaeda founder osama bin laden found refuge in a pakistani city for several years and that the haqqani network of afghan insurgents may continue to receive support for pakistan's main intelligence service .

to many , pakistan also appears incapable of providing sustainable economic development and security for its own people , and often is unaccountable to the united states for aid results .

beyond these issues , some question whether the aid results in public diplomacy benefits for the united states .

meanwhile , only a small percentage of pakistanis appear to view u.s. assistance to their country as having a positive impact .

pakistan is a poor , fragile , and insecure state , representing a daunting challenge to u.s. and other foreign donors .

pakistan's estimated per capita gdp of $2,881 ( at purchasing power parity ) in 2012 ranks it 141 st of 187 world countries ( by comparison , the u.s. figure is $51,248 and india's , with seven times as many citizens as pakistan , is $4,063 ) .

from 2008 to 2010 the country experienced aggregate inflation of nearly 50% against gdp growth of less than 13% .

pakistan's education sector is among the world's least effective: the government devotes less than 3% of gdp to education and nearly one - quarter of primary school age children have no formal education of any kind .

less than half of pakistanis have access to modern energy services , and the energy infrastructure is so overburdened that chronic electricity shortages result in rolling blackouts lasting 16 or more hours per day , even in vital business centers such as karachi .

potable water shortages are widespread , and a dilapidated health sector provides insufficient access to basic health services , meaning that many citizens — women and children , especially — die each year from preventable diseases .

meanwhile , security threats remain rife: pakistan is home to multiple islamist , separatist , sectarian , and other politically motivated militants and terrorist groups .

reports indicate that as many as 49,000 pakistanis have died in terrorism - and / or insurgency - related violence since september 2001 ; more than 5,100 civilians are said to have been killed in bomb blasts or suicide attacks since 2008 .

the post - 2001 u.s. assistance program for pakistan has seen notable accomplishments , not least in the area of humanitarian relief related to that country's devastating 2005 earthquake and 2010 floods .

u.s. aid has measurably improved pakistan's energy , health , and education sectors , bolstered its infrastructure , and facilitated better governance and gender equity .

in the security realm , u.s. assistance has provided pakistan's military and law enforcement agencies with equipment and training that has improved their capacity to combat the country's indigenous terrorism threat .

it has also contributed to successes realized by the pakistani military in offensive military operations undertaken in tribal areas , and enabled pakistan to better support u.s. - led military operations in afghanistan .

pakistani law enforcement agencies have received equipment and training .

however , by most objective measures , u.s. assistance to pakistan since 2001 has not achieved its central goals , especially as islamist extremism and militancy there have increased , the civilian government remains unstable , and the national economy continues to suffer .

many independent assessments of the u.s. aid program are critical of the way washington has delivered and overseen aid .

in the representative words found in a june 2012 study , international , particularly u.s. , military and civilian aid has failed to improve pakistan's performance against jihadi groups operating on its soil or to help stabilize its nascent democracy .

lopsided focus on security aid after the 11 september 2001 attacks has not delivered counterterrorism dividends , but entrenched the military's control over state institutions and policy , delaying reforms and aggravating pakistani public perceptions that the u.s. is only interested in investing in a security client .

this critique , like many others , urges the united states to apply conditions on military , but not civilian , assistance , and to give both the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and its implementing partners more freedom to devise and prioritize their efforts .

some observers fault the u.s. government for failing to put security aid and development aid on distinct tracks .

these analysts further contend that the obama administration and congress may both have overestimated the pace at which the united states could enlarge the assistance program , and been too optimistic about the ability of u.s. agencies to quickly and extensively implement klb effectively .

over the past six decades , the united states has turned aid to pakistan on and off to correspond with u.s. foreign policy objectives and to reflect the state of the bilateral relationship .

aid was provided or restricted for numerous reasons over those 60 years .

in some years , u.s. aid would support balance in the region and contain soviet expansionism ; in other years , the u.s. government would withhold aid because of nuclear weapons proliferation and lack of democratization gains .

u.s. aid levels to pakistan ( after adjusting for inflation ) peaked in 1962 when pakistan aligned itself with the west by joining two regional defense pacts , the south east asia treaty organization ( seato ) and the central treaty organization ( cento , also known as the "baghdad pact" ; see figure a - 1 ) .

president dwight d. eisenhower famously called pakistan america's "most allied ally in asia. .

in contrast , u.s. aid to pakistan was at its lowest level in the 1990s after the soviet army withdrew from afghanistan in 1989 , and president george h. w. bush suspended aid to pakistan in 1990 because of its nuclear activities .

during and immediately after the indo - pakistani wars of 1965 and 1971 , the united states suspended military assistance to both sides .

this resulted in a cooling of the pakistan - u.s. relationship and a perception among many in pakistan that the united states was not a reliable ally .

in the mid - 1970s , new strains arose over pakistan's efforts to respond to india's 1974 underground nuclear test by seeking its own nuclear weapons capability .

president jimmy carter suspended most u.s. aid in response to pakistan's covert construction of a uranium enrichment facility .

however , in 1979 , the soviet union invaded afghanistan , and the united states viewed pakistan as a frontline ally in the effort to block soviet expansionism .

in 1981 , therefore , the reagan administration negotiated a five - year , $3.2 billion economic and military aid package with pakistan .

as a result , pakistan became a key transit country for arms supplies to the afghan resistance , as well as home for millions of afghan refugees , many of whom have yet to return .

in 1985 congress passed the pressler amendment ( §620e ( e ) of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ) that required the president to certify to congress that pakistan did not possess a nuclear explosive device during the fiscal year for which the aid was provided .

president reagan and president george h. w. bush certified pakistan each year until 1990 .

after the 1990 suspension of aid to pakistan , u.s. aid to that country remained at low levels not seen since the early 1950s , largely due to a disengagement from pakistan and afghanistan after the defeat of the soviet union there , as well as an overall reduction in foreign aid in an effort to balance the u.s. budget .

this left a lasting effect on pakistani perceptions of the united states .

former pakistani army chief and president musharraf repeatedly voiced a narrative in which pakistan joined the united states to "wage jihad" in afghanistan in the 1980s , only to see "disaster" follow when the "military victory was bungled up" and the united states then left the region "abandoned totally. .

when combined with ensuing sanctions on u.s. aid , this left many pakistanis with the sense they had been "used and ditched. .

according to the succeeding pakistani president asif zardari , writing in january 2009 , "frankly , the abandonment of afghanistan and pakistan after the defeat of the soviets in afghanistan in the 1980s set the stage for the era of terrorism that we are enduring. .

unpredictability of u.s. aid has contributed to pakistan's view that the united states is an unreliable partner .

that view may play a role in pakistan's level of cooperation with the united states on various national security issues while keeping its options open with u.s. competitors , such as china .

the pakistani prime minister's may 2011 state visit to beijing was viewed by many as an implicit response to a recent deterioration in u.s. - pakistan ties .

following a decade of alienation in the 1990s , u.s. relations with pakistan were once again transformed in dramatic fashion , this time with the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states and the ensuing enlistment of pakistan as a pivotal ally in u.s. - led counterterrorism efforts .

post - 9 / 11 u.s. aid to pakistan rose dramatically and included a $600 million emergency cash transfer in september 2001 .

in 2003 , president george w. bush hosted then - pakistani president general pervez musharraf at camp david , md , where he vowed to work with congress on establishing a five - year , $3 billion aid package for pakistan .

annual installments of $600 million each , split evenly between military and economic aid , began in fy2005 .

from fy2000 at $36.76 million to fy2001 at $187.7 million , u.s. aid increased five - fold , and in fy2002 ( the first post - 9 / 11 fiscal year ) aid increased by another nearly 11-fold to $2,000 million .

aid trended up between 2006 and 2010 ; fy2007 was the first year of the bush administration's plan to devote $750 million in u.s. development aid to pakistan's tribal areas over a five - year period .

the 2010 u.s. aid to pakistan of some $4.3 billion represented an increase of 2,185% when compared to the pre - 9 / 11 level in fy2001 .

in fy2010 , pakistan ranked second among top u.s. aid recipients , after afghanistan and before israel .

it ranks third in fy2012 with u.s. aid estimated at $2.1 billion , about half of the fy2010 peak .

about two - thirds of u.s. aid from fy2002 to fy2012 , some $15.8 billion ( including coalition support fund reimbursements ) , has supported security assistance in pakistan .

of that , about $9.5 billion has been funded through defense department appropriations , with $6.4 billion in security assistance for pakistan funded through the department of state appropriations .

economic assistance for pakistan from fy2002 to fy2012 has totaled more than $7.8 billion .

about 85% ( or $6.6 billion ) of that was within the economic support fund ( esf ) , which grew dramatically in fy2009 and fy2010 , but has been scaled back since .

over the years , disbursements of aid to pakistan generally track appropriation levels of aid .

however , in some years not all aid appropriated is actually disbursed .

for example , of the $400 million in pcf / pccf funds in 2009 , a total of $125 million has been received by pakistan .

with other accounts , some funds are transferred to meet certain needs on the ground .

during years of natural disasters , some funds from esf have been transferred to the international disaster assistance ( ida ) or the migration and refugee assistance ( mra ) account .

 ( see table 1 for both appropriation and disbursement levels. ) .

the fy2014 budget request indicates the level of importance the obama administration places on a stable , democratic , and prosperous pakistan because of its "critical role" in the region with respect to u.s. counterterrorism efforts , nuclear nonproliferation , regional stability , the peace process in afghanistan , and regional economic integration and development: "as the united states withdraws its troops from afghanistan , fy2014 u.s. assistance needs to reflect [america's] continued robust engagement of pakistan and its role in the region. .

for fy2014 , the administration is requesting a total of $1,162.57 million within the international affairs 150 function ( state - foreign operations appropriations ) .

of this amount , about two - thirds is for economic assistance and one - third is for security assistance .

the total includes $281.2 million , considered to be overseas contingency operations ( oco ) that is not part of the core request but is identified by the administration as extraordinary , temporary funding needs for frontline states .

consistent with the eppa , the fy2014 civilian assistance will focus on five key areas: energy , stabilization , social services ( especially health and education ) , economic growth ( including agriculture ) , and improving governance , including transparency and gender equality .

security assistance will focus on building counterinsurgency and counterterrorism capabilities , strengthening military - to - military cooperation , and supporting the ability for pakistan to provide security for its citizens , particularly along the afghanistan - pakistan border .

the administration's fy2014 budget request seeks $765.7 million ( and $252.2 million in oco funds ) within the economic support fund ( esf ) for energy assistance , economic growth and agriculture , education , health , and cross - cutting issues , such as supporting gender equality , human rights , better governance , and political participation .

energy — within esf , the administration is requesting $264.7 million to support a policy of attracting private sector investment , increase cost recovery , decrease technical and commercial losses , and add power to the grid .

economic growth — the $137.0 million request for fy2014 esf funds would promote international and regional trade , develop manufacturing and service sector links , and support the private sector .

the usaid agriculture program would continue to provide training to farmers to improve productivity and learn new techniques and management practices .

education — the fy2014 request of $53.0 million would be used to support provincial governments in pakistan to improve basic education programs , provide scholarships for talented , but economically disadvantaged students to attend a top pakistani university , and improve academic programs at the university level .

health — a fy2014 request for $58.0 million within esf would support improvements in delivering essential family planning , maternal , and child health services through high - impact , evidence - based interventions .

cross - cutting issues — other esf funds are requested for fy2014 to support gender equity , human rights , civil society , strengthening good governance , and increasing political participation .

foreign military financing ( fmf ) , $300 million for pakistan in the fy2014 request , would provide support for the counterinsurgency ( coin ) and counterterrorism ( ct ) capabilities of pakistan's security forces and would encourage u.s. - pakistan military - to - military engagement .

international military education and training ( imet ) , $5.0 million for pakistan in the fy2014 request would build professional and personal ties between u.s. and pakistani military personnel .

students would receive instruction at military schools in the united states and learn about democratic values , as well as military techniques .

nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining , and related programs ( nadr ) , $17.87 million for pakistan in the fy2014 request would provide training to build the capacity for pakistan to detect , deter , and respond to terrorist threats and improve border security .

international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) , $45.0 million ( plus $29.0 million of oco funds ) for pakistan in the fy2014 request would help through training , equipment , and instructor development , to build pakistan's capability for civilian law enforcement and criminal investigative techniques and crime management .

it would also build on successes to reduce opium poppy production and illegal narcotics trafficking .

monitoring and program evaluation .

the administration continues to foster community and third - party oversight of aid programs in pakistan .

the oversight combines with usaid monitoring and regular audits done by state and usaid inspector generals , the u.s. government accountability office , the pakistan auditor general , and pakistani accounting firms to expand the capability of conducting audits .

in august 2011 , usaid initiated a five - year , $71 million monitoring and evaluation contract that provides for third - party monitoring and evaluation services across all usaid projects .

critics contend that many of the stated institutional and development goals of u.s. assistance to pakistan remain largely unmet .

for much of the post - 2001 period , this was at least in part due to a perceived u.s. overreliance on security - related aid , which has accounted for the great bulk of u.s. assistance to pakistan .

many observers argue that it would be more useful to target u.s. assistance programs in such a way that they more effectively and more directly benefit the country's citizens .

a number of issues concern many in congress about making pakistan one of the top u.s. aid recipients , not the least of which is its willingness or capability to be a reliable partner .

notable issues follow .

major upheavals in u.s. - pakistan relations in 2011 caused the already troubled bilateral relationship to further sour .

following nato's late 2011 border incursion , bilateral ties were largely put "on hold" by islamabad as the pakistani parliament completed a comprehensive review of ties , a review that called for stringent new restrictions and conditions on future engagement .

several measures within the defense authorization and appropriations bills to restrict u.s. aid to pakistan in fy2014 are pending in the 113 th congress , reflecting members' ongoing concerns .

nevertheless , many u.s. government and independent analysts continue to assert that u.s. strategic interests are inextricably linked with a stable pakistan that can effectively rule all of its territory , assist the united states with efforts to stabilize afghanistan , as well as with the fight against terrorism , and contribute to the stability in the region .

while there are numerous concerns about whether pakistan can be accountable in how it uses u.s. aid and whether its newly seated government will pursue needed reforms , these observers emphasize the importance of maintaining a close bilateral engagement , with an eye toward encouraging and facilitating pakistani democratization .

given the current budgetary constraints facing the united states and the recent strained relationship , some in the 113 th congress question the return on such large investments in pakistan , among the largest recipients of u.s. aid .

lawmakers will continue to seek the right balance between u.s. aid expenditures to promote u.s. national security interests in pakistan and the region versus belt - tightening budget cuts to foreign aid programs and accountability measures to address the lack of trust between the two governments .

appendix a .

history of u.s. aid to pakistan appendix b .

current year request appendix c. major donor bilateral development assistance to pakistan , cy2010 appendix d. principles and purposes of the enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2009 principles: 1 .

pakistan is a critical friend and ally to the united states and share goals of combating terrorism , firmly establishing democracy and rule of law , and promoting social and economic development in pakistan ; 2 .

u.s. aid to pakistan is to supplement , not replace , pakistan's own efforts ; 3 .

the united states requires a balanced , countrywide strategy that provides aid throughout the country ; 4 .

the united states supports pakistan's struggle against extremism and recognizes its sacrifices in this regard ; 5 .

the united states intends to work with the government of pakistan to build mutual trust by strengthening mutual security , stability , and prosperity of both countries ; to support the people of pakistan and democracy there , including strengthening its parliament , judicial system , and rule of law in all provinces ; to promote sustainable long - term development and infrastructure projects , including healthcare , education , water management , and energy programs ; to ensure all people of pakistan have access to public education ; to support curricula and quality of schools throughout pakistan ; to encourage public - private partnerships in pakistan top support development ; to expand people - to - people engagement between the united states and pakistan ; to encourage capacity to measure program success and increase accountability ; to help pakistan improve its counterterrorism financing and anti - money laundering ; to strengthen pakistan's counterinsurgency / counterterrorism strategy to prevent any territory of pakistan from becoming a base for terrorist attacks ; to aid in pakistan's efforts to strengthen law enforcement and national defense forces under civilian leadership ; to have full cooperation on counterproliferation of nuclear weapons ; to assist pakistan in gaining control and addressing threats in all its areas and along its border ; and to explore ways to consult with the pakistani - american community .

purposes of democratic , economic , and development assistance: 1 .

to support democratic institutions in pakistan to strengthen civilian rule and long - term stability ; 2. to support pakistan's efforts to expand rule of law , build capacity , transparency , and trust in government , and promote internationally recognized human rights ; 3. to support economic freedom and economic development in pakistan such as investments in water resource management systems , expansion of agricultural and rural development ( i.e. , farm - to - market roads ) , and investments in energy ; 4. to invest in people , particularly in women and children , regarding education , public health , civil society organizations , and to support refugees ; and 5. to strengthen public diplomacy to counter extremism .

purposes of security assistance: 1 .

to support pakistan's paramount national security need to fight and win the ongoing counterinsurgency within its borders ; 2. to work with the pakistani government to improve pakistan's border security and control and help prevent any pakistani territory from being used as a base or conduit for terrorist attacks in pakistan , or elsewhere ; 3. to work in close cooperation with the pakistani government to coordinate action against extremist and terrorist targets ; and 4. to help strengthen the institutions of democratic governance and promote control of military institutions by a democratically elected civilian government .

