the seismic design criteria applied to siting commercial nuclear power plants operating in the united states received increased attention following the march 11 , 2011 , earthquake and tsunami that devastated japan's fukushima daiichi nuclear power station .

since the event , a magnitude 5.8 earthquake near mineral , va , on august 23 , 2011 , precipitated the temporary shutdown of dominion power's north anna nuclear power plant .

some members of congress have questioned whether u.s nuclear plants are more vulnerable to seismic threats than previously assessed , particularly given the nuclear regulatory commission's ( nrc's ) ongoing reassessment of seismic risks at certain plant sites .

currently , 104 commercial nuclear power plants operating in the united states use variations in light water reactor designs and construction .

figure 1 shows the locations of all 104 nuclear power reactors operating in the united states .

light water reactors use ordinary water as a neutron moderator and coolant , and uranium fuel enriched in fissile uranium - 235 .

designs fall into either pressurized water reactor ( pwr ) or boiling water reactor ( bwr ) categories .

both have reactor cores ( the source of heat ) consisting of arrays of uranium fuel bundles capable of sustaining a controlled nuclear chain reaction .

u.s. commercial nuclear power plants incorporate safety features intended to ensure that , in the event of an earthquake , the reactor core would remain cooled , the reactor containment would remain intact , and radioactive releases would not occur from spent fuel storage pools .

nrc defines this as the "safe - shutdown condition. .

when utilities began building nuclear power plants in the 1960s - 1970s era , they typically hired an architect / engineering firm , then contracted with a reactor manufacturer ( "nuclear vendors" ) to build the nuclear steam supply system ( nsss ) , consisting of the nuclear core , reactor vessel , steam generators and pressurizer ( in pwrs ) , and control mechanisms — representing about 10% of the plant investment .

the balance of the plant ( bop ) consisted of secondary cooling systems , feed - water systems , steam systems , control room , and generator systems .

at the time , the four vendors who offered designs for nuclear reactor systems in the united states were babcock & wilcox , combustion engineering , general electric , and westinghouse .

about 12 architect / engineering firms were available to design the balance of the plant .

each architect / engineer had its own preferred approach to designing the balance of plant systems .

the custom design - and - build industry approach resulted in problems verifying the safety of individual plants and in transferring the safety lessons learned from one reactor to another .

in addition to the custom - design features of each plant , designers also had to contend with earthquake hazards unique to each plant site .

designs for structures , systems , and components important to a nuclear power plant operation must withstand earthquakes without losing their intended safety - related function .

this report presents some of the general design concepts of operating nuclear power plants in order to discuss design considerations for seismic events .

this report does not attempt to conclude whether one design is inherently safer or less safe than another plant .

nor does it attempt to conclude whether operating nuclear power plants are at any greater or lesser risk from earthquakes given recent updates to seismic data and seismic hazard maps .

general design criteria for nuclear power plants require that structures and components important to safety withstand the effects of earthquakes , tornados , hurricanes , floods , tsunamis , and seiche waves without losing the capability to perform their safety function .

these "safety - related" structures , systems , and components are those necessary to assure: the capability to maintain the reactor coolant pressure , the capability to shut down the reactor and maintain it in a safe condition , or the capability to prevent or mitigate the consequences of accidents , which could result in potential offsite radiation exposures .

all bwr plants operating in the united states use variations of a general electric design .

the more numerous pwr plants use babcock & wilcox , combustion engineering , and westinghouse designs .

table 1 summarizes the various reactor types .

the sections that follow discuss them further .

earthquakes occur when stresses in the earth exceed the strength of a rock mass , creating a fault or mobilizing an existing fault .

the fault can slip laterally ( a strike / slip fault , such as the san andreas fault ) , move vertically ( a thrust or reverse fault , such as the fault that caused the march 11 japanese earthquake ) , or move in some combination of the two .

the fault's sudden release sends seismic shock waves through the earth that have two primary characteristics: ( 1 ) amplitude — a measure of the peak wave height , and ( 2 ) period — the time interval between the arrival of successive peaks or valleys .

the seismic wave's arrival causes ground motion .

the intensity of ground motion depends primarily on three factors: the distance from the source ( also known as focus or epicenter ) , the amount of energy released ( magnitude of the earthquake ) , and the type of soil or rock at the site .

in general , for a given magnitude earthquake , the shallower the focus , the stronger the wave will be when reaching the surface .

in addition , the intensity of ground shaking diminishes with increasing distance from the earthquake focus .

sites with deep , soft soils or loosely compacted fill will experience stronger ground motion than sites with stiff soils or rock .

on march 17 , 2011 , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs held a hearing on catastrophic preparedness that looked at technologies and emergency procedures used in the event of a large - scale earthquake or other natural disaster .

on april 6 , 2011 , the subcommittee on oversight and investigations of the house energy and commerce committee held a hearing on the u.s. government response to the nuclear power plant incident in japan .

on april 7 , 2011 , the subcommittee on technology and innovation of the house science , space , and technology committee held a hearing on earthquake risk reduction .

legislation introduced in the senate and house would reauthorize appropriations and make some changes to the ongoing national earthquake hazards reduction program ( nehrp ) .

h.r .

1379 and s. 646 would amend the earthquake hazards reduction act of 1977 ( 42 u.s.c .

7704 ) , and reauthorize appropriations through fy2015 ( authorization for appropriations for nehrp activities ended in fy2009 ) .

h.r .

3479 would also make some changes to nehrp , and authorize appropriations through fy2014 .

activities conducted under nehrp are intended to improve the scientific understanding of earthquakes and their effects on people and infrastructure , develop effective measures to reduce earthquake hazards , and promote the adoption of earthquake hazard reduction activities .

results from these activities could improve the current understanding of how earthquake - caused shaking would affect nuclear power plants .

h.r .

1268 , the nuclear power licensing reform act of 2011 , would amend section 103 of the atomic energy act of 1954 ( 42 u.s.c .

2133 ) , subsection c , by adding at the end the following requirements for nuclear power plant licenses: any such renewal shall be subject to the same criteria and requirements that would be applicable for an original application for initial construction , and the commission shall ensure that any changes in the size or distribution of the surrounding population , or seismic or other scientific data not available at time of original licensing , have not resulted in the facility being located at a site at which a new facility would not be allowed to be built .

h.r .

1242 , the nuclear power safety act of 2011 , would amend the atomic energy act to revise regulations to ensure that nuclear facilities licensed under the act can withstand and adequately respond to an earthquake , tsunami ( for a facility located in a coastal area ) , strong storm , or other event that threatens a major impact to the facility ; a loss of the primary operating power source for at least 14 days ; and a loss of the primary backup operating power source for at least 72 hours .

the usgs developed a 2011 report in response to a request from the nrc evaluating seismic monitoring capabilities in the ceus , with particular emphasis on meeting the current and future needs of the nrc .

the usgs report recommends adding 100 new stations to existing arrays of seismometers in the ceus: 38 deployed in seismically active zones in the ceus to capture information from infrequent earthquakes for use in improving the understanding of how , where , and why earthquakes occur in the region ; and 62 stations deployed near nuclear power plants to understand the site - specific response to earthquakes and improve assessments of seismic risk at the facilities .

according to the usgs , the 38 proposed stations in seismically active zones would bolster earthquake monitoring where it is currently inadequate .

the new stations would fill in where existing stations are farther than 50 kilometers apart ( about 31 miles ) or where existing stations could go off - scale during an earthquake of expected magnitude for the seismic zone .

these stations would also help improve assessments of how well the seismic waves travel , or propagate , from the epicenter outwards , and inversely how the seismic energy is lost , or attenuated , as the earthquake waves move away from the epicenter .

as people experienced first - hand , virginia's august 2011 earthquake broadcast widespread ground shaking .

for similar magnitude earthquakes , seismic waves travel more efficiently in general in the ceus and shaking is felt over a broader area compared to the western united states .

according to its report , the usgs proposes deploying 62 additional stations near nuclear power plants to help characterize earthquake effects for site - specific engineering and emergency - response applications .

this would aid in the location and degree of ground shaking and estimation of damage to structures in near - real time .

the combined 100 new stations proposed by the usgs would supplement the advanced national seismic system ( anss ) to compute earthquake properties more accurately in the region and improve the likelihood of capturing important earthquake data within 50 kilometers of the earthquake epicenter for moderate and large earthquakes .

the usgs report indicates that this information would be useful to the nrc .

the usgs report also includes cost information for the seismometers , which range from $15,000 to $20,000 to purchase and install "class a" systems , and about $10,000 for "class b" systems .

class a systems have higher resolution and other features superior to class b systems .

operating costs range from $2,000 to $5,000 per year .

for 100 new stations , costs to purchase and install class a systems would range between $1.5 million and $2.0 million versus $1.0 million for 100 class b systems .

operating costs would range between $200,000 to $500,000 per year , depending on location and options for transmitting data from the stations .

appendix a .

magnitude , intensity , and seismic spectrum earthquake magnitude is a measure of the strength of the earthquake as determined from seismographic observations .

magnitude is essentially an objective , quantitative measure of an earthquake's size expressed in various ways based on seismographic records ( eg , richter local magnitude , surface wave magnitude , body wave magnitude , and moment magnitude ) .

currently , the most commonly used magnitude measurement is moment magnitude ( m ) , which accounts for the strength of the rock that ruptured , the area of the fault that ruptured , and the average amount of slip .

moment is a physical quantity proportional to the slip on the fault times the area of the fault surface that slips .

it relates to the total energy released in the earthquake .

the moment can be estimated from seismograms ( and from geodetic measurements ) .

the moment magnitude provides an estimate of earthquake size that is valid over the complete range of magnitudes , a characteristic that was lacking in other magnitude scales , such as the richter scale .

because of the logarithmic basis of the moment magnitude scale , each whole number increase in magnitude represents a tenfold increase in measured amplitude ; as an estimate of energy , each whole number step in the magnitude scale corresponds to the release of about 31 times more energy than the amount associated with the preceding whole number value .

in 1935 , charles f. richter of the california institute of technology developed the richter magnitude scale based on the behavior of a specific seismograph manufactured at that time .

the instruments are no longer in use and therefore the richter magnitude scale is no longer used in the technical community .

however , the term richter scale is so common in use that scientists generally just answer questions about "richter" magnitude by substituting moment magnitude without correcting the misunderstanding .

the intensity of an earthquake is a qualitative assessment of effects of the earthquake at a particular location .

the assigned intensity factors include observed effects on humans , on human - built structures , and on the earth's surface at a particular location .

the most commonly used scale in the united states is the modified mercalli intensity ( mmi ) scale , which has values ranging from i to xii in the order of severity .

mmi of i indicates an earthquake that was not felt except by a very few , whereas mmi of xii indicates damage to all works of construction , either partially or completely .

while an earthquake has only one magnitude , intensity depends on the effects at each particular location .

greater magnitude earthquakes are generally associated with greater lengths of fault ruptures .

a fault break of 100 miles might be associated with an m8 earthquake , while a break of several miles might generate an m6 earthquake .

the length of the fault break , however , is not directly proportional to the energy released .

the induced amplitude of acceleration ( g ) does increase with increasing magnitude ( m ) .

various methods developed relate the magnitude of an earthquake to the amplitude of acceleration it induces , and different methods may result in significant variations in results .

appendix b .

early seismic zone map in the late 1940s , structural engineers began considering the seismic - based shear forces that structures must resist .

to supplement their design calculations , they referred to the seismic zone map published by the uniform building code ( ubc , in figure b - 1 ) .

the ubc map divided the united states into six distinct seismic zones representing various degrees of seismic risk .

the map expressed peak ground acceleration as the decimal ratio of the acceleration due to gravity ( g ) that applied to a maximum credible earthquake ( mce ) and an operating basis earthquake ( obe ) .

ubc defined a maximum credible earthquake as producing the greatest level of ground motion at a site .

an operating basis earthquake was be defined as the greatest level of ground motion likely to occur during the economic life of a structure .

appendix c. terms boiling water reactor ( bwr ) directly generates steam inside the reactor vessel .

deterministic seismic hazard assessment ( dsha ) focuses on a single earthquake event to determine the finite probability of damage occurring .

double - ended guillotine break ( degb ) represents a break of the largest diameter pipe in the primary system that the emergency core cooling system ( eccs ) must be sized to provide adequate makeup water to compensate for .

light water reactor systems use ordinary water as a fuel moderator and coolant , and uranium fuel artificially enriched to 3% - 5% fissile uranium - 235 .

includes bwr and pwr types .

loss of coolant accident ( loca ) is an accident involving a broken pipe , stuck - open valve , or other leak in the reactor coolant system that results in a loss of the water cooling the reactor core .

operating basis earthquake is the maximum vibratory ground motion for which a reactor could continue operation without undue risk and safety of the public .

pressurized water reactor ( pwr ) uses two major loops to convert the heat generated by the reactor core into steam outside of the reactor vessel .

probabilistic seismic hazard assessments ( psha ) attempt to quantify the probability of exceeding various ground - motion levels at a site given all possible earthquakes .

safe shutdown earthquake ( also design basis earthquake ) is the maximum vibratory ground motion at which certain structures , systems , and components are designed to remain functional .

seismic core damage frequency is the probability of damage to the core resulting from a seismic initiating event .

