a number of groups and individuals have recently focused attention on u.s. rules governing imports from north korea .

their interest has been sparked by the debate over the south korea - u.s. free trade agreement ( korus fta ) , which would lower or eliminate u.s. tariffs and non - tariff barriers on most imports from south korea .

some , particularly the agreement's opponents , argue that the agreement could lead to increased u.s. imports of goods or components made in north korea .

the korus fta will not enter into force unless congress approves implementation legislation , which obama administration officials have said they expect to send to the 112 th congress .

as a result of north korea's relative economic isolation , the undeveloped state of its export sector , and u.s. trade restrictions , the united states imports virtually no finished goods from north korea .

between 2000 and 2010 , cumulative u.s. bilateral imports of finished north korean goods totaled $335,700 , which is equivalent to a rounding error in annual u.s. trade flows with most countries .

nearly half of this amount consisted of stamps , with another 40% or so consisting of women's clothing .

since 2005 , according to u.s. trade data , the only finished imports that have entered the united states from north korea have been $8,363 worth of stamps , which were imported in june 2010 .

imports of finished north korean goods have literally been zero in four of the past five years .

those concerned that the korus fta would change this situation focus considerable attention on the kaesong industrial complex ( kic ) , a seven - year - old industrial park located in north korea just across the demilitarized zone , where more than 100 south korean manufacturers employ over 45,000 north korean workers at relatively low wages .

critics argue that south korean firms could obtain low - cost kaesong - made goods or components , incorporate the latter into finished products such as electronics or automobiles , and then reship the final goods to the united states with "made in [south] korea" labels .

if the korus fta were in effect , the argument runs , these goods might receive preferential treatment , to the benefit of the north korean government , which receives revenue from the kic .

the first section of this report examines existing u.s. rules and practices governing imports from north korea .

the second section analyzes the two main portals through which north korea conducts its minimal economic interaction with the outside world: the kic and china .

the third section addresses the issue of how , if at all , the korus fta would affect potential u.s. imports of north korean content , including whether the agreement could result in legal action against the u.s. government if it kept out imports of north korean content .

the north korean economy is one of the world's most isolated .

the dprk's stated policy of self - reliance ( juche ) , its suspicion of foreign countries , and the collapse of its industrial base since the late 1980s have resulted in an extremely low level of commercial and financial relations with other nations in the world .

over the course of the 2000s , north korea's significant export markets shrunk to two countries , south korea and china , which in 2010 appear to have accounted for over three - quarters of north korea's export shipments .

some critics of the korus fta contend that the agreement will increase the chances that north korean goods or components will enter the united states .

their arguments tend to fall into three categories: 1 .

the korus fta in the future could allow products made in the kaesong industrial complex to be covered by the agreement , thereby conferring preferential treatment to these products .

2 .

the korus fta might constrain the u.s. government's ability to impose restrictions on imports from north korea .

3 .

the korus fta has insufficient "rules of origin" to determine the country of origin of imported products .

this section examines these issues point by point .

the korus fta appears likely to have only a minimal impact on whether u.s. sanctions on north korean imports are put to the test .

the korus fta's preferential terms would not apply to finished goods made in the kic , and the provisions for bringing the kic into the agreement include multiple opportunities for the united states , including congress , to block such a move by a future south korean government .

the agreement also contains provisions that aim to help preserve the united states' ability to maintain its restrictions on imports of north korean goods and components .

as long as u.s. sanctions on north korean imports remain in place and are adequately enforced , the korus fta's rules of origin — which are used to determine the country of origin of imported products — would apply only in cases where an importer has received a license from ofac to bring in a south korean good that contains north korean components .

thus , the issue of how best to handle imports from north korea appears to center on customs controls , cooperation , and enforcement .

at present , because north korea exports a minimal amount of manufactured goods to the outside world , the application of u.s. restrictions against north korean imports has not been significantly challenged .

however , this situation may change if at some future date north korean industry revives and its manufacturers become more integrated into the global economy .

the most likely ways this integration would occur would be through increased economic ties between the north korean and chinese provinces straddling the dprk - chinese border or through a decision by the south and north korean governments to significantly expand the kaesong industrial complex .

if either or both of these events occur , the possibility of circumventing u.s. import restrictions against north korea could become a bigger problem than it is today .

there is no means to determine with one hundred percent certainty that there are no goods or components originating in north korea entering u.s. commerce without proper authorization .

an example of the challenge faced is the automobile supply chain , in which chinese or south korean producers could source one of thousands of components from a low - wage north korean producer and then seek to evade u.s. customs authorities by not reporting the item to ofac or cbp .

in the case of south korea , these imports could receive preferential treatment if the korus fta is passed and if the imports meet the agreement's rules of origin .

the ability of the united states to enforce its restrictions would then depend to a large extent upon the level of u.s. - south korea customs cooperation — which arguably would be enhanced by the korus fta — and the severity of the penalties charged for non - compliance with u.s. import restrictions .

