black's law dictionary defines legislative history as "the background and events leading to the enactment of a statute , including hearings , committee reports , and floor debates. .

it also descri bes one of the primary reasons legal , policy , and legislative researchers investigate the legislative history of a particular piece of legislation: "legislative history is sometimes recorded so that it can later be used to aid in interpreting the statute. .

however , the purpose of legislative history research is not limited to statutory interpretation .

questions researchers may want to answer through legislative history include which committees and members were involved ? .

how was the legislative language amended as it advanced through the congressional process ? .

how did members vote on proposed amendments and final passage ? .

to answer these and similar questions , researchers must identify the chronological steps the legislation followed through congress and the materials that document what happened during each of these steps .

this report briefly describes the actions a piece of legislation might undergo during the legislative process and provides information on resources for retrieving legislative history materials .

this report focuses on legislative history research , and therefore does not contain detailed information about the legislative process .

however , because a general understanding of the legislative process is helpful when compiling a legislative history , overviews of certain congressional actions are provided .

detailed guides on the legislative process for the house and senate are available online: how our laws are made , revised and updated , by john v. sullivan parliamentarian , united states house of representatives presented by mr. brady of pennsylvania july 24 , 2007 https: / / www.congress.gov / resources / display / content / how+our+laws+are+made+ - +learn+about+the+legislative+process enactment of a law by robert b. dove parliamentarian , united states senate updated: february 1997 https: / / www.congress.gov / resources / display / content / enactment+of+a+law+ - +learn+about+the+legislative+process in addition , there are a number of congressional research service ( crs ) reports on various aspects of the legislative process referenced throughout this report and available on crs's website at http: / / www.crs.gov .

the legislative history resource materials discussed below vary in scope and availability .

for example , the government printing office's ( gpo's ) federal digital system ( fdsys ) , through its website http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / search / home.action , is an online collection of official congressional publications and databases containing texts of legislation , the congressional record , house and senate calendars , committee prints , committee hearings , committee reports , and other material useful for legislative research .

however , the information available on these websites is limited to more recent congresses .

by contrast , print publications may be more historically complete , but limited to only one type of document or information .

for example , the congressional record and its predecessor publications , which are available in print going back to 1789 , contain information on procedural actions for legislation and transcripts of the proceedings on the house and senate floor , but do not contain the text of committee hearings .

the references cited below are available online through government sources or in hard copy through crs or the law library of congress .

they are also commonly available at local libraries , law libraries , or federal depository libraries .

gpo has a website to assist patrons in finding the nearest depository library , at http: / / catalog.gpo.gov / fdlpdir / fdlpdir.jsp .

references to commercial services that require subscriptions are limited to those available in all congressional offices .

in addition , some stages of the legislative process are more fully documented than others .

for example , bills are often debated and amended extensively during their consideration by congressional subcommittees , but these deliberations are not usually transcribed and made widely available .

in general , information on subcommittee action is limited to discussion in news accounts or reports from the full committee .

in some instances , a legislative history may have already been compiled .

there are a few government and commercial sources for compiled legislative histories .

online sources proquest legislative insight http: / / www.conquest - leg - insight.com / legislativeinsight / leghistmain.jsp this commercial service offers compiled legislative histories that typically include bill text , congressional record references , committee documents , and miscellaneous publications for public laws enacted starting with the 57 th congress ( 1901-1903 ) .

users can search by public law number , statutes at large citation , or enacted bill number .

proquest congressional http: / / web.lexis - nexis.com / congcomp proquest congressional , a commercial database , has legislative histories from 1969 to the present .

researchers can find legislative history compilations by keywords in the abstract , bill tracking , bill text , floor votes , public laws , united states code or statutes at large .

results can be restricted by words in the title of the legislative history or the congress .

print sources government accountability office ( gao ) legislative history microfiche .

this resource contains the legislative history for most public laws from 1921 to 1980 .

reprints from the microfiche may be available from crs , the law library of congress , or at a federal depository library .

committee prints .

on occasion , committees produce legislative histories of enactments within their jurisdiction .

reprints of published copies of committee prints may be available through crs , the library of congress , or at a federal depository library .

bills .

most legislation introduced by a member of congress ( i.e. , the legislation's sponsor ) is introduced as a "bill," the general form used for legislation that will have the force of law if enacted .

bills are numbered sequentially in the order they were introduced .

bills introduced in the senate are preceded by "s." ; those in the house by "h.r. .

bills remain pending from the time of introduction until final passage or the final adjournment of a congress ( i.e. , the numbered two - year convocation of the house and senate that begins january 3 following each biennial federal election ) .

bills not enacted during a congress "die" ; further legislative consideration requires that they be reintroduced in the next congress .

joint resolutions .

while bills are used for purposes of general legislation , joint resolutions ( s.j .

res .

or h.j .

res. ) .

are used to propose constitutional amendments and for a variety of special or subordinate purposes , such as continuing appropriations .

except for those proposing constitutional amendments , joint resolutions become law in the same manner as bills .

if a legislative measure receives action , gpo publishes versions of the legislative text as it moves through the various stages of the legislative process .

these versions include those marked reported , engrossed , engrossed house / senate amendment , public print , and enrolled .

by comparing different bill or resolution texts , researchers can determine at what stage in the legislative process revisions were made .

online sources government printing office ( fdsys ) http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / browse / collection.action ? collectioncode=bills fdsys enables users to browse or search for bills and resolutions from the 103 rd congress ( 1993-1994 ) forward .

legislative information system ( lis ) http: / / www.lis.gov congress.gov http: / / www.congress.gov lis is available to congressional researchers .

users can browse or search for bill and resolution texts starting with the 101 st congress ( 1989-1990 ) .

congress.gov is available to the general public and covers the same time period for legislative text .

american memory's a century of lawmaking for a new nation: bills and resolutions http: / / memory.loc.gov / ammem / amlaw / the american memory website contains scanned images of some historical bills and resolutions .

coverage for the house starts with the 6 th congress ( 1799-1800 ) through the 42 nd  congress ( 1871-1872 ) .

for the senate , coverage is from the 16 th congress ( 1819-1821 ) through the 42 nd congress ( 1871-1872 ) .

print sources print versions of bills are available on microfiche or microfilm through the law library of congress ( 1789-current ) and certain federal depository libraries .

at its most fundamental , legislative history tracks congressional action on a piece of legislation and its status within the legislative process .

when beginning a legislative history research project , one of the first steps a researcher may want to undertake is locating information on the history of the bill and citations to documents .

through the years , various government and private entities have tracked the history and status of bills .

online sources lis http: / / www.lis.gov congress.gov http: / / www.congress.gov lis is available to congressional offices and provides bill summary and status information on bills and resolutions starting from the 93 rd congress ( 1973-1974 ) to the present .

congress.gov , a public legislative service from the library of congress , contains the same information on a bill's history and status .

congressional calendars http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / browse / collection.action ? collectioncode=ccal house and senate calendars are published periodically during the session by the clerk of the house and the secretary of the senate .

the calendars provide a list of legislation .

in the house calendar , the history and current status of legislation receiving action is summarized .

fdsys contains final house and senate calendars starting from the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) to the present .

print sources digest of public general bills and resolutions .

the bill digest , a publication of the library of congress from 1936 until 1990 , contains summaries and status of legislation .

house and senate calendars .

published copies of the calendars are available through crs , the law library of congress , or at a federal depository library .

congressional information service ( cis ) .

a commercial service , the cis index lists each public law in the annual abstracts volume and references publications concerning the law .

these references include a list of congressional hearings , reports , documents , and prints back to 1970 .

the legislative histories volume contains the legislative history information on selected public laws , including dates of congressional debate , back to 1970 .

the cis historical index contains congressional documents from 1789 through 1972 .

legislation is usually referred to a committee after introduction , according to its subject matter .

often , a committee will further refer the legislation to one of its subcommittees .

the subcommittees may request reports from government agencies or departments , hold hearings , mark up the bill ( meet to propose changes ) , and report the legislation to the full committee .

the full committee may take similar action , with or without prior subcommittee consideration , and report the legislation to its full chamber ( i.e. , the house or senate ) .

hearings .

hearings provide a committee or subcommittee the opportunity to explore topics or legislation .

hearings may include statements of committee members and interested parties , as well as the testimony of witnesses .

gpo publishes hearings made available to them by committees .

online sources gpo fdsys http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / browse / collection.action ? collectioncode=chrg through fdsys , researchers can download selected committee hearings starting with the 105 th congress ( 1985-1986 ) .

proquest congressional hearings digital collection http: / / web.lexis - nexis.com / congcomp proquest congressional , a commercial database , has scanned pdf images of published committee hearings from 1824 to the present .

print sources print versions of committee hearings are available through crs and the law library of congress .

more recent hearings are available through the house and senate document rooms .

individual hearings may be available through a federal depository library .

reports .

most legislation never proceeds through full committee consideration and remains in committee for the remainder of a congress .

however , committees may , by majority vote , report some bills and resolutions for consideration by the entire chamber .

the house requires a written report on the legislation , but the senate does not .

these committee reports can be particularly useful documents for legislative history research because they often describe the purpose of the legislation and summarize or explain specific provisions .

the report will also give details on the committee's actions , understandings , and conclusions about the legislation .

changes to existing laws , votes on amendments during markups , and subcommittee information are supplemental material to the committee report that may also be useful for legislative history research .

if the legislation was considered by a subcommittee , that information may also be covered in the full committee's report .

committee reports are published by gpo .

sometimes , the reports are reproduced in whole or part by commercial publishers .

committee reports are identified as house report ( h. rept .

or h. rep. ) or senate report ( s. rept .

or s. rep. ) and given a number ( eg , s.rept .

107-31 is the 31 st report to the senate in the 107 th congress ) .

online sources lis http: / / www.lis.gov congress.gov http: / / www.congress.gov lis is available to congressional researchers and has committee reports starting from the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) .

congress.gov has the same coverage for committee reports .

gpo fdsys http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / browse / collection.action ? collectioncode=crpt fdsys contains committee reports starting from the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) .

proquest congressional u.s .

serial set collection http: / / web.lexis - nexis.com / congcomp proquest congressional , a commercial database , has scanned pdf images of committee reports published in the serial set ( described below ) from 1817 to the present .

print sources print versions of committee reports are available through crs , the law library of congress , and possibly a federal depository library .

more recent reports may be available through the house and senate document rooms .

the serial set .

this serial publication contains house and senate documents and reports bound by session of congress beginning in 1817 .

it is available through crs , the law library of congress , and may be available through a federal depository library .

u.s. code congressional and administrative news ( "usccan" ) .

usccan , a commercial service , reprints the major reports and conference report or portions thereof , for most public laws enacted since 1941 , along with the text of the public law .

this publication is available through crs , the law library of congress , and may be in the collection of a federal depository library .

prints and documents .

committee prints and documents can be used to duplicate research papers or annual reports from executive branch agencies of interest to the committee , papers prepared by the committee staff , reports on investigative and oversight hearings and activities , and analytical information on legislation .

some committees use prints for reproducing compilations of laws that come under their legislative jurisdiction .

committee prints are identified as house print ( h .

prt. ) .

or senate print ( s .

prt. ) .

and given a number ( e.g .

senate print 111-6 is the sixth numbered print for the senate in the 111 th congress ) .

committee documents are identified as house document ( h .

doc. ) .

or senate document ( s .

doc. ) .

and given a number ( e.g .

house document 111-2 is the second numbered document for the house in the 111 th congress ) .

online sources gpo fdsys — committee prints http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / browse / collection.action ? collectioncode=cprt fdsys has house and senate committee prints starting from the 105 th congress ( 1997-1998 ) .

gpo fdsys — committee documents http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / browse / collection.action ? collectioncode=cdoc fdsys has house and senate committee documents starting from the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) .

proquest congressional research digital collection http: / / web.lexis - nexis.com / congcomp proquest congressional has committee prints and miscellaneous documents that were published from 1830 to the present .

they also have an assortment of house and senate documents from 1871 to the present .

print sources copies of committee prints and documents are available through crs and the subject collections of the library of congress .

more recent prints and documents may be available through the house and senate document rooms .

individual prints and documents may be available through a federal depository library .

legislation may be brought to the floor of the respective chambers for consideration by the full house or senate .

the length and scope of debate on the floor of congress ( eg , which amendments , if any , will be considered ) are governed by the rules of the respective chambers .

for example , in the house , the measure is sometimes considered under the terms of a "special rule," that is , a simple resolution reported by the committee on rules , which may be accompanied by a written report specifying which amendments can be offered on the floor .

votes on amendments and final passage may or may not be in the form of a formal recorded vote , in which the vote of each member is identified .

the debates are published in the congressional record .

recorded votes , called "roll call votes," are published in the congressional record but they can also be found through other sources , such as the clerk of the house website , the secretary of the senate , and commercial publishers .

after legislation is passed by one chamber , it is sent to the other chamber for action , where it is often referred to committee .

if the second chamber chooses to consider the legislation and passes it without change , it is submitted to the president .

remarks on the house or senate floor can be useful for legislative history research because members will often speak to the purpose of the legislation , emphasize or clarify certain provisions in the legislation ; or raise concerns about the potential impact in their statements .

in addition to debate on passage , sponsors and cosponsors may submit introductory remarks and materials on legislation into the congressional record .

these remarks may explain the reasons for , and expected effects of , the legislation .

the congressional record is the official record of the proceedings and debates of congress and contains a summary of the daily proceedings of the house and senate .

predecessor publications for the congressional record are the congressional globe ( 1833-1873 ) , register of debates in congress ( 1825-1837 ) , and annals of the congress of the united states ( 1789-1824 ) .

currently , there are two editions of the congressional record published by gpo — the daily edition and the permanent edition .

the daily edition is published each day congress is in session and the pages are lettered and numbered by chamber ( eg , senate pages begin with "s" and house pages begin with "h" ) .

the permanent or "bound" edition is published years later .

it is continuously paginated ( eg , the pages are renumbered and the "s" and "h" designations are dropped ) and the text may have been edited .

online sources lis http: / / www.lis.gov congress.gov http: / / www.congress.gov lis is available to congressional researchers only and has links to the daily edition of the congressional record starting from the 101 st congress ( 1989-1990 ) .

congress.gov has the same coverage for the congressional record .

gpo fdsys — congressional record , daily edition http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / browse / collection.action ? collectioncode=crec fdsys provides the congressional record from 1994 to the present .

users can search by keyword , page number , or browse by date of publication .

gpo fdsys — congressional record , bound edition http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / browse / collection.action ? collectioncode=crecb the bound edition of the congressional record is available through fdsys for the years december 19 , 1998 , through january 3 , 2002 .

gpo fdsys — congressional record index http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / browse / collection.action ? collectioncode=cri the congressional record index lists all introduced legislation by number .

references in the index are to pages in that year's congressional record .

each congress spans two years and typically is divided into two sessions , with each session conducted during a separate calendar year .

legislation introduced during the first session may also be referred to in the second session of the same congress .

coverage for the congressional record index through gpo online is 1983 to the present .

american memory's a century of lawmaking for a new nation: u.s. congressional documents and debates http: / / memory.loc.gov / ammem / amlaw / contains scanned images of the journals and debates of congress from 1789 through 1875 .

proquest congressional congressional record permanent digital collection http: / / web.lexis - nexis.com / congcomp proquest congressional has scanned pdf images the congressional record and its predecessor publications from 1789 to 1997 .

print sources copies of the congressional record and its predecessor publications are available through crs , the law library of congress , and may be available at a federal depository library .

online sources office of the clerk , u.s. house of representatives http: / / clerk.house.gov / legislative / legvotes.html the house clerk's website has roll call votes from 1990 to the present .

secretary of the united states senate http: / / www.senate.gov / pagelayout / legislative / a_three_sections_with_teasers / votes.htm the secretary of the senate's website has roll call votes from 1989 to the present .

cq.com http: / / www.cq.com this fee - based subscription database provides searchable roll call votes from the 102 nd congress ( 1991-1992 ) to the present .

print sources congressional quarterly almanac .

the cq almanac , a commercial publication , contains floor roll call votes .

it also includes valuable background information as well as references to relevant material on major legislation .

cq almanac has been published annually since 1945 .

these volumes may be available through crs , the law library of congress , and in the collection of a local library .

if there are differences between the house and senate versions of a piece of legislation , the last chamber to adopt its version may send its language back to the other chamber for further consideration in amended form .

the first chamber may take up the amended version , or the two chambers may establish a conference committee to reach agreement on a common version .

each chamber appoints conferees , usually members of the original reporting committees , who may take up only those areas in disagreement .

a majority of the senate conferees and a majority of the house conferees must agree on what to report back to their respective chambers .

upon reaching agreement , a conference committee usually issues a report ( usually printed as a house report ) that contains two parts: the agreed upon text and a joint explanatory statement .

the joint explanatory statement in the conference report may discuss the differences between the house and senate passed language , discuss the reasons certain provisions were chosen over others , and provide additional information on the purpose of the legislation .

if passed by both chambers in identical form , the legislation is sent to the president .

conference committee reports are available in the same formats and sources as regular committee reports .

they can also be found in the congressional record .

the president may approve a bill or resolution , veto it , or take no action .

if the president signs a bill into law , he may issue a signing statement .

if no action is taken , the legislation becomes public law after 10 days ( sundays excepted ) unless final adjournment of congress has occurred , in which case the legislation does not become law ( known as a "pocket veto" ) .

if the president vetoes the legislation , congress may override the veto .

two - thirds of the house of representatives and two - thirds of the senate must vote to override the veto .

if the two chambers vote to override the veto , the legislation becomes law without the president's signature .

online sources compilation of presidential documents http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / browse / collection.action ? collectioncode=cpd the compilation of presidential documents is the official publication of presidential documents issued by the national archives and records administration's office of the federal register .

it consists of the weekly compilation of presidential documents and the daily compilation of presidential documents .

of note for legislative history researchers , it contains presidential signing statements .

it is available online through the gpo's website from 1993 to the present .

print sources public papers of the presidents of the united states .

published by the national archives and records administration's office of the federal register , these volumes contain public messages , speeches , and statements of the presidents beginning with president herbert hoover ( 1929 ) to the present .

they are available through crs , the library of congress , and federal depository libraries .

weekly compilation of presidential documents .

published beginning in 1965 and ending with the january 26 , 2009 , issue , it contains statements , messages , and other presidential materials released by the white house .

it is available through crs , the law library of congress , and federal depository libraries .

the united states s tatutes at large contain public and private laws enacted since 1789 .

gpo publishes the official text of the public and private laws of the united states .

beginning with the 110 th congress ( 2007-2008 ) , gpo has digitally signed and certified the pdf versions of individual public laws ( also called "slip laws" ) available from its website .

online sources gpo fdsys — united states statutes at large http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / browse / collection.action ? collectioncode=statute coverage on the gpo website is from the 82 nd congress ( 1951-1952 ) to the 111 th congress ( 2009-2010 ) .

gpo fdsys — public and private laws http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / browse / collection.action ? collectioncode=plaw coverage on the gpo website is from the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) to the present .

american memory's a century of lawmaking for a new nation: statutes at large http: / / memory.loc.gov / ammem / amlaw / the american memory website contains scanned images of the statutes at large from 1789 through 1875 .

print sources united states statutes at large .

the statutes at large volumes contain public and private laws enacted since 1789 .

they are available through crs , the law library of congress , and at some federal depository libraries .

u.s. code congressional and administrative news ( "usccan" ) .

this commercial service reprints public laws enacted since 1941 .

this publication is available through crs , the law library of congress , and may be in the collection of a federal depository library .

