the senior executive service ( ses ) was established by the civil service reform act of 1978 ( csra ; p.l .

95-454 , 92 stat .

1111 ) .

congress created the ses to provide a government - wide , mobile corps of managers within federal agencies .

the ses , comprising mostly career appointees who are chosen through a merit staffing process , is the link between the politically appointed heads of agencies and the career civil servants within those agencies .

the creators of the ses envisioned a cadre of high - level managers in the government who would provide leadership for agencies across administrations and ensure productivity and efficiency within the government .

the csra incentivized good performance among senior executives by basing their compensation on their performance .

the csra tasked the creation and distribution of ses positions within the government to the office of personnel management ( opm ) , which was also established by the csra .

the ses was launched in july 1979 and includes most of the government's managerial and policy positions above the general schedule ( gs ) grade 15 .

as one government official explained , "the ses is the backbone of federal executive leadership and its members play a crucial role in addressing unprecedented challenges facing our nation. .

more than three decades after its existence , the ses still serves as the link between political appointees who run agencies and the career government workers in the agencies .

before the ses was established , a centralized cadre of senior leaders in the government did not exist .

the creation of the ses was intended to bring a "measure of coherence" to an otherwise fragmented federal bureaucracy .

senior executives would be equipped with managerial skills that could allow them to move between agencies to "quell administrative brushfires" and to help fulfill agencies' leadership and management needs .

senior executives serve an important function in high - level government positions , overseeing the implementation of many government programs and providing leadership within agencies .

however , some organizations and individuals have called for changes to the current ses .

at a march 2011 hearing on the ses , for example , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs' subcommittee on oversight of government management , the federal workforce , and the district of columbia evaluated the current state of the ses .

all three witnesses at the hearing identified areas they said were in need of improvement in the ses , including recruiting , career development , diversity , and the ses pay system .

this report provides a history and background of the ses , examines the central features of the ses , and discusses some areas that ses reform advocates have identified as needing improvement .

the development of the "higher civil service" in the united states throughout the mid - 20 th century led to a class of civil servants in high - level agency positions sometimes referred to as the supergrades .

supergrades were civil servants who held gs - 16 , gs - 17 , and gs - 18 positions .

congress created the gs scale , including the supergrade positions , in 1949 .

at that time , the number of supergrade positions was limited to 400 .

individuals in supergrade positions earned salaries almost equivalent to those of political executives and members of congress .

they generally held specialized positions within agencies that were technically specific and did not require broad leadership skills or mobility .

it was these individuals who were converted into the senior executive service under the civil service reform act , along with individuals in managerial positions in executive levels iv and v. converting those high - level positions into a more centralized cadre of managers was intended to make the management of government more flexible and efficient .

although the ses was created during president jimmy carter's administration , president carter was not the first president to propose changes to the executive levels of the civil service .

three decades earlier , for example , president dwight d. eisenhower proposed a senior civil service ( which he later called the career executive service ) .

this proposal followed a series of recommendations made by the second hoover commission , chaired by former president herbert hoover , which was created in part to identify needs of the u.s. federal personnel system .

president john kennedy and president lyndon johnson also showed interest in reforming the higher civil service , tasking their administrations with reviewing the federal executive personnel system .

both presidents kennedy and johnson introduced a new method for filling supergrade positions , but as some scholars have pointed out , reactions to and success of the programs were mixed .

soon after entering the white house , president richard nixon asked the civil service commission to study and make recommendations on the state of the federal executive personnel system .

the study concluded that there were a number of issues with the executive personnel system that needed to be addressed .

some recommendations made by the commission included improving executive management capabilities ; fostering and recruiting from a talent pool of motivated individuals ; centralizing executive resources across agency lines ; and providing training for executives .

these recommendations were incorporated into a proposal by president nixon to establish the federal executive service in 1971 .

scholars have identified the political landscape surrounding the nixon presidency and a controversial provision which would have required executives to enter three - year "employment agreements" as the main reasons why congress did not pass nixon's fes bill .

this section discusses several key elements of the ses , including the types of positions and appointments , the role of opm , how career appointees enter the ses , compensation , and the issues of mobility and rank - in - person .

while many of the goals of the original vision for the ses have been achieved , critics maintain that unintended consequences have occurred in its development and that the ses can be further improved .

advocates for ses reform argue that changes could improve the efficiency and the management of government programs and the government workforce .

for example , a report by the partnership for public service and booz allen hamilton published in august 2009 examined the current condition of the ses , stating , our primary finding is that the senior executive service as envisioned by reformers has fallen short of its promise .

the original vision of the ses was never realized .

more importantly , we find that the original vision itself is inadequate for today's needs and does not provide the blueprint to build the kind of senior government leadership required for the future… .

building a consistently high - caliber , government - wide executive organization is impeded by decentralized talent development and recruitment processes , passive recruiting , an exceedingly cumbersome and lengthy hiring system , inadequate leadership training programs and a pay structure than can allow subordinates to earn more than top - level executives .

the senior executive service's professional association , the senior executive association ( sea ) , has also suggested a need for reforms to the ses .

carol bonosaro , president of the sea , has been a strong advocate for reforms .

in testimony she gave before the house committee on homeland security's subcommittee on management , investigation and oversight in march 2009 , she proposed several reforms for the department of homeland security and government - wide .

she suggested a number of changes that would help to do the following: restore career leadership , create a more fair and transparent pay and performance management system , and provide for training and continuing development of the ses .

making such reforms to the ses system across the government will help all agencies , including dhs , recruit and retain the best senior executives and ensure that they have the necessary tools to effectively carry out the missions of their agencies .

this section discusses some areas that advocates for changes to the ses have identified as needing reform , including pay compression , recruiting and retaining of senior executives , career development and training opportunities , mobility , diversity , and the role of opm .

president obama's president's management council established a working group to identify , among other things , areas for improvement of the ses .

omb and opm , the agencies that are coordinating the working group's effort , issued a joint memorandum on february 18 , 2011 , to members of the ses .

in the memo , leaders from omb and opm listed proposals to ( 1 ) improve ses professional development programs ; ( 2 ) streamline burdensome administrative processes ; ( 3 ) strengthen personnel performance management ; and ( 4 ) expand and diversify executive talent pipelines .

the memo suggested such reforms as encouraging more engagement between senior executives and political appointees in agencies and improving the current recruitment techniques to increase diversity and talent within the ses .

on march 29 , 2011 , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs' subcommittee on oversight of government management , the federal workforce , and the district of columbia held a hearing on the ses .

entitled "strengthening the senior executive service: a review of challenges facing the government's leadership corps," the hearing featured three witnesses who discussed many of the issues mentioned in this report .

the witnesses were representatives from opm , the partnership for public service , and the senior executives association .

the chairman of the subcommittee , senator daniel akaka , suggested that improvements to the hiring process , among other changes , could help strengthen the ses .

senator ron johnson , the committee's ranking member , stressed the importance of strong leadership in ensuring effectiveness of an organization , whether it is in the public or private sector .

hearing witness max stier , president and chief executive of the partnership for public service , suggested changing the 10% government - wide cap on noncareer senior executives to a 10% cap on each individual agency , since the percentage of noncareer appointees varies widely among agencies , ranging up to 20% at the department of education .

nancy kichak , a hearing witness from opm , discussed current efforts at opm to improve the hiring and recruiting processes .

carol bonosaro , the president of the senior executives association , raised the issue of pay compression and pressed for changes to the pay system .

other topics that were discussed at the hearing included diversity and career development opportunities for senior executives .

later in the 112 th congress , two bills were introduced that would make significant and sweeping changes to the ses .

the senior executive service reform act , s. 2249 , was introduced by senator daniel akaka on march 28 , 2012 .

if enacted , s. 2249 would make adjustments to the ses pay system , reduce the ratio of noncareer to career senior executives , establish an ses resource office in the office of personnel management ( opm ) , and require agencies to enhance professional development opportunities for senior executives .

representative jim moran introduced h.r .

6042 , also titled the senior executive service reform act , on june 27 , 2012 .

h.r .

6042 proposed similar changes to those proposed in the senate bill , and would also require agencies to evaluate the skills and qualifications necessary for each ses position when it becomes vacant .

in addition , h.r .

6042 would require agencies to establish an objective for holding executives accountable for addressing employee satisfaction .

