the most important military component of the struggle against violent extremists is not the fighting we do ourselves , but how well we help prepare our partners to defend and govern themselves .

national defense strategy 2008 the united states is unlikely to repeat another iraq or afghanistan — that is , forced regime change followed by nation building under fire — anytime soon .

but that does not mean it may not face similar challenges in a variety of locales .

where possible , u.s. strategy is to employ indirect approaches — primarily through building the capacity of partner governments and their security forces — to prevent festering problems from turning into crises that require costly and controversial direct military intervention .

in this kind of effort , the capabilities of the united states' allies and partners may be as important as its own , and building their capacity is arguably as important as , if not more so than , the fighting the united states does itself .

secretary of defense robert gates , january 2009 security force assistance ( sfa ) is defined by the department of defense ( dod ) as department activities that contribute to unified action by the u.s. government to support the development of the capacity and capability of foreign security forces and their supporting institutions .

it encompasses all activities formerly consolidated under the term "military training and advisory assistance. .

sfa is intended to be a u.s. means to develop , within a host nation , an enduring capability to establish and maintain security , provide legitimate governance , and foster development programs that address root grievances .

security force assistance is an overarching concept that ties into several interests of congress , including security assistance , security cooperation , foreign military financing , foreign military sales , foreign affairs , foreign aid , overseas contingency operations , and legislative authorities associated with training foreign forces ( foreign assistance act , p.l .

87-195 ; 22 u.s.c .

2151 ) .

 ( see figure 6 ) .

security force assistance relates to several significant issues in which congress may have interest and oversight .

sfa is considered key to engaging underdeveloped , undergoverned nations in a preventive context linked to counterterrorism strategy .

its basic premise , widely endorsed by analysts and within dod , is that developing nascent military and governance capabilities in nations that could either stabilize or tip into anarchy prevents the conditions that would devolve into nesting grounds for terrorists .

sfa is central to u.s. strategy for ensuring that afghanistan and iraq will be responsible for their own future stability and security .

the services' ability to provide trainers / advisors to central command ( centcom ) is at the nexus of reconstruction and stability operations in those countries .

congress may want to further consider policies to ensure that allies and coalition forces are contributing to this requirement .

congress may also consider the extent to which the capability that these nations attain through coalition sfa is sustainable and how it will impact future years' budgets .

sfa is linked to security cooperation and security assistance efforts through a diverse portfolio of legislative authorities , reporting requirements , and congressional oversight functions .

while these authorities provide for significant oversight from several committees , congress might decide to consolidate these authorities into pooled or multiyear funding intended to expedite a comprehensive and transparent approach .

the most recognizable counterterrorism efforts are direct action missions against al qaeda leadership , as seen in the reporting of drone strikes in afghanistan and pakistan .

it is not the intent of this report to discuss these kinetic operations .

nevertheless , the secretary of defense has stated , "arguably the most important military component in the war on terror is not the fighting we do ourselves , but how well we enable and empower our partners to defend and govern their own countries. .

the inability of weak or failed states to provide for their own internal security potentially creates within them a sanctuary for terrorist organizations such as al qaeda to operate , if not with impunity , then at least with greater freedom and less scrutiny .

the u.s. military focus is increasingly on the search for small cells of terrorists and on building the capacity of u.s. partners .

dod's emphasis in sfa is , in part , to give partner countries capabilities to deter and prevent terrorist activities and training .

counterterrorism includes actions taken directly against terrorist networks and indirectly to influence global and regional environments and render them inhospitable to terrorist networks .

the framework for the u.s. special operations command concept plan 7500 , department of defense global war on terrorism campaign plan , identifies two approaches consisting of efforts applied directly against the enemy and actions applied indirectly to influence the global environment .

these are referred to as direct and indirect approaches .

sfa is a primary piece of the indirect approach .

through training partner nations to be capable of their own security , the united states "enables partners to combat violent extremist organizations ( veos ) " ( see figure 12 ) .

sfa enables partners to conduct operations against terrorists and their organizations as well as to shape and stabilize their environments in order to erode the capabilities of terrorist organizations and degrade their ability to acquire support and sanctuary .

the premise of weak / failed state linkage to terrorism has its skeptics .

some analysts believe the common denominator for terrorist activity is not state failure .

rather , they argue , terrorist attacks are carried out by extremists claiming social or religious affiliations that have no linkage to geography .

thus , safe havens are not necessarily geographical but social .

this argument points out that several regions identified in the upper tier of state weakness ( such as haiti , congo , burundi , zimbabwe , and myanmar ) are not havens for terrorists .

this position further holds that the biggest terrorist threat to the homeland is posed by european radicals , who are able to travel to america more freely than those that reside in weak or failed state .

in testimony before the house and senate armed services committees , secretary of defense gates , service chiefs , and regional combatant commanders have been asked what steps are being taken to build a larger pool of sfa - oriented trainers within the services .

the challenge for the services has been to facilitate the organizing , training , and equipping of their own forces to meet this demand .

the special operations community has historically organized , trained , and equipped forces for this mission , and the conventional services are still standardizing their training methods and supporting organizations .

there have been increases in training , in the number of individuals trained , and in organizational commitment .

still , a significant challenge for the services will be providing continuity of effort , because their task - organized training is for a limited time , as compared to the long - term commitment of sof .

for example , a service member individual assigned to a conventional unit may be tasked to deploy as a trainer in his or her area of expertise ( e.g .

a logistician , an air traffic controller , a civil engineer or a helicopter pilot ) .

then he or she will attend the training provided by the service before deployment .

afterward , the individual will return to his or her own unit and resume functioning in a traditional capacity .

the "training" skill is not a permanent characteristic the soldier maintains proficiency in .

a reason for this is the degree of resources that would be required to maintain a standing capability .

sof personnel train for years in this field , and it is the mission for which they are inherently responsible ( see " u.s. special operations forces ( sof ) and security force assistance " ) .

to develop the same degree of fidelity in the conventional forces could require a significant increase in time and money .

sfa ( security assistance and security cooperation ) programs are governed by u.s. statute .

the primary laws with application to sfa are the arms export control act ( aeca ) ( as amended ) , the foreign assistance act ( faa ) ( as amended ) , and various sections of titles 10 and 22 of the u.s. code .

 ( see figure 13 . ) .

some analysts have described these authorities as disjointed , fragmented , cumbersome , and not finely tuned to address overseas needs or u.s. national security interests .

further , the obstacles to successful implementation of sfa are largely the same today as when the faa was enacted as a "remedy" to the nation's lacking unity of effort in 1961 .

this dilemma was summed up by dod in its 2010 quadrennial defense review as "a limited ability to sustain long - term efforts. .

it has consistently been an issue raised by combatant commanders in congressional hearings ( see appendix a ) .

in a 2009 memorandum to the national security council , dod described what it considered to be several deficiencies in the existing authorities: shortfalls and earmarks in funding that impede flexibility ; foreign military financing ( fmf ) funding essentially unchanged from 1991 to 2008 ; budget - to - execution timelines ( ~ 3 years ) that are not responsive to a changing security environment ; security assistance framework designed for building long - term relationships against a cold war adversary ; uncertainty about what capacity - building title 10 and title 22 programs are appropriate in the ambiguous area between war and peace ( lebanon , yemen , southern philippines ) ; the lack of multiyear funding and authorities available to combatant commanders to support building partner capacity ( i.e .

sfa ) missions .

secretary gates underscored that current authorities create missed opportunities for the united states to conduct capacity building in at - risk locations , opportunities that are often filled by other nations , such as china .

"all the while , other countries that do not suffer from such ( legislative ) encumbrances have been more quickly funding projects , selling weapons , and building relationships. .

as an example of the disparate u.s. government efforts to support sfa , an analysis by the government accountability office ( gao ) cited difficulties in africa command ( africom ) , which stated that it had access to 15 different funding sources to fund its activities in fy2009 .

this complex matrix of legal constraints affected the timely execution of capacity - building missions .

africom essentially "disinvited two - thirds of the intended participants for activities at the last minute because it was discovered that certain funding sources could not be used to support the participants. .

another analysis done by the gao used the example of thailand , the philippines , and indonesia , where u.s. assistance was provided through at least 12 programs and activities managed by state , dod , and justice .

the study pointed out that execution of these programs is hampered because of a lack of continuity at the strategic level across government agencies .

the "u.s. government lacks an integrated national security assistance strategy covering all u.s. training and assistance provided to foreign security forces. .

critics of expanded authorities to conduct the training of foreign forces bring up several points .

the most frequently heard criticism is the seemingly expansive role of dod serving as the lead in implementing foreign relations through sfa .

critics caution against reliance on a military - centric approach to international capacity building .

this position also highlights the disparity in resources between dod and dos and encourages significant investment in the latter as opposed to expanding the authorities of the former .

a 2007 report to senate members of the committee on foreign relations highlighted the expanded growth in department of defense authorities in the foreign assistance field since 2001 .

the report had the following recommendations: foreign assistance functions and authorities should not be migrating to the department of defense due to inadequate executive branch requests for funding in the proper budget account .

the secretary of state should streamline security assistance decision - making to make certain that there is ready flexibility and means to address emerging threats and unexpected opportunities .

insufficient funding for foreign assistance in the civilian agency budgets reinforces a migration of foreign aid authorities and functions to the department of defense .

congress , in cooperation with the executive branch , should undertake an overhaul of the foreign assistance act .

too often , members of congress narrow their foreign aid focus to favorite or least - favorite countries , specific ngos or programs , and other unique enthusiasms that end in earmarks or reporting requirements in appropriations bills .

the executive branch must provide detailed justifications for its requests and a sound strategic rationale for its priorities in order to stave off congressional directives .

congressional leadership should find floor time for a foreign aid authorization bill as a routine matter at least every two years .

members of congress should agree on reprogramming levels below which decisions can be made at the embassy level without requiring legislative branch notifications .

nevertheless , congress provided dod with an opportunity to explicitly spell out what is needed to facilitate building partner capacity .

as part of the 2010 national defense authorization act , congress directed under section 1204 that dod provide a "report on authorities to build the capacity of foreign military forces and related matters. .

as of the writing of this crs report , a final report from dod to meet this requirement had not been completed .

 ( see appendix b . ) .

one potential means for revised authorities was recently introduced .

both the department of state and the department of defense have endorsed a new global security contingency fund ( gscf ) that is intended to pool resources and expertise between the two departments and allow them to respond quickly as new challenges emerge .

this three - year pilot pooled fund is intended to be used to build partner capacity , prevent conflicts , and prepare for emerging threats .

described as an initiative that would "incentivize interagency collaboration through a new business model," it is intended to "provide a more agile and cost effective way to reduce the risk of future conflicts by allowing our government to respond to unforeseen needs and take advantage of emerging opportunities to help partners secure their own territories and regions. .

the gscf proposal was introduced in a memorandum to the secretary of state entitled "options for remodeling security assistance authorities. .

this proposal is modeled after a similar effort recently employed in the united kingdom .

this approach is intended to structure funding mechanisms and approval processes to reflect the importance of security sector activities to both dod and dos and to offer incentives for collaboration across the national security structure .

it is also intended to provide impetus for future steps toward national security budgeting .

in supporting the proposal for pooled funding , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , admiral mike mullen urged , "we should not allow bureaucratic resistance to trump operational effectiveness when security sector assistance is essential to our national strategy of helping others secure and defend themselves. .

this fund coincides with a state department reorganization , as outlined in the 2010 quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) .

the gscf would be affiliated with the bureau of conflict and stabilization operations ( formerly the coordinator for stabilization and reconstruction ) .

the qddr ( see appendix c ) emphasizes the priority of interagency coordination , while still leveraging dod's resources: "we must more effectively work with the defense department , which has unparalleled logistical , operational , and personnel capacities to operate in complex crisis situations and the capacity and knowledge to help countries build effective , responsible military forces under civilian leadership. .

the qddr also states: "the department of defense is uniquely positioned to stop violence , create conditions of security , and build the military capacity of foreign nations. .

one section of the qddr appears to give tacit endorsement for the gscf proposal , and another directly endorses it .

each department would seek funding within its own budget to contribute to the pooled funds .

both the state department and the defense department would contribute to these funds , and no project could move forward without the approval of both agencies .

the initial request for the program is for $50 million to be appropriated in whole or in part to either the state department or dod .

the proposal also includes a request for authority to transfer an additional $450 million into the fund from either department if needed .

the gscf is not intended to replace the 1206 and 1207 programs , which have leveraged interagency coordination for implementation .

these authorities provide training and equipment to partners for counterterrorism operations or for stability operations in which u.s. forces are a participant , including afghanistan ( see " security sector legislation beyond asff and isff " ) .

however , if the three year pilot program proves successful , 1206 could be supplanted by the gcsf .

the gscf would expand the scope of foreign security force organizations that could receive training to include the justice sector ( eg , law enforcement , prisons , rule of law programs ) , when the secretary of state , in consultation with the secretary of defense , determines that conflict or instability in a region challenges the existing capability of civilian providers to deliver such assistance .

this approach would require a request for authorities and funding from congress .

legislation would be required to establish funding pools in the u.s. treasury .

additionally , dod and state would both need to seek authority to provide funding to the pool as well as seeking their own appropriations for this purpose .

this funding could be drawn from existing accounts or identified as a separate funding requirement with a dedicated appropriation each year .

the request for authority would also likely include a mechanism for each department to add to the pool if a departmental priority needs to be addressed in the near term .

under current committee structure , this approach would require broad oversight from several committees .

this scrutiny would mirror current oversight of the 1206 and 1207 programs .

this process has provided more transparency to congress than is typical in most dod programs .

however , one analysis conducted by stimson center considers the necessary degree of congressional coordination to be an insurmountable task .

an option for congress could be a more transformational approach .

this would include creating in both the house and the senate a select committee to oversee these funds ( notionally referred to as select committees on security capacity building , stabilization , and conflict prevention ) .

moreover , the proposal could establish a new title of the u.s. code , separate from dod's title 10 or state's title 22 , under the oversight of these two select committees ( notionally referred to as "title 51" ) .

the intent would be to codify this process into a law with cross - cutting responsibility beyond a single committee's jurisdiction or section of u.s. code .

those that endorse the gscf proposal point out several issues .

among them are the availability of personnel and resources , the efficacy of streamlined authorities , and the move toward an overarching sfa effort as part of national security sector reform .

the most commonly heard endorsement is that while the state department holds overarching responsibility for determining engagement strategies and capability development for foreign nations , it is more often than not military resources that are available and accessible to conduct interaction , capability development , and relationships with our allies and partner nations .

one analysis of the proposal also points out that , in an area of tightening fiscal budgets , it is unlikely that there will be a huge shift in resources from dod to state and usaid , but it is likely that there will be ways to spend these resources together , with state and usaid in the lead .

one analysis sees the gcsf as part of a greater unified effort to coordinate an overarching security agenda .

the fund is seen as one effort that is combined with the state department's reorganization and a consolidated dod / dos overseas contingency operations ( oco ) budget .

some hold that pooling the resources of dod and state undermines the authorities and responsibilities inherent in each of these organizations .

while the security assistance authorities within the department of defense have expanded since 9 / 11 , some attest that this has eroded the tradition of state department leadership in aligning security assistance with america's foreign policy priorities .

they argue that a program such as the gscf would in essence grant the secretary of defense a veto over foreign policy decisions made by the secretary of state .

further , it could misalign the role of the defense department in policymaking and the contribution of security assistance to america's delicate diplomatic balance .

proponents of this position believe a more appropriate option for congress would be to amend section 506 of the foreign assistance act .

such an amendment would authorize the president to direct the drawdown of resources from any agency of the government to provide assistance elsewhere .

currently , this authority does not explicitly include security assistance .

opponents of the gscf proposal also argue that providing some of the funding through defense ( armed services ) committees is a conflict of interest and that doing so contradicts the importance of conflict prevention through diplomatic and development efforts rather than military ones .

those who endorse this stance contend that funding lines should remain distinct and that further efforts should be directed toward the state department's complex crises fund .

the overarching concept of security force assistance raises several questions for congressional consideration .

are the services' efforts to organize , train , and equip ( and corresponding resource budgets ) sufficient to conducting sfa ? .

are dedicated gpf units , similar to sof , for conducting sfa more suitable .

is the premise of training indigenous forces in afghanistan the correct methodology for establishing stability or is a smaller presence dedicated to eradicating the taliban more appropriate ? .

are current legislative authorities sufficient to conduct sfa ? .

and if the gscf is endorsed , how will effective oversight be ensured across committees ? .

what future steps will be taken to ensure a coordinated approach to capacity building between dos and dod ? .

combatant commanders' testimonies: authorities to conduct sfa combatant commanders' requests for revisions to authorizations in testimony before the armed services committees , the position of the global combatant commanders has consistently been that the current authorizations for conducting sfa are counter to effective security cooperation efforts .

in africa command ( africom ) , where sfa is considered essential to stability and counter - terrorism strategies , the commander testified: our ability to sustain forward progress toward our long - term goals in africa is dependent on several factors that enable our efforts .

some , such as limits on authorities , present us with challenges where we seek assistance .

others , such as interagency integration , present opportunities for growth and development of new or improved programs and activities that we wish to sustain .

sustaining our long - term security cooperation programs and activities in africa requires flexible , multi - year authorities .

existing authorities are designed to support the conduct of individual short - term activities or long - term programs , but do not support the transition from the former to the latter .

they are also insufficiently responsive to changing conditions , such as when train and equip efforts initiated in response to emergent threats highlight the need for long - term capacity building .

we encourage dialogue on ways to streamline or modify legislative authorities to enable sustained security engagement with our african partners , ranging from train and equip programs that respond quickly to changing conditions to long - term partner capacity - building , especially in countering violent extremism .

similarly , the european command ( eucom ) commander testified: through these training efforts , eucom enabled partner nations in making contributions to the effort in afghanistan .

however , we require expanded long - term authorities and funding to enhance and continue these efforts .

operationally , we must continuously strive to find flexible authorities and funding mechanisms to build the capacity of those partner nations willing to fight side - by - side with us .

this has become increasingly important because of the recent surge in activities in afghanistan and the need to get our allies and partners more involved .

your continued support and expansion of authorities like ndaa section 1206 , particularly allowing their use for partner nation forces deploying to iraq and afghanistan , has been absolutely pivotal in enabling our strategic efforts in the european theater .

the pacific command ( pacom ) commander testified: we face challenges in building partner capacity under the current patchwork of authorities and programs designed to support our security assistant efforts .

unfortunately these ( security assistance ) programs have not evolved much since the end of the cold war .

as reported by the qdr , these security assistance programs are constrained by a "patchwork of authorities , persistent shortfalls in the resources , unwieldy processes and a limited ability to sustain such undertakings beyond a short period of time. .

i agree with this description and fully support the administration's efforts to reform and enhance these important programs as essential to maintaining , and , in some cases , regaining our competitive edge .

i hope you will support the administration efforts in this regard .

congressional 1206 authority is the only partner capability / capacity building tool that we have to address urgent or emergent needs in the region .

in central command ( centcom ) , authorities are unique in that there is specific legislation addressing training activities with afghanistan , iraq , and pakistan .

nevertheless , general david petraeus also identified the legislative obstacles to effective security force assistance .

while these programs are reasonably successful in meeting needs in a peacetime environment , we support the reformation of the security assistance programs and processes described in this year's quadrennial defense review to create new , more responsive , long term mechanisms for developing our partner nations' security capacity .

additionally , in the face of enduring conflict in the region , we look to expanded special authorities and multi - year appropriations to quickly meet the emerging needs of counterterrorism , counterinsurgency , and foreign internal defense / security force assistance activities .

multi - year programs - of - record that provide training , equipment , and infrastructure for our partner nations' security forces enabled our successes in iraq and are of prime importance if we are to achieve comparable progress in afghanistan and pakistan .

these critical programs include the iraq security forces fund , the afghanistan security forces fund , the pakistan counterinsurgency fund , and the cooperative defense program .

additionally , in his 2011 guidance , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , admiral mike mullen , conveyed a similar theme to the joint staff: our engagement across the globe would be greatly enhanced by wholesale reform of security sector assistance .

our security assistance is designed for another era: authorities are inflexible , resources are insufficient , and processes are too cumbersome for addressing today's security challenges .

the laws and regulations surrounding security assistance are one of the major barriers to better and more substantial partnerships and a pooled - resources approach to foreign assistance .

we must better coordinate resources that are dedicated to the cause of national security , and ask congress to reform these authorities .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 , section 1204 report on authorities to build partner capacity sec .

1204 .

report on authorities to build the capacity of foreign military forces and related matters .

 ( a ) report required. — not later than march 1 , 2010 , the president shall transmit to the congressional committees specified in subsection ( b ) a report on the following: ( 1 ) the relationship between authorities of the department of defense to conduct security cooperation programs to train and equip , or otherwise build the capacity of , foreign military forces and security assistance authorities of the department of state and other foreign assistance agencies to provide assistance to train and equip , or otherwise build the capacity of , foreign military forces , including the distinction , if any , between the purposes of such authorities , the processes to generate requirements to satisfy the purposes of such authorities , and the contribution such authorities make to the core missions of each such department and agency .

 ( 2 ) the strengths and weaknesses of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( 22 u.s.c .

2151 et seq .

 ) , the arms export control act ( 22 u.s.c .

2171 et seq .

 ) , title 10 , united states code , and any other provision of law relating to training and equipping , or otherwise building the capacity of , foreign military forces , including to conduct counterterrorist operations or participate in or support military and stability operations in which the united state armed forces are a participant .

 ( 3 ) the changes , if any , that should be made to the provisions of law described in paragraph ( 2 ) that would improve the ability of the united states government to train and equip , or otherwise build the capacity of , foreign military forces , including to conduct counterterrorist operations or participate in or support military and stability operations in which the united state armed forces are a participant .

 ( 4 ) the organizational and procedural changes , if any , that should be made in the department of defense and the department of state and other foreign assistance agencies to improve the ability of such departments and agencies to conduct programs to train and equip , or otherwise build the capacity of , foreign military forces , including to conduct counterterrorist operations or participate in or support military and stability operations in which the united state armed forces are a participant .

 ( 5 ) the resources and funding mechanisms required to ensure adequate funding for such programs .

 ( b ) specified congressional committees. — the congressional committees specified in this subsection are the following: ( 1 ) the committee on armed services , the committee on foreign affairs , and the committee on appropriations of the house of representatives .

the committee on armed services , the committee on foreign relations , and the committee on appropriations of the senate .

state department's quadrennial diplomacy and development review , referral to pooled funding civil - military collaboration , particularly in countries characterized by conflict or instability , initiatives and programs jointly developed by teams of state , usaid , and department of defense personnel are generally more effective .

where appropriate , we will work in joint civilian and military teams and develop innovative mechanisms for civil - military collaboration , such as shared funding or pooled funds.... pooled funding .

as we work toward comprehensive solutions to the challenges described above , state and usaid will pursue innovative mechanisms to facilitate unified planning and implementation of missions that cut across agencies , programs and budgets , and that require the integration and cohesion of military and civilian power .

we are currently exploring the creation of a 3-year joint pilot pooled fund between state , usaid , and department of defense for security and justice sector and stabilization assistance .

the creation of a pooled funding mechanism would provide needed flexibility and resources in situations in which the confluence of several security challenges , such as armed conflict , terrorist activities or organized crime , converge with state fragility .

in such circumstances , a coordinated and holistic assistance response across the security and justice sector is necessary , requiring state and usaid to work in complete synchronization with the department of justice , department of defense , and other agencies .

pooled funding would help overcome the limitations of current authorities and resource shortfalls , by allowing for the integration of military and civilian assets in planning and implementing comprehensive assistance programs .

in this way , it would facilitate the design of assistance programs based on the comparative advantages of each agency in a particular situation , instead of the current allocation of funding between agencies .

pooled funding would embody the principle of shared responsibility , with a dual key decision model and an interagency staff , through which our agencies would work together to identify requirements and develop programs , taking advantage of the diverse expertise of state , usaid , the department of defense , and other agencies .

defense department's 2010 quadrennial defense review , sfa references build the security capacity of partner states : since the united states assumed the role of a leading security provider after the end of world war ii , dod has worked actively to build the defense capacity of allied and partner states .

doing so has also given the u.s. armed forces opportunities to train with and learn from their counterparts .

these efforts further the u.s. objective of securing a peaceful and cooperative international order .

security cooperation activities include bilateral and multilateral training and exercises , foreign military sales ( fms ) and financing ( fmf ) , officer exchange programs , educational opportunities at professional military schools , technical exchanges , and efforts to assist foreign security forces in building competency and capacity .

in today's complex and interdependent security environment , these dimensions of the u.s. defense strategy have never been more important .

u.s. forces , therefore , will continue to treat the building of partners' security capacity as an increasingly important mission .

within the range of security cooperation activities , the most dynamic in the coming years will be security force assistance ( sfa ) missions: "hands on" efforts , conducted primarily in host countries , to train , equip , advise , and assist those countries' forces in becoming more proficient at providing security to their populations and protecting their resources and territories .

in order to ensure that improvements in partner security forces are sustained , the department must seek to enhance the capabilities and capacity of security institutions , such as defense ministries , that support fielded forces.... [emphasis added] as we place greater emphasis on building the capacity of our partners , our efforts will continue to be informed by our long - term determination to foster human dignity .

this commitment is manifested in human rights vetting and other controls that shape our efforts to train , equip , advise , and assist foreign forces and partner security institutions .

america's efforts to build the capacity of our partners will always be defined by support for healthy civil - military relations , respect for human dignity and the rule of law , promotion of international humanitarian law , and the professionalization of partner military forces .

these sfa activities can help enable host - country participation in coalition stability operations and multilateral peacekeeping operations that improve regional security .

working in conjunction with other u.s. government agencies and allied military forces to strengthen the security institutions of partner nations will be a crucial part of u.s. and allied efforts to defeat terrorist groups around the world .

terrorist groups seek to evade security forces by exploiting ungoverned and undergoverned areas as safe havens from which to recruit , indoctrinate , and train fighters , as well as to plan attacks on u.s. and allied interests .

where appropriate , u.s. forces will work with the military forces of partner nations to strengthen their capacity for internal security , and will coordinate those activities with those of other u.s. government agencies as they work to strengthen civilian capacities , thus denying terrorists and insurgents safe havens .

for reasons of political legitimacy as well as sheer economic necessity , there is no substitute for professional , motivated local security forces protecting populations threatened by insurgents and terrorists in their midst .

u.s. forces have been training , advising , and assisting afghan and iraqi security forces so that they can more effectively uphold the rule of law and control and defend their territories against violent non - state actors .

in these contested environments , partnered counter insurgency ( coin ) , in which afghan and iraqi units operate in tandem with u.s. forces , is an effective way to train and advise forces while conducting combat operations against insurgents .

these partnered host - nation units have the advantage of knowing the terrain , language , and local culture .

partnering with u.s. forces in return allows them to train and learn by doing.... u.s. forces have been training , advising , and assisting afghan and iraqi security forces so that they can more effectively uphold the rule of law and control and defend their territories against violent non - state actors .

in these contested environments , partnered counter insurgency ( coin ) , in which afghan and iraqi units operate in tandem with u.s. forces , is an effective way to train and advise forces while conducting combat operations against insurgents .

these partnered host - nation units have the advantage of knowing the terrain , language , and local culture .

partnering with u.s. forces in return allows them to train and learn by doing.... key qdr initiatives to support this mission area include the following: strengthen and institutionalize general purpose force capabilities for security force assistance .

all four services provide specialized training to individuals and groups deploying abroad to train and advise the security forces of partner nations .

in anticipation of the growing role of security force assistance in u.s. defense strategy and operations , the army , navy , air force , and marine corps will add more than 500 personnel to their train - the - trainer units for general purpose forces .

the air force will also expand its regionally oriented contingency response groups ( crgs ) .

the intention is for these units to steadily grow to the point at which their staffs can sustain specialized expertise in regions and countries of greatest importance and regularly detach experts to accompany units deploying to training missions abroad .

in addition , the air force will field light mobility and light attack aircraft in general purpose force units in order to increase their ability to work effectively with a wider range of partner air forces.... [emphasis added] building the defense capacity of allies and partners and ensuring that the u.s. armed forces are able to effectively train and operate with foreign militaries is a high - priority mission .

as the emphasis on developing the capability of indigenous security forces in afghanistan and iraq reflects , conducting security force assistance ( sfa ) operations is an increasingly critical element of building partnership capacity .

in anticipation of the growing role of security force assistance in u.s. strategy and operations , the department is institutionalizing general purpose force capabilities for security force assistance ; enhancing language , regional , and cultural abilities ; strengthening and expanding capabilities for training partner aviation forces , as well as capacities for ministerial - level training ; and creating mechanisms to facilitate more rapid transfer of critical materiel... .

