state revenues declined during the recent economic recession ( december 2007 through june 2009 ) and have not fully recovered .

this decline in revenue continues to place considerable strain on state budgets .

as a result , nearly all states made spending cuts — both to public programs and for public employees .

at the same time , the recession increased the number of individuals meeting medicaid's income eligibility standards .

this resulted in higher program enrollment and therefore higher state spending on medicaid benefits .

given declining state tax revenue , in conjunction with requirements in all states but vermont for balanced operating budgets , states are faced with tough decisions about where to direct the limited funds .

this state fiscal condition is a reason the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 as extended ) included a temporary increase to the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) rates to help states maintain their medicaid programs and free up funds that states would have otherwise used for medicaid to address other state budgetary needs .

as a condition of the receipt of the federal medicaid matching funds made available under the arra fmap provision , states were required to maintain their medicaid programs with the same eligibility standards , methodologies , or procedures for medicaid through june 30 , 2011 ( i.e. , the end of the arra temporary fmap adjustment period ) .

this provision is referred to as the maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement .

with the enactment of the patient protection and affordable care act as modified by the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( aca , p.l .

111-148 as modified by p.l .

111-152 ) , the arra moe provisions were extended and expanded .

aca's moe provisions were designed to ensure that individuals eligible for medicaid or the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) did not lose coverage in the period between the date of enactment of aca ( march 23 , 2010 ) and the implementation of the state health insurance exchanges ( expected in 2014 ) .

generally , beginning in 2014 , medicaid - eligible adults who were no longer protected by moe would presumably have access to subsidized coverage through state exchanges .

under the aca moe , with certain exceptions , states are required to maintain their medicaid and chip programs until 2014 with the same eligibility standards , methodologies , or procedures in place as of march 23 , 2010 .

for medicaid and chip - eligible children up to age 19 , the moe requirement extends through september 30 , 2019 .

failure to comply with these requirements would result in the loss all federal medicaid matching funds .

because states are prohibited from curbing the cost of medicaid through restricting eligibility standards due to the moe requirements included in arra and aca , over the past few years , states have focused cost containment strategies on reducing provider rates , making changes to their benefit packages , or implementing limitations on the use of benefits .

however , with the june 30 , 2011 , phase - out of the enhanced federal medicaid funding under arra , states have been seeking congressional relief from the moe requirements .

states want greater flexibility to restrain their medicaid expenditures through eligibility restrictions .

this report summarizes the moe requirements enacted under arra and aca and what these requirements have meant for states in terms of their actions to restrict medicaid and / or state children's health insurance program ( chip ) eligibility .

it also summarizes recent legislative activity to repeal the moe requirements .

medicaid is a means - tested individual entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services as well as long - term care to more than 68 million people ( fy2010 ) who meet both income and categorical eligibility criteria .

while medicaid is considered a mandatory program in federal budget terms , states choose whether to participate , and all 50 states , the district of columbia , and the territories do .

the federal and state governments share the cost of medicaid .

states are reimbursed by the federal government for a portion ( the "federal share" ) of a state's medicaid program costs .

in fy2010 , medicaid spending totaled approximately $406 billion , with a federal share of $274 billion and a state share of $132 billion .

as a condition of receipt of any federal financial participation ( ffp ) , states must meet their state share requirements , have a plan for medical assistance approved by the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) , and comply with medicaid program rules .

chip was established by the balanced budget act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-33 ) and was recently reauthorized by the children's health insurance program reauthorization act of 2009 ( chipra , p.l .

111-3 ) .

chip provides health coverage to uninsured , low - income children in families with annual income above medicaid eligibility thresholds .

when certain conditions are met , chip coverage is also available to pregnant women and parents .

in fy2010 , there were approximately 7.7 million children and 347,143 adults ( ever enrolled ) in chip , and the estimated annual cost to the federal and state governments was roughly $11.4 billion in fy2010 , with a federal share of $8.0 billion and a state share of $3.4 billion .

as with medicaid , chip is funded jointly by the federal government and the states , and is administered by the states .

also like medicaid , chip is considered a mandatory spending program in terms of the federal budget .

however , rather than being considered an individual entitlement , chip operates as a capped entitlement to states .

states with approved chip plans that comply with program rules and that meet their state share requirements are entitled to a portion of a national annual appropriation .

all 50 states , the district of columbia , and the territories choose to participate in the chip program .

during the most recent recession , congress provided additional economic stimulus funding to states , including a temporary increase to the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) rate that defines the federal government's share of a state's expenditures for most medicaid services .

the temporary fmap increase enacted under arra was later extended by p.l .

111-226 .

the temporary fmap increase runs for 11 quarters , from the first quarter of fy2009 through the third quarter of fy2011 ( i.e. , october 2008 through june 2011 ) , subject to certain requirements , including a maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement .

the arra moe provision generally requires states with medicaid programs in effect on july 1 , 2008 , to maintain their programs with the same eligibility standards , methodologies , or procedures for medicaid through june 30 , 2011 ( i.e. , the end of the arra temporary fmap adjustment period ) .

failure to comply with the moe requirements means a state would lose its increase in its federal medicaid matching funds made available under the arra fmap provision .

section 5001 ( f ) ( 1 ) ( b ) and ( c ) permits states that have restricted their "eligibility standards , procedures , or methodologies" to reinstate them in any quarter to begin receiving the temporary fmap increase .

in addition , those states that reinstated their "eligibility standards , procedures , or methodologies" prior to july 1 , 2009 , received the increase for the first three quarters of fy2009 .

states were required by hhs to attest that they met the eligibility requirements .

hhs indicated that four states ( mississippi , north carolina , south carolina , and virginia ) were ineligible when funding estimates were first released on february 23 , 2009 , but those states have since been cleared to receive the fmap increase .

a more recent study found that the arra requirements resulted in 14 states reversing and 5 states abandoning planned restrictions to eligibility .

under the children's health insurance program reauthorization act ( chipra ) of 2009 , a number of states were required to move their childless adult populations out of chip by december 31 , 2009 , and could apply to have them enrolled under a medicaid waiver .

however , arra fmaps were not originally available for these childless adults because they had not been eligible for medicaid on july 1 , 2008 ( as stated above ) .

under p.l .

111-226 , states can now receive arra fmaps for non - pregnant childless adults in medicaid who would have been eligible for chip based on standards in effect on december 31 , 2009 .

it appears that idaho , michigan , and new mexico will benefit from this provision .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 ) , as amended by the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-152 ) , made significant changes to medicaid and extended federal financing for chip through fy2015 .

the most noteworthy change begins in 2014 , or sooner at state option , when states are required to expand medicaid eligibility to individuals under age 65 with income up to 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) ( effectively 138% fpl with the modified adjusted gross income or magi 5% fpl income disregard ) .

at the same time , with certain exceptions , aca requires states to maintain current medicaid and chip eligibility levels .

under aca , the arra moe provisions were extended and expanded .

aca's moe provisions were designed to ensure that medicaid and chip - eligible individuals did not lose coverage in the period between the date of enactment of aca ( march 23 , 2010 ) and the implementation of the state health insurance exchanges ( expected in 2014 ) .

the aca medicaid moe provision generally requires that states with medicaid programs in effect on march 23 , 2010 , maintain their programs with the same eligibility standards , methodologies , or procedures until the health insurance exchanges are operational .

additionally , the medicaid moe for medicaid - eligible children up to age 19 continues until september 30 , 2019 .

failure to comply with the aca moe requirements would result in a loss of all federal medicaid matching funds for that state .

this differs from the arra moe requirement , under which states that do not comply would only lose access to the additional federal funds made available through the increase in the fmap rate .

section 2001 ( b ) ( 3 ) provides for an exemption to this moe requirement for states that have , or are projected to have , a budget deficit , but only with respect to individuals who are non - pregnant , non - disabled adults who are eligible for medical assistance under a state plan or waiver of a state plan , and whose income exceeds 133% fpl ( or 138% fpl with the magi income counting disregard ) .

this moe provision does not prohibit states from cutting medicaid in other ways , such as by reducing provider reimbursement rates or by eliminating optional benefits .

states are not prohibited from expanding medicaid coverage during the moe period .

this chip - specific moe provision generally requires states to maintain income "eligibility standards , methodologies and procedures" in effect as of march 23 , 2010 , through september 30 , 2019 , as a condition of receiving federal matching payments under medicaid .

specifically , with the exception of waiting lists for enrolling children in chip or enrolling chip - eligible children in exchange plans when federal chip funding is no longer available , states cannot implement eligibility standards , methodologies , or procedures that are more restrictive than those in place on the date of enactment of aca .

however , states can expand their current income eligibility levels — that is , states can enact less restrictive standards , methodologies , or procedures .

to obtain fiscal reprieve , some states have pondered either dropping out of medicaid entirely or scaling back on eligibility .

recently , states have been seeking congressional relief from the moe requirements , to provide them with greater flexibility to restrain medicaid expenditures through eligibility restrictions .

on may 3 , 2011 , the house of representatives introduced h.r .

1683 , the state flexibility act , which would repeal the moe requirements for medicaid and chip included in arra and aca .

cbo and the staff of the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) estimated that enacting h.r .

1683 would reduce the federal deficit by approximately $2.1 billion over the 2012-2021 period .

their estimate includes the net impact on direct spending and revenues from changes in enrollment in medicaid , chip , health insurance purchased through exchanges , and employer - based health insurance .

of this amount , cbo estimates that federal medicaid spending would decline by roughly $1.5 billion over the five - year period ( 2012-2016 ) , with no additional savings or costs occurring in the next five years of the budget window .

for chip , cbo estimates that federal spending would decline by an estimated total of $8.8 billion over 10 years .

the medicaid and chip savings would be largely offset by increased enrollment in employer - sponsored plans and additional exchange subsidies .

with regard to enrollment , cbo estimates that h.r .

1683 would reduce medicaid and chip enrollment by about 400,000 individuals in 2013 , of which approximately 300,000 would become uninsured and 100,000 would enroll in employer - based coverage .

in 2014 , individuals would be eligible for medicaid based on the new income requirements established in aca , eliminating the impact of repealing moe requirements on medicaid enrollment .

in 2016 , cbo estimates that chip enrollment would decline by about 1.7 million individuals , while employer - based insurance would increase by 700,000 .

relative to current law projections , approximately 300,000 individuals would become uninsured in 2016 .

