the obama administration has requested $7.8 billion in bilateral foreign assistance for africa in fy2012 , which is designed to meet a number of objectives ( see figure 1 ) .

the administration has identified five u.s. policy priorities in africa that broadly correspond to long - standing u.s. engagement on the continent: to strengthen democratic institutions ; to foster broad - based and sustainable economic growth ; to combat disease and improve public health ; to prevent , mitigate , and resolve armed conflict ; and to help to address transnational threats and challenges .

at the same time , over three - quarters ( $6 billion ) of the administration's fy2012 foreign assistance budget request for the continent is allocated toward implementing three global aid initiatives launched over the past two years: the global health initiative , which incorporates significant pre - existing hiv / aids , malaria , and tropical disease initiatives ; feed the future ; and the global climate change initiative .

 ( these initiatives and other bilateral and regional assistance program areas are discussed below. ) .

the wide range of u.s. policy objectives with regard to africa reflects the continent's size and diversity .

it also reflects a central tension of foreign aid policy: aid aims to enable other countries to achieve a certain level of prosperity and governance capacity for their own sake , but it is also a tool for the united states to advance its national and strategic interests .

bilateral aid packages thus ostensibly advance u.s. interests , while seeking to meet recipient countries' assessed needs and perceived ability to benefit from u.s. programs .

there is additional tension between aid as a tool to achieve specific development outcomes ( such as increasing economic growth , extending life expectancy , improving government service delivery , or contributing to the settlement of conflicts ) and its potential usefulness in obtaining diplomatic leverage .

the design of u.s. aid to africa therefore represents a challenge to u.s. policy makers in terms of balancing priorities and achieving strategic focus .

given the inability of many african countries to meet basic development and governance criteria — as a region , africa is not on track to meet the u.n. millennium development goals — policy makers often debate whether poor performance on the part of recipient governments justifies terminating or continuing aid .

some policy makers may argue that governance concerns justify cutting aid , while others might contend that aid is designed to improve areas of poor performance , and that maintaining programs may give the united states leverage to change poor or ineffective policies pursued by recipient governments .

others debate whether security assistance programs strengthen undemocratic regimes in africa , and whether they serve the national security interests of the united states ( and at what cost ) .

at the same time , security assistance programs sometimes aim to improve the professionalism and human rights record of african military and police forces .

a breakdown of u.s. aid to africa by program area shows a strong emphasis on health assistance ( largely categorized as investing in people by the state department ) , which represents nearly three - quarters of total bilateral aid to the continent .

president obama's administration and recent congresses have provided strong support for global health assistance , building on the sharp increase in u.s. global health commitments initiated by the administration of former president george w. bush .

at the same time , administration policy statements reference various other policy priorities in africa , which are not necessarily matched with equally robust aid allocations .

over three - quarters of the administration's fy2012 bilateral aid request for african countries ( not including mcc funding ) would be allocated toward implementing three presidential global foreign aid initiatives focused on health , food security , and mitigation of the impacts of global climate change .

the remaining "non - initiative" funding amounts to $1.8 billion , or 23% of the total bilateral aid request for african countries ( see figure 3 ) .

 ( other aid priorities are discussed below , in " other selected ." ) .

the administration has identified 13 priority african countries for non - initiative aid programming: 1 .

sudan , liberia , the democratic republic of congo ( drc ) , kenya , zimbabwe , and somalia are "facing major humanitarian problems , or recovering or suffering from serious conflict. .

2 .

ethiopia , nigeria , and south africa play "important roles … in advancing regional security and economic growth. .

3 .

ghana , mali , mozambique , and tanzania are "relatively well - performing" but are seen as requiring assistance to support "democratic consolidation. .

proposed fy2012 aid to these 13 countries totals $5.14 billion , or just under 66% of the total africa aid request .

the decision to designate priority countries reflects an attempt to strategically focus foreign aid resources ; the designations , however , do not necessarily correspond to overall aid levels , in part because the prioritization refers to non - initiative aid allocations .

in other words , some countries receive higher overall funding than some priority countries , potentially because of large costs in health , food assistance , or climate change programs .

for example , uganda ( $527.8 million ) , zambia ( $400.8 million ) , and rwanda ( $241.4 million ) are among the top 13 aid beneficiaries in the fy2012 budget , but are not designated among the 13 priority countries .

neither is angola , which is one of three african countries ( along with nigeria and south africa ) with which the united states has initiated a bilateral strategic partnership dialogue .

the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) was established in 2004 to introduce a new approach to foreign economic assistance .

a number of key elements differentiate it from previous aid efforts and from the ongoing work of usaid .

its purpose — reducing poverty through economic growth — is not characterized by the multiple objectives legislated for usaid or with similar legislative restrictions .

it was conceived to work with only a relative handful of nations that are viewed as most likely to succeed .

recipients must score above the median in relation to other countries in their income brackets in performance indicators that measure their commitment to "ruling justly," "investing in people," and "economic freedom. .

in the most radical departure from previous aid efforts , recipient countries are expected to "own" their projects , with responsibility to formulate , propose , and implement them .

the mcc maintains two types of programs — compacts and threshold agreements .

compacts are large - scale grants , most lasting five years , that contain two or three project elements focusing on different sectors .

most projects have emphasized infrastructure , especially roads and irrigation , but many also include a component aimed at land titling , financial sector reform , health , water , education , tourism , or artisan crafts .

of the 23 compacts signed to date , 12 have been with african countries .

of the roughly $8.3 billion in compact funding provided , about $4.8 billion ( 58% ) is committed to african countries .

the mcc also has supported two - year threshold programs designed to assist promising candidate countries in addressing shortcomings in one or more of their qualifying performance indicators .

nearly all of these threshold programs focus on corruption concerns , a performance measure that must be passed in order to achieve compact - eligible status .

of the 21 countries that have received threshold funding to date , 10 are in africa .

of the $495 million in threshold program funding , africa represents $161 million ( 33% ) .

in fy2011 , the mcc is funding a first compact for malawi and plans to fund a first compact for zambia and a second compact for cape verde .

the malawi compact was signed on april 7 , 2011 .

valued at $351 million , it will focus entirely on the electricity sector .

the envisaged $350 million zambia compact is expected to focus on tourism and clean water supply .

the cape verde compact is expected to address problems in water sanitation and property rights .

the administration's fy2012 request would cover funding for a second compact with ghana .

a project proposal has not yet been fully developed .

appendix a .

aid to africa: selected charts appendix a .

appendix b. ma .

