around the world , more than 3.3 billion people have access to the internet , an increase from about 2 billion people in 2013 .

most use this access to conduct activities related to their day - to - day lives — such as accessing government services , banking and paying bills , communicating with friends and relatives , researching health information , and , in some cases , participating in their counties' political processes .

in most countries , those who use the internet to participate in their countries' political processes take for granted that they may use the internet to engage openly in political discussions and to organize politically oriented activities .

however , the freedoms of speech , association , and assembly — including both political speech and organizing conducted via the internet — are not available to citizens in every country .

in some countries activists are in danger any time they access or even attempt to access a prohibited website or service or promote political dissent .

political activity is monitored and tracked .

despite such hurdles , political activists have embraced the internet , using it to share information and organize dissent .

to protect themselves , they have purchased and deployed circumvention technologies to skirt government censors .

the restriction of internet freedom by foreign governments creates a tension between u.s. policymakers and industry .

one of the most fundamental of these tensions is between the commercial needs of u.s. industry , which faces competitive and legal pressures in international markets , and the political interests of the united states , which faces other pressures ( eg , national security , global politics ) .

this tension is complicated by the fact that many of the technologies in question may be used both for and against internet freedom , in some cases simultaneously .

governments everywhere need the internet for economic growth and technological development .

some also seek to restrict the internet in order to maintain social , political , or economic control .

such regimes often require the assistance of foreign internet companies operating in their countries .

these global technology companies find themselves in a dilemma: they must either follow the laws and requests of the host country , or refuse to do so and risk the loss of business licenses or the ability to sell services in that country .

at the same time , if companies do comply with the requirements of the host nation , they risk raising the concern of u.s. lawmakers by appearing to be complicit with a repressive regime .

others believe that technology can offer a complementary ( and , in some cases , better ) solution to prevent government censorship than mandates imposed on companies .

hardware , software , and internet services , in and of themselves , are neutral elements of the internet ; it is how they are implemented by various countries that makes them "repressive. .

for example , software is needed by internet service providers ( isps ) to provide that service .

however , software features intended for day - to - day internet traffic management , such as filtering programs that catch spam or viruses , can be misused .

repressive governments use such programs to censor and monitor internet traffic — sometimes using them to identify specific individuals for persecution .

both the department of state and the broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) have an active role in fighting internet censorship .

in response to criticism , particularly of their operations in china , a group of u.s. information and communications technology companies , along with civil society organizations , investors , and academic entities , formed the global network initiative ( gni ) in 2008 .

the gni aims to promote best practices related to the conduct of u.s. companies in countries with poor internet freedom records .

the gni adopts a self - regulatory approach to promote due diligence and awareness regarding human rights .

a set of principles and supporting mechanisms provides guidance to the ict industry and its stakeholders on how to protect and advance freedom of expression and the right to privacy when faced with pressures from governments to take actions that infringe upon these rights .

companies undergo third - party assessments of their compliance with gni principles .

although some human rights groups have criticized the gni's guidelines for being weak or too broad , the gni's supporters argue that the initiative sets realistic goals and creates real incentives for companies to uphold free expression and privacy .

in november 2015 , the gni sent letters to all members of the european parliament regarding "resolution on prevention of radicalisation and recruitment of european citizens by terrorist organisations. .

the letter was sent to express concerns among gni members that the proposed resolution — which at the time had been approved by the committee on civil liberties , justice , and home affairs , and has since been adopted — while well - intended , could have unintentional consequences: the gni acknowledges the legitimate national security and law enforcement obligations of governments .

however , our members are concerned that the rush to adopt laws and policies that increase government requirements on companies to restrict or remove content may have serious consequences for freedom of expression and may not be effective in countering violent extremism and stemming recruitment by organizations such as isis .

appendix a .

for further reading freedom on the net 2015 freedom house october 2015 https: / / freedomhouse.org / report / freedom - net / freedom - net - 2015 how to circumvent online censorship electronic frontier foundation updated august 14 , 2015 https: / / ssd.eff.org / en / module / how - circumvent - online - censorship letter from gni to european parliament regarding terrorist recruitment and radicalization global network initiative november 18 , 2015 http: / / globalnetworkinitiative.org / sites / default / files / gni%20letter%20on%20radicalization%20to%20eu%20meps_0.pdf protecting human rights in the digital age global network initiative february 2011 https: / / globalnetworkinitiative.org / sites / default / files / files / bsr_ict_human_rights_report.pdf leaping o ver the firewall: a review of censorship circumvention tools freedom house april 2011 https: / / www.freedomhouse.org / sites / default / files / inline_images / censorship.pdf the political power of social media: technology , the publ ic sphere , and political change journal of the council on foreign relations january / february 2011 http: / / www.foreignaffairs.com / articles / 67038 / clay - shirky / the - political - power - of - social - media *full article not available online .

appendix b. methods / technologies used to monitor and censor websites and web - based communications there are three different types of targets that are censored: services , eg , email , the web , peer - to - peer , social networking service content , eg , hate speech , child pornography , gambling , human - rights organizations , independent news sites , political opposition sites activities , eg , illegal music downloads , spam , political organizing by opposition groups in repressive regimes .

these targets can be censored using the methods listed below .

key - word list blocking this is a simple type of filtration where a government drops any internet packets featuring certain keywords , such as "protest" or "proxy. .

domain name system ( dns ) and dns cache poisoning ( spoofing ) and hijacking ( filtering / redirection ) these methods introduce malware and / or errors into the internet's or local dns cache to misdirect the original request to another ip address .

ip blocking ip blocking is one of the most basic methods that governments use for censorship , as it simply prevents all packets going to or from targeted ip addresses .

this is an easy technology to implement , but it does not address the problem of individual communications between users .

this method is used to block banned websites , including news sites and proxy servers that would allow access to banned content , from being viewed .

bandwidth throttling bandwidth throttling simply limits the amount of traffic that can be sent over the internet .

keeping data volume low facilitates other methods of monitoring and filtering by limiting the amount of data present .

traffic classification this is a much more sophisticated method of blocking traffic than ip blocking , as governments can halt any file sent through a certain type of protocol , such as ftp .

because ftp transfers are most often sent through a specific communications port , a government can simply limit the bandwidth available on that port and throttle transfers .

this type of traffic - shaping practice is popular with repressive governments because it is not resource intensive and it is fairly easy to implement .

shallow packet inspection ( spi ) shallow packet inspection is a less sophisticated version of the deep packet inspection ( dpi ) technique ( dpi is described below ) that is used to block packets based on their content .

unlike dpi , which intercepts packets and inspects their fingerprints ( fingerprinting is described below ) , headers , and payloads , spi makes broad generalities about traffic based solely on evaluating the packet header .

although shallow packet inspection cannot provide the same refined / detailed traffic assessments as dpi , it is much better at handling volume than dpi .

spi is much less refined than dpi , but it is capable of handling a greater volume of traffic much more quickly .

spi is akin to judging a book by its cover .

this method is prone to exploitation by users because they can disguise their packets to look like a different kind of traffic .

packet fingerprinting this is a slightly more refined method of throttling packets than shallow packet inspection , as it looks not only at the packet header but at its length , frequency of transmission , and other characteristics to make a rough determination of its content .

in this manner , the government can better classify packets and not throttle traffic sent out by key businesses .

deep packet inspection ( dpi ) / packet content filtering dpi is the most refined method that governments have for blocking internet traffic .

as mentioned above , deep packet inspectors examine not only a packet's header but also its payload .

for instance , certain keywords can be both monitored and the email containing them can be kept from reaching its intended destination .

this gives governments the ability to filter packets at a more surgical level than any of the other techniques discussed so far .

while providing the most targeted traffic monitoring and shaping capabilities , dpi is also more complicated to run and is far more labor intensive than other traffic - shaping technologies .

appendix c. examples of technologies used to circumvent censorship each of the circumvention methods explained below can , in general , be considered an anonymous "proxy server. .

a proxy server is a computer system or an application program that acts as an intermediary for requests from a user seeking resources from other servers , allowing the user to block access to his or her identity and become anonymous .

web - based circumvention systems web - based circumvention systems are special web pages that allow users to submit a url and have the web - based circumventor retrieve the requested web page .

there is no connection between the user and the requested website , as the circumventor transparently proxies the request , allowing the user to browse blocked websites seamlessly .

since the web addresses of public circumventors are widely known , most internet filtering applications already have these services on their block lists , as do many countries that filter at the national level .

examples: proxify , stupidcensorhip , cgiproxy , psiphon , peacefire / circumventor .

web and application tunneling software tunneling encapsulates one form of traffic inside of other forms of traffic .

typically , insecure , unencrypted traffic is tunneled within an encrypted connection .

the normal services on the user's computer are available , but run through the tunnel to the non - filtered computer , which forwards the user's requests and their responses transparently .

users with contacts in a non - filtered country can set up private tunneling services while those without contacts can purchase commercial tunneling services .

"web" tunneling software restricts the tunneling to web traffic so that web browsers will function securely , but not other applications .

"application" tunneling software allows the user to tunnel multiple internet applications , such as email and instant messenger applications .

examples: web tunneling: ultrareach , freegate , anonymizer , ghost surf .

examples: application tunneling: gpass , http tunnel , relakks , guardster / ssh .

anonymous communications systems anonymous technologies conceal a user's ip address from the server hosting the website visited by the user .

some , but not all , anonymous technologies conceal the user's ip address from the anonymizing service itself and encrypt the traffic between the user and the service .

since users of anonymous technologies make requests for web content through a proxy service , instead of to the server hosting the content directly , anonymous technologies can be a useful way to bypass internet censorship .

however , some anonymous technologies require users to download software and can be easily blocked by authorities .

examples: tor , jap anon , i2 .

