the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill includes funding for agencies and programs in three separate federal departments , as well as numerous related agencies and bureaus .

it provides funding for department of the interior ( doi ) agencies ( except for the bureau of reclamation , funded in energy and water development appropriations laws ) , many of which manage land and other natural resource or regulatory programs .

the bill also provides funds for agencies in two other departments — the forest service ( fs ) in the department of agriculture , and the indian health service ( ihs ) in the department of health and human services — as well as funds for the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

further , the annual bill includes funding for arts and cultural agencies , such as the smithsonian institution , the national endowment for the arts , and the national endowment for the humanities , and for numerous other entities and agencies .

previously , the appropriations laws for interior and related agencies provided funds for several activities within the department of energy ( doe ) , including research , development , and conservation programs ; the naval petroleum reserves ; and the strategic petroleum reserve .

however , at the outset of the 109 th congress , these doe programs were transferred to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees covering energy and water , to consolidate jurisdiction over doe .

these programs currently are funded in the annual energy and water development appropriations bill .

at the same time , jurisdiction over the epa and several smaller entities was moved to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees covering interior and related agencies , and they are now funded in the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

this change resulted from the abolition of the house and senate appropriations subcommittees on veterans affairs , housing and urban development , and independent agencies , which previously had jurisdiction over epa .

since fy2006 , appropriations laws for interior , environment , and related agencies have contained three primary titles .

this report is organized along these lines .

the first section ( title i ) provides information on interior agencies ; the second section ( title ii ) discusses epa ; and the third section ( title iii ) addresses other agencies , programs , and entities .

a fourth section of this report discusses selected cross - cutting topics that encompass more than one agency .

entries in this report are for major agencies ( eg , the national park service ) and cross - cutting issues ( eg , wildland fire management ) that receive funding in the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

for each agency or issue , we discuss some of the key funding changes that appear to be of interest to congress .

we also address related policy issues that occur in the context of considering appropriations legislation .

appropriations are complex , and not all issues are summarized in this report .

for example , budget submissions for some agencies number several hundred pages and contain innumerable funding , programmatic , and legislative changes for congressional consideration .

further , appropriations laws provide funds for numerous accounts , activities , and subactivities , and the accompanying explanatory statements provide additional directives and other important information .

for information on programs funded in the bill but not directly discussed in this report , please contact the key policy staff members listed at the end of the report .

in general , in this report the term appropriations represents total funds available , including regular annual and supplemental appropriations , as well as rescissions , transfers , and deferrals , but excludes mandatory spending authorities .

the house committee on appropriations is the primary source of the funding figures used throughout the report .

other sources of information include the senate committee on appropriations , agency budget justifications , and the congressional record .

in the tables throughout this report , some columns of funding figures do not match the precise totals provided due to rounding .

epa's primary responsibilities include the implementation of federal statutes regulating air quality , water quality , pesticides , toxic substances , the management and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes , and the cleanup of environmental contamination .

epa also awards grants to assist states and local governments in their regulatory role and in complying with federal requirements to control pollution .

the fy2012 appropriations law provided $8.46 billion for epa , $219.1 million ( 3% ) less than the fy2011 appropriation of $8.68 billion and $510.0 million ( 6% ) less than the president's fy2012 request of $8.97 billion .

table 13 presents the fy2012 enacted amounts compared to the president's fy2012 budget request and the fy2011 enacted appropriations for the eight accounts that fund the agency .

note that the name of the "oil spill response" account was changed to "inland oil spill program" in fy2012 , as had been proposed by the president , to more clearly reflect the agency's jurisdiction for oil spill response in the inland coastal zone .

the fy2012 appropriations were lower than the president's fy2012 request for each of the eight epa accounts and lower than most of the fy2011 account levels .

as indicated in table 13 , the largest dollar decreases below fy2011 enacted and the fy2012 request are in three accounts: environmental programs and management ( epm ) , hazardous substance superfund , and state and tribal assistance grants ( stag ) .

further , the fy2012 appropriations reflect mostly decreases for individual programs and activities funded within each of the eight appropriations accounts , although funding for some programs and activities was maintained or increased compared to fy2011 levels .

the following sections highlight issues associated with certain accounts and programs that have been prominent in the debate on epa's fy2012 appropriations .

 table 21 and figure 1 show appropriations for interior , environment , and related agencies for the five - year period from fy2008 through fy2012 .

for all years , figures represent appropriations .

the table shows the appropriations by agency during this period , as well as the total appropriations contained in each title of the appropriations law and the overall total in the law .

the graph depicts the appropriations provided for each of the three main titles of the law: title i , department of the interior ; title ii , environmental protection agency ; and title iii , related agencies .

