the explosion of consumer demand for geospatial information and tools such as geographic information systems ( gis ) to manipulate and graphically display such information has brought gis into the daily lives of millions of americans , whether they know it or not .

google earth and handheld or dashboard navigation systems represent enormously popular examples of the wide variety of applications made possible through the availability of geospatial information .

the release of google earth in 2005 represented a paradigm shift in the way people understand geospatial information , according to some observers , because it offered multi - scale visualization of places and locations around the globe that was free and easy to use .

this report provides a primer on geospatial data and gis and provides several examples of their use .

it should be recognized that the amount of geospatial data is expanding rapidly , the methods for acquiring geospatial data are growing , and the ways geospatial data are being used are diversifying throughout local and state governments , as well as within the federal government .

it is beyond the scope of this report to present the universe of geospatial data and its utility to the federal government .

however , the federal government has had and continues to have a major role in the overall framework for geospatial data , including its organization , coordination , and sharing among federal agencies and with state and local entities .

in addition to providing basic information on gis and geospatial information , this report describes the federal geospatial enterprise and how it is organized .

given the complexity of managing , sharing , and using geospatial data from a variety of sources and across the breadth of the federal government , the 112 th congress in its oversight role may have an interest in the programs and geospatial "assets" belonging to most federal departments and agencies .

crs report r41826 , issues and challenges for federal geospatial information , explores geospatial policy issues of interest to congress , including organization and management , data sharing , coordination , the role of nonfederal stakeholders , and proposals for a national gis , as well as examples of legislation .

crs report r40717 , issues regarding a national land parcel database , delves into one specific federal responsibility: the coordination and management of land parcel data for all federal lands .

together , these three reports introduce basic concepts and discuss more complex policy issues regarding the federal geospatial enterprise .

a discussion of classified geospatial information and national security issues is beyond the scope of this report .

gis is a computer data system capable of capturing , storing , analyzing , and displaying geographically referenced information — information attached to a location , such as latitude and longitude , or street location .

geographically referenced information is also known as geospatial information .

types of geospatial information include features like highway intersections , office buildings , rivers , the path of a tornado , the san andreas fault , or congressional district boundaries .

information associated with a specific location is referred to in gis parlance as an attribute , such as the population of a congressional district , or amount of movement per year along the san andreas fault .

other terms common to geospatial data and gis analysis are described in the box below .

the power of gis is the ability to combine geospatial information in unique ways — by layers or themes — and extract something new .

for instance , a gis analysis might include the location of a highway intersection and the average number of vehicles that flow through the intersection throughout the day , and extract information useful for locating a business .

gis might include both the location of a river and the water depth along its course by season , and enable an analysis of the effects of development on runoff within the watershed .

overlaying the path of a severe thunderstorm with geospatial data on the types of structures encountered — homes , stores , schools , post offices — could inform an analysis of what types of building construction can survive high winds and hail .

arra american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 apz accident potential zone blm bureau of land management brac base realignment and closure cogo coalition of geospatial organizations cz clear zone dfirms digital flood insurance rate maps fema federal emergency management agency fgdc federal geographic data committee firms flood insurance rate maps gao government accountability office gis geographic information systems gps global positioning system iftn imagery for the nation lidar light detection and ranging mapps management association for private photogrammetric surveyors ngac national geospatial advisory committee ngp national geospatial program nils national integrated land system nrc national research council nsdi national spatial data infrastructure nsgic national states geographic information council omb office of management and budget usgs u.s. geological survey usfs u.s. forest service vgi volunteered geographic informatio .

