the debate over the size and scope of federal spending has raised interest in how federal dollars are spent .

this report focuses on federal outlays for major "need - tested" programs — programs targeted toward families and individuals with limited income .

the major need - tested programs discussed in this report provide cash , food , housing , and educational and medical assistance to families and individuals with limited financial resources , and they had collective fy2013 federal outlays of $606 billion .

these programs represented 17.6% of all federal outlays and 3.7% of the gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

this report provides perspective on current federal outlays for these programs , examining historical trends in the outlays as well as showing the congressional budget office's ( cbo's ) april 2014 baseline budget projections for them .

the baseline projections cover the period from fy2014 through fy2024 , indicating what spending would be if current law were continued .

additional perspective is provided by showing their trends as a percentage of all federal outlays as well as a percent of gdp .

the common feature of need - tested programs is that they provide benefits , services , or funding based on a measure of low financial resources ( income and sometimes assets ) .

however , beyond that the programs differ considerably in their target populations , benefits , services , and focus .

that is , aid from these programs is not provided to one common group of people or families , nor do these programs address the same purposes .

some address basic needs ( food , housing , and medical care ) ; others ( eg , student financial assistance ) seek to enable recipients to overcome financial need in order to engage in an activity .

moreover , need - tested programs are not the only programs that benefit low - income persons and families .

more universally available social programs — such as the social insurance programs of social security , medicare , and unemployment insurance — also benefit low - income persons and families .

these programs also tend to be substantially larger ( in spending ) than need - tested programs .

to simplify the analysis , this report focuses on nine of the largest need - tested programs based on federal spending , plus subsidies for health care that were created in the 2010 health reform law , and are available to lower - income families and persons .

the need - tested programs discussed in this report are the following: medicaid / chip .

medicaid provides medical assistance to needy families with dependent children and the aged , blind , and disabled who have low incomes .

beginning in 2014 , states have the option to expand coverage to able - bodied individuals under age 65 with incomes below 133% of the federal poverty guidelines .

a large share of medicaid expenditures pays for nursing home care for the elderly and disabled .

the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) allows states to cover targeted low - income children with no health insurance in families with income above medicaid eligibility levels .

in addition , when certain conditions are met , states may extend chip coverage to pregnant women and parents of medicaid - and chip - eligible children .

in fy2013 , medicaid / chip outlays of $275 billion accounted for 8.0% of all federal outlays and 1.7% of gdp .

the health insurance tax credit , created by the 2010 health care reform law , helps certain individuals and families purchase health insurance beginning in 2014 .

under the 2010 law , individuals and families not otherwise covered are able to purchase health insurance from state - based "exchanges. .

families with incomes below 400% of the poverty line have their out - of - pocket premium payments capped at a certain percentage of their incomes .

the remainder of the premium cost is paid for through an advance - payable , refundable tax credit .

the refundable portion of that tax credit is considered a federal outlay .

the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( s nap , formerly known as food stamps ) provides low - income families with an income supplement to enable them to purchase a minimal cost , nutritious diet .

snap is available to all low - income households regardless of their demographic composition , though benefits for able - bodied adults without dependents and who are not working is time - limited and certain noncitizens are excluded .

snap benefits are uniform nationwide for families of a given size except in alaska , hawaii , and the territories .

in fy2013 , snap outlays of $83 billion accounted for 2.4% of all federal outlays and 0.5% of gdp .

student financial assistance provides funds ( mostly through pell grants ) to students from low - income families to help meet the cost of post - secondary education .

awards are based on a need analysis that considers both the cost of education and the financial resources of the student's family .

in fy2013 , outlays for student financial assistance of $34 billion accounted for 1.0% of all federal outlays and 0.2% of gdp .

compensatory education ( title i - a of the elementary and secondary education act ) provides aid to school districts based on their number and percentage of economically disadvantaged children .

the purpose of this aid is to ensure that each child has a high - quality education and reaches , at a minimum , proficiency on state academic achievement standards and assessments under the no child left behind act .

in fy2013 , total outlays for compensatory education grants of $16.8 billion accounted for 0.5% of all federal outlays and 0.1% of gdp .

housing assistance , as categorized for this report , includes federal outlays for project - based rental assistance and tenant - based vouchers ( under the section 8 program ) ; other support for public housing ; and housing assistance for the elderly , the disabled , and american indians .

in fy2013 , housing assistance outlays of $36 billion accounted for 1.1% of all federal outlays and 0.2% of gdp .

the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) represents the refundable portion of the earned income tax credit .

it provides an earnings supplement for low - wage earners , with the size of the credit dependent on family type and earnings .

the bulk of eitc dollars was historically delivered through tax refund checks and goes to families with children .

beginning in 2012 , all "advance payments" of eitc benefits were ended , and all refundable eitc dollars are paid through refund checks .

in fy2013 , eitc outlays of $57 billion accounted for 1.7% of all federal outlays and 0.4% of gdp .

the additional child tax credit ( actc ) represents the refundable portion of the child tax credit .

it assists eligible parents of children who have earned income above a certain threshold but whose tax liability is too small to fully benefit from the regular nonrefundable child tax credit .

it is delivered to families through refund checks when they file their taxes .

in fy2013 , actc outlays of $22 billion accounted for 0.6% of all federal outlays and 0.1% of gdp .

supplemental security income ( ssi ) provides a federally funded cash income floor for low - income persons or couples who are aged , blind , or disabled .

federal ssi benefits are based on uniform nationwide eligibility and benefit rules , and they are paid with federal funds .

states may supplement ssi with their own funds .

in fy2013 , ssi outlays of $57 billion accounted for 1.6% of all federal outlays and 0.3% of gdp .

family support , as categorized for this report , includes outlays for the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant , the child support enforcement ( cse ) program , and federal grants to help support state child care subsidy programs .

in fy2013 , family support outlays of $26 billion accounted for 0.8% of all federal outlays and 0.2% of gdp .

this report focuses only on federal outlays .

a number of programs ( medicaid , snap , housing assistance , and family support ) are actually administered at the state or local level .

states also contribute financially to medicaid , snap ( administrative and employment and training costs ) , and family support .

further , the bulk of financing for elementary and secondary education represents state and local dollars .

additionally , this report focuses on programs classified as "major" by their current spending level .

this focus might leave out some programs that historically comprised a greater share of aid to low - income persons .

for example , employment and training programs had much higher spending levels in the 1970s than they do today .

excluding such programs has the effect of somewhat depressing historical spending levels ( in the late 1970s ) and overstating growth since then .

it also leaves out the part of the story regarding low - income assistance: training and employment , particularly public service employment in the late 1970s , were once a greater part of low - income aid .

federal outlays for low - income assistance have generally increased over the past five decades .

in total , spending for low - income assistance in inflation - adjusted terms has been higher at the end of each decade .

though there have been some declines in spending immediately following recessions , the long - term trend in federal outlays for low - income assistance is one of increasing spending during both economic downturns and periods of economic growth .

figure 1 shows federal outlays for the major low - income assistance programs in inflation - adjusted terms for fy1962 through fy2013 , and shows cbo - projected outlays under current law for fy2014 through fy2024 .

the figure shows several periods of pronounced growth , with the most recent occurring from fy2007 through fy2011 .

this represents spending , both automatic ( through increased enrollment ) as well as legislated ( eg , benefit and funding increases through the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) ) , in response to the deep recession from 2007 to 2009 .

federal outlays for selected programs declined from fy2011 to fy2012 .

the temporary increases in funding for these programs under arra expired during this period .

total federal outlays for these programs again increased from fy2012 to fy2013 .

federal outlays for major low - income assistance programs measured as a percentage of gross domestic product ( gdp ) provide a sense of how large these programs are relative to the size of the national economy .

these programs have grown as a share of gdp over the past five decades , ending each decade at a higher level as a percentage of gdp .

figure 4 shows federal outlays for major low - income assistance programs as a percentage of gdp for fy1962 through fy2013 , and as projected under the cbo baseline for fy2014 through fy2024 .

outlays for these programs — both the non - health and health programs — generally increased as a share of gdp , with some fluctuations due mostly to the economic cycle ( eg , increasing as a share of gdp during economic slumps , decreasing during periods of growth ) .

the longest period of decline as a percentage of gdp was in the late 1990s .

federal outlays for major low - income assistance programs as a percentage of gdp decreased for four consecutive years .

during this period , outlay growth for these programs increased , but at a rate slower than overall economic growth .

in fy2011 , federal outlays on the selected low - income assistance programs as a percentage of gdp reached 4.1% .

they have since fallen back to 3.7% of gdp .

however , total federal outlays for the selected low - income assistance programs would again rise , to 4.1% , in fy2017 and remain in the neighborhood of 4% of gdp thereafter .

all of that increase reflects the growth of health care spending .

federal outlays for the major non - health programs as a percentage of gdp would drop from their peak of 2.2% in fy2011 to below their pre - recession levels by fy2020 , with continued declines thereafter .

though federal spending for major low - income assistance programs has increased by almost any measure , so has total federal spending .

figure 5 shows total federal outlays for major need - tested programs as a percentage of total federal spending .

though the long - term trend has been for the major need - tested programs to account for a greater share of total federal spending , the largest jumps in this measure occurred from the mid - 1980s to the mid - 1990s , when spending for them jumped from about 8% to 14% of total federal outlays .

aggregate federal outlays for these programs increased again , to about 16% of total federal outlays , by fy2004 ; fell before the recession ; and then increased to 17.4% of total outlays in fy2010 .

in fy2013 , federal outlays for the selected low - income assistance programs were 17.6% of total outlays .

under cbo's april 2014 baseline , federal outlays for the selected programs would peak as a percentage of total federal outlays in fy2016 and fy2017 at 19.6% , with declines thereafter .

at the beginning of the period examined in this report ( fy1962 ) , federal aid to address low income was dominated by grants to the states to provide public assistance for the aged , blind , and disabled and families with dependent children .

grant - in - aid programs for the low - income aged , blind , and families with dependent children were established by the social security act of 1935 and focused on groups that , during that era , were not expected to work .

a grant - in - aid program for low - income disabled persons was added in 1950 .

the period since the 1960s saw large changes in programs that assist low - income families .

first , there were large expansions in noncash medical , food , and housing assistance .

the great society era also produced expanded educational aid for elementary and secondary education for school districts with large concentrations of low - income children , and the early 1970s saw the establishment of grants to help students from low - income families attend college .

second , there was the increasing dominance of medical assistance in spending for low - income families .

by fy2013 , medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) accounted for almost half of all spending on major low - income assistance programs .

third , low - income aid became increasingly federalized .

in the 1970s , the federal government assumed the costs of providing a cash income floor for the aged , blind , and disabled ; by mid - decade , the expanded food stamp program provided 100% federally funded benefits nationwide using uniform benefit and eligibility rules ; and housing aid shifted to 100% federally financed vouchers .

in the last two decades ( the 1990s and the 2000s ) , the major expansion of aid was done through refundable tax credits for families with children , 100% federally financed and administered through the tax code .

the exception to the rule of increasing federalization — and it is a major exception — is that the costs of medicaid and chip are shared with the states .

fourth , for families with children , expansions of aid went to the working poor rather than the nonworking poor .

the medicaid expansions of the 1980s and early 1990s were for children who were not on cash assistance and thus targeted families with earnings .

the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) and the refundable portion of the child credit require earnings to qualify for them .

food and housing assistance programs benefit families with and without earned income , and increasingly assist those who work .

looking at cbo's budget projections of current policies , low - income aid would become increasingly dominated by health care .

medicaid , chip , and the new health care tax credit established in the 2010 health law would account for two - thirds of all dollars spent on low - income aid through the selected programs by 2024 .

non - health programs would see their aggregate spending decline .

crs report r41625 , federal benefits and services for people with low income: programs , policy , and spending , fy2008-fy2009 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43357 , medicaid: an overview , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42663 , health insurance exchanges under the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42446 , federal pell grant program of the higher education act: how the program works , recent legislative changes , and current issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33960 , the elementary and secondary education act , as amended by the no child left behind act: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34591 , overview of federal housing assistance programs and policy , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31768 , the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) : an overview , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41873 , the child tax credit: current law and legislative history , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42505 , supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) : a primer on eligibility and benefits , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40946 , the temporary assistance for needy families block grant: an introduction , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41917 , welfare , work , and poverty status of female - headed families with children: 1987-2012 ( pdf ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

the spending trends shown in this report are based on spending for 9 of the 10 largest programs ( in terms of spending ) providing low - income assistance catalogued in crs report r41625 , federal benefits and services for people with low income: programs , policy , and spending , fy2008-fy2009 , by [author name scrubbed] .

that report provides a "snapshot" of federal or federally assisted need - based programs with $100 million or more in obligations in fy2008 or fy2009 .

this report intends to complement the material in crs report r41625 by providing information on long - term spending trends .

the 10 largest need - tested programs discussed in crs report r41625 were ( 1 ) medicaid ; ( 2 ) snap ; ( 3 ) ssi ; ( 4 ) eitc ; ( 5 ) pell grants ; ( 6 ) the actc ( the refundable portion of the child tax credit ) ; ( 7 ) title i - a education for the disadvantaged ; ( 8 ) medicare part d , the prescription drug low - income subsidy ; ( 9 ) tanf ; and ( 10 ) section 8 housing choice vouchers .

crs report r41625 used federal obligations as its measure of spending for a program because they are the most consistent measure at the level of detail ( program - level ) used in that report .

however , as mentioned in that report , obligations are difficult to track in a consistent manner over time .

the most consistent measure of federal spending available over time is outlays , which represent actual payments from the federal government , usually in the form of checks or electronic transfers of funds .

each year , the office of management and budget ( omb ) releases a database that shows historical outlays for each budget account for each fiscal year from fy1962 and later .

additionally , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) makes its baseline budget projections in terms of outlays for each budget account .

the tradeoff here is that budget account outlays do not necessarily represent program - level activity .

some programs represent spending within only a part of an account .

moreover , the composition of accounts sometimes changes over time , which necessitates combining multiple accounts to provide consistent measures of spending over time .

table a - 1 shows the federal outlays for the selected major income assistance programs by budget account .

it shows that three of the categories represent combinations of accounts .

medicaid ( the largest program ) is combined in this report with the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) because some chip programs are expansions of medicaid .

housing assistance combines many accounts and represents far more spending than the section 8 housing choice vouchers discussed in crs report r41625 .

the account composition of housing aid has changed many times over the years , and a consistent measure of "housing assistance" requires combining both rent vouchers and support for families in public housing .

finally , the "family support" account comprises more than tanf .

in the federal budget , tanf's predecessor ( aid to families with dependent children ) was included in the same account as the child support enforcement ( cse ) program and child care for families receiving , transitioning from , or at - risk of receiving cash assistance .

therefore , the "family support" category covers tanf , cse , and today's child care subsidy programs .

tanf also consolidated funding in the pre - 1996 program to provide employment services , education , and training for cash assistance recipients ( the job opportunity and basic skills training , or jobs , program ) ; funding for that program is included in the historical outlays of the "family support" category .

in addition , pell grants are the major component of the "student financial assistance" account .

also included in the "student financial assistance" account are federal supplemental educational opportunity grants ( seogs ) and college work study programs .

the largest component of the "compensatory education" account ( currently named "accelerating achievement and ensuring equity" ) is the title i - a grants to school districts with low - income children , but it also includes school improvement grants , even start , and the high school graduation initiative , among other activities .

the medicare part d ( prescription drug ) low - income subsidy is not included in this report because it is not separately accounted for in the federal budget , but instead is subsumed in the much larger budget account that finances the medicare prescription drug program .

unlike it did for other programs , crs report r41625 did not use federal budget information to capture spending for this program .

rather , it used information from the annual report of the medicare trustees .

