while agencies are prohibited by federal law and policy from contracting out functions that are "inherently governmental," other functions could potentially be contracted out .

there has long been debate over both general government policies promoting the use of the private sector to perform "commercial functions," and whether specific functions should be performed by government personnel or contractors .

however , since 2008 , the insourcing initiatives of recent congresses and the obama administration have generated particular controversy .

several lawsuits have been filed challenging agencies' determinations to insource particular functions , and broader questions have been raised as to whether agencies' implementation of insourcing runs afoul of civil service , ethics , or small business laws .

this report provides a brief overview of key legal issues related to recent insourcing initiatives .

it will be updated as developments occur .

since january 1955 , the federal government has consistently had policies promoting the use of the private sector to produce commercial products and perform commercial services , although the wording of such policies and , particularly , the degree to which they have been implemented by the executive branch have varied over time .

the george w. bush administration , for example , promoted this policy vigorously under the name of "competitive sourcing" ( later "commercial services management" ) , which was a key component of the president's management agenda .

its doing so prompted concern among some commentators , who asserted that competitive sourcing represented a concerted effort to shift work to the private sector and resulted in contractors performing functions that should have been performed by government employees .

responding , in part , to such concerns , the 109 th congress enacted legislation directing the secretary of defense to "prescribe guidelines and procedures for ensuring that consideration is given to using federal government employees for work that is currently performed or would otherwise be performed under department of defense [dod] contracts. .

these guidelines and procedures are to ensure that "special consideration" is given to using government personnel to perform functions that had been performed by government employees at any time on or after october 1 , 1980 ; are closely associated with the performance of inherently governmental functions ; are performed under contracts that were not competitively awarded ; or have been performed poorly by a contractor due to excessive costs or inferior quality .

subsequent congresses expanded upon these requirements .

first , the 110 th congress required that dod guidelines and procedures also give consideration to using government employees to perform new functions , as well as those that had been contracted out .

then , the 111 th congress imposed similar requirements upon civilian agencies .

when president obama took office , these and related legislative actions were supplemented by a number of executive branch initiatives that also promoted insourcing of at least certain functions .

president obama himself paved the way for such initiatives with a march 4 , 2009 , memorandum on government contracting , which suggested that "contractors may be performing inherently governmental functions. .

although explicitly focused on impermissible and inappropriate outsourcing of inherently governmental functions , this memorandum implied that at least certain functions that have been outsourced should be returned to government performance ( i.e. , insourced ) .

dod and the office of management and budget ( omb ) both subsequently issued additional guidance regarding insourcing .

for example , in a may 28 , 2009 , memorandum , the deputy secretary for defense called for the development of insourcing plans and stated that insourcing should be part of a "total force approach to workforce management and strategic human capital planning. .

omb took a similar approach in its july 29 , 2009 , memorandum on "managing the multi - sector workforce," directing agencies to conduct pilot human capital analyses of programs where the agency has concerns about reliance on contractors .

the president's fy2011 budget submissions later reiterated the call for agencies to "be alert for situations in which excessive reliance on contractors undermines the ability of the federal government to control its own operations and accomplish its missions for the american people. .

dod , in particular , heeded this call , with the secretary of the army testifying in february 2010 that the army intended to insource 7,162 positions in fy2010 and 11,084 positions in fy2011 through fy2015 .

such announcements prompted some commentators to object that dod's insourcing initiatives had become a "quota driven exercise. .

these and subsequent insourcing initiatives generated several lawsuits , discussed in more detail below , alleging that dod failed to comply with its own policies and procedures when determining to insource specific functions .

because federal agencies have broad discretion in determining their own requirements and how they will meet these requirements , whether with their own employees or by contracting out , there do not appear to be any legal barriers to insourcing per se .

however , various provisions of federal law could constrain whether and how agencies may proceed with insourcing in particular circumstances , as well as limit the activities that former contractor employees may perform after being hired by the federal government .

these provisions include ( 1 ) the administrative procedure act , which could potentially preclude agencies from implementing insourcing determinations that were not made in accordance with any applicable statutes , regulations , or guidelines ; ( 2 ) contract law , under which agencies could be found to have constructively terminated for convenience , or even breached , certain requirements contracts by augmenting their in - house capacity to perform services provided for in the contract ; ( 3 ) civil service law , which would generally limit "direct hires" of contractor employees ; and ( 4 ) ethics law , which could limit the involvement of former contractor employees who are hired by the government in certain agency actions .

no issues of small business law would appear to be implicated , even though small businesses are generally given special consideration under federal law , and some commentators have expressed concern that insourcing , at least as implemented to date , has disproportionately affected small businesses .

however , the obama administration has provided that , as a matter of policy , agencies should place a lower priority on reviewing certain functions performed by small businesses when determining which functions should be insourced , as well as give small businesses preference when determining who performs work that remains in the private sector after related functions are insourced .

the report does not address any limits on insourcing that may be imposed by agency personnel ceilings or caps , largely because such ceilings or caps pertain to agency personnel , not agency functions .

while personnel and functions are obviously related , and there could potentially be instances where agencies experience difficulties in insourcing particular functions due to a lack of personnel , agencies could return functions to in - house performance without hiring new personnel .

in addition , such caps or ceilings typically do not raise legal issues like those discussed herein .

while most of the legal issues related to insourcing discussed herein arise from agencies' implementation of insourcing initiatives , there is considerable scope for congress to influence whether and how insourcing is implemented .

the 112 th congress enacted legislation that calls for the office of management and budget ( omb ) to establish "procedures and methodologies" for use by agencies in deciding whether to insource functions performed by small businesses , including procedures for ( 1 ) identifying which contracts are considered for conversion ; ( 2 ) determining whether particular functions are inherently governmental or critical functions ; and ( 3 ) comparing the costs of performance by contractor personnel with the costs of performance by government personnel .

this legislation also requires agency offices of small and disadvantaged business utilization ( osdbus ) to review and to advise on insourcing determinations , and sba procurement center representatives ( pcrs ) to consult with osdbus and other agency personnel on insourcing determinations .

other legislative options are possible if concerns related to insourcing persist .

broadly , congress could restrict the scope of any insourcing by , for example , requiring that agencies complete a "public - private competitive sourcing analysis" and determine that the "provision of such goods or services by federal employees provides the best value to the taxpayer" before using government personnel to provide goods or services previously performed by a "private sector entity. .

alternatively , congress could broaden the scope of insourcing with legislation , like that introduced in the 109 th through 111 th congresses , which encourages agencies to insource particular functions .

more narrowly , congress could also expand or limit the jurisdiction of particular courts over contractors' challenges to insourcing determinations ; require that agency insourcing guidelines be promulgated in ways that are more or less likely to be found to be legally binding ; expand or limit direct hire authority ; impose or remove restrictions upon the activities of former contractor employees who enter government service ; or otherwise seek to protect small businesses from the effects of insourcing determinations .

for example , some members of the 112 th congress introduced legislation that would have amended 31 u.s.c .

section 3551 ( 1 ) to provide that the term "protest" includes a written objection to the "conversion of a function that is being performed by a private sector entity to performance by a federal employee," and that "any small business whose economic interest would be affected by the conversation" is an "interested party. .

this legislation would also have amended the small business act to prohibit an agency from converting functions performed by small businesses to performance by federal employees unless it has "made publicly available , after providing notice and an opportunity for public comment," its procedures for making insourcing determinations .

the requirement that agency procedures be made publicly available after a notice - and - comment period , in particular , could help remove questions as to whether agencies are bound by their insourcing guidelines that could arise when these guidelines are promulgated as policy or guidance documents .

however , questions about prudential standing could potentially remain , notwithstanding the enactment of this legislation , because prudential standing is a "judicially self - imposed limit[] on the exercise of federal jurisdiction. .

