electricity is vital to the commerce and daily functioning of united states .

the electrical grid of the united states consists of all the power plants generating electricity , together with the transmission and distribution lines and their associated transformers and substations which bring power to end - use customers .

electric power generation in the united states is currently dominated by the use of combustible fuels , such as coal and natural gas , or from biomass .

these fuels are burned to produce steam in boilers which is used to turn turbine - generators which produce electricity .

nuclear power uses heat from the decay of radioactive elements to produce steam .

however , electricity can also be generated directly by wind turbines , solar power , geothermal energy , and hydropower .

figure 1 illustrates the phases of the electric power production process .

electricity from large central station power plants is routed to a step - up transformer which raises the voltage so the power can be sent over high - voltage transmission lines to step - down transformers in substations which then transfer this energy at lower voltages via distribution lines to industrial , commercial , and residential users .

generally , electricity must be used as soon as it is produced because large amounts of electricity cannot be easily stored .

originally , the individual company systems were not linked , but with greater electricity demand came the necessity of sharing generation resources .

this sharing of generation resources required an interconnection of separate company systems to enable power sales and transfers .

these aggregated power systems form three major "interconnections" — the eastern and western interconnections , and the electric reliability council of texas which includes most of the state of texas .

within these interconnections are reliability regions , and a number of balancing authorities which "integrate resource plans ahead of time , maintain load - interchange generation balance" within a balancing authority area , and "support interconnection frequency in real - time. .

the grid also connects the many publicly and privately owned electric utility and power companies in different states and regions of the united states ( and in canada and mexico ) .

congress passed the public utility regulatory policies act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-617 ) which allowed non - utility power producers into wholesale power markets ( eg , for the sale of electricity to entities other than the end - user of power ) .

the passage of the energy policy act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-486 ) served to further promote greater competition in the bulk power markets .

as a result , in many parts of the united states , the electric power industry began to transition from highly regulated , local monopoly companies which generated , transmitted , and distributed electricity to end - use customers , to a business in which power generation is competitive while the industry's transmission and distribution functions are still highly regulated .

while the federal government regulates the electric power transmission function and wholesale power markets , regulation of the distribution function of the electric power business is still largely carried out by state government agencies .

much of the infrastructure which serves the u.s. power grid is aging .

the average age of power plants is now over 30 years ; most of these facilities were originally designed to last 40 years .

electric transmission and distribution system components are similarly aging , with power transformers averaging over 40 years of age , and 70% of transmission lines being 25 years or older .

as components of the system are retired , they are replaced with newer components often linked to communications or automated systems .

with changes in federal law , regulatory changes , and the aging of the electric power infrastructure as drivers , the grid is changing from a largely patchwork system built to serve the needs of individual electric utility companies to essentially a national interconnected system capable of accommodating massive transfers of electrical energy between regions of the united states .

the modernization of the grid to accommodate today's power flows , serve reliability needs , and meet future projected uses is leading to the incorporation of information processing capabilities for power system controls and operations monitoring .

the "smart grid" is the name given to the evolving electric power network as new information technology systems and capabilities are incorporated .

while these new components may add to the ability to control power flows and enhance the efficiency of grid operations , they also potentially increase the susceptibility of the grid to cyber ( i.e. , computer - related ) attack since they are built around microprocessor devices whose basic functions are controlled by software programming and subject to manipulation over a network .

the information processing attributes which make the smarter grid attractive are the very same attributes which can increase the vulnerability of the electric power system and its critical infrastructure to a potentially devastating cyber attack .

the potential of the smart grid to revolutionize the ways power is generated and used is great , but so too are the potential risks if not sufficiently addressed .

the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ) ( p.l .

110-140 ) defined the attributes of a smart grid and plans for its development .

the potential for a major disruption or widespread damage to the nation's power system from a large scale cyberattack has increased focus on the cybersecurity of the smart grid .

while a nation - state might have the resources and capability to create widescale disruption of the u.s. grid ( to create economic disorder or as part of a physical attack ) , terrorists or hackers are less likely to have the sophistication or resources necessary to inflict damage on a national scale .

but the possibility of collaboration between terrorists and hackers could increase the capability of these groups to launch network - based cyberattacks against critical u.s. infrastructure .

among the issues for congress is whether the existing requirements of current law adequately assure the cybersecurity and reliable operation of the u.s. electricity grid today ( and the smart grid of tomorrow ) .

this report will look at issues key to these determinations , discussing the scope and point of application of regulations , and where the overall responsibility rests for the cybersecurity of the grid .

the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) summarized its view of the potential of the smart grid by the year 2030 as: … a fully automated power delivery network that monitors and controls every customer and node , ensuring a two - way flow of electricity and information between the power plant and the appliance , and all points in between .

its distributed intelligence , coupled with broadband communications and automated control systems , enables real - time market transactions and seamless interfaces among people , buildings , industrial plants , generation facilities , and the electric network .

a "smarter" grid is gradually being introduced as upgrades to the systems and components of the power generation , transmission , and distribution infrastructure .

substation and distribution substations are being automated with superior switching capabilities to enhance current flows and control of the grid .

devices called "phasor measurement units" are also being added to substations to make time and location - specific measurements of transmission line voltage , current , and frequency ( i.e. , synchrophasor measurements made 30 times per second instead of data measured once every two to four seconds by current industrial control systems ) providing better tools to improve power system reliability .

doe's strategic plan targets the deployment of 1,000 phasor measurement units by 2013 .

advanced meters are being introduced in some utility markets which can offer customers the ability to leverage demand response regimes and technologies , and potentially benefit from the interactive features of the smart grid by shifting their energy use to off - peak hours .

expectations vary of what a smart grid could accomplish , and the estimated costs of a system rise with the increased scope and attributes of a system .

some see the smart grid as only an enhancement of today's existing transmission and distribution systems focused on improving the reliability and efficiency of the grid .

others see the smart grid of the future as an integrated system spanning the nation from coast to coast , able to seamlessly combine distributed resources and central power stations across the three major interconnections of the u.s. grid .

under such a vision , distributed and renewable energy resources could be efficiently integrated into the grid , with power from ( for example ) intermittent wind generation channeled by sensors and intelligent electronics from multiple widely dispersed sites to where power is needed anywhere on the grid .

figure 2 shows a possible configuration of a smart grid system illustrating components of an interconnected , two - way intelligent network , and distributed and central station sources of power .

the efficiency and economy of all grid operations could conceivably be optimized by similarly harnessing all power generation to take advantage of a wide range of generation and storage resources across the united states .

a prolonged disruption of energy from the grid was described in a report for the presidential commission on critical infrastructure as an event which would seriously affect every infrastructure , with the possibility of a cyberattack causing such damage considered as a possibility .

the widespread and increasing use of supervisory control and data acquisition ( scada ) systems for control of energy systems provides increasing ability to cause serious damage and disruption by cyber means .

the exponential growth of information system networks that interconnect the business , administrative , and operational systems contributes to system vulnerability .

eisa gave the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) the role of coordinating the development of a framework to enable the development of the smart grid in a safe and secure manner , and nist issued its first guidelines for cybersecurity of the smart grid in 2010 .

because cybersecurity threats were perceived as "diverse and evolving," nist advocated a defense - in - depth strategy with multiple levels of security because no single security measure could counter all types of threats .

the key to nist's suggested approach is the determination of risk ( i.e. , the potential for an unwanted outcome resulting from internal or external factors , as determined from the likelihood of occurrence and the associated consequences ) as quantified by the threat ( eg , event , actor or action with potential to do harm ) , the vulnerability ( eg , weakness in the system ) , and the consequences ( eg , physical impacts ) to the system .

a smarter grid is largely the result of the modernization of the grid .

most sectors of business and industry have gone from the analog age of knobs and dials to the digital age of sensors and electronic displays in the recent past , and that process is now reaching into the nation's electric power infrastructure .

part of the delay has been due to the long - lived nature of the capital assets which make up the industry .

the power plants and other expensive components of the grid can function for many productive years if maintenance of the systems is kept up .

however , much of the delay in modernization has been due to cost concerns , as many electric utilities seek to manage expenses by delaying replacement of aging systems as long as possible .

several of the better - known vulnerabilities of a smarter grid are discussed in the following paragraphs .

a smarter grid is increasing reliance on automated systems to manage energy sources , power control devices , system information , and power flows .

automation will allow information from smarter processors and sensors to be processed at much faster rates , giving power system operators more accurate and timely information , and giving customers greater input into their own power use .

but , the possibility that such systems could be highjacked in such a way as to bring down the grid regionally or even nationally , and cause long - term damage to critical systems and components , is giving congress reason to consider the cybersecurity of the electric power infrastructure .

the passage of the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) ( hsa ) established the department of homeland security .

hsa increased penalties for certain computer - based crimes , and in addition to improving on the earlier computer fraud and abuse act of 1986 , made critical infrastructure protection a key mission of dhs .

federal efforts to enhance the cybersecurity of the electrical grid were reemphasized with the recognition of cybersecurity as a critical issue for electric utilities in developing the smart grid .

the energy independence and security act ( eisa ) of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 ) thus added requirements for "a reliable and secure electricity infrastructure" with regard to smart grid development .

eisa directed nist to develop a framework for protocols and standards for the smart grid to achieve "interoperability" of devices and systems .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) provided nist with funds to proceed with this mandate .

there are a number of collaborative efforts involving private sector , academia , national laboratories , consumer groups , and others looking at cybersecurity and smart grid issues .

federal agencies are also working together to ensure communication and share resources on these issues , and helping to fund industry cybersecurity initiatives .

two of the major doe - led initiatives are discussed below .

doe is home to the federal smart grid task force ( fsgtf ) established under eisa to "ensure awareness , coordination , and integration of the diverse activities of doe's office of electricity delivery and energy reliability ( oe ) and elsewhere in the federal government related to smart grid technologies , practices , and services. .

ferc , the department of commerce , the environmental protection agency , the department of agriculture , and the department of defense are also members of the fsgtf .

doe also funds ( with oe leading doe's participation ) the "trustworthy cyber infrastructure for the power grid" ( tcipg ) initiative , working with dhs and industry .

tcipg is led by the academic sector as a public - private research partnership , supporting the development of resilient and secure smart grid systems , leveraging research previously funded by the national science foundation: tcipg's research plan is focused on securing the low - level devices , communications , and data systems that make up the power grid , to ensure trustworthy operation during normal conditions , cyber - attacks , and / or power emergencies .

at the device level , new key functionality is being designed in hardware in order to detect attacks and failures and to restore proper system operation .

likewise , virtual machine technology is being developed and adapted for advanced power meters in order to permit new power use scenarios while preserving privacy .

at the protocol level , new techniques are being developed to detect , react to , and recover from cyber attacks that occur while preserving integrity , availability , and real - time requirements .

participating in tcipg are the university of illinois at urbana - champaign , dartmouth college , cornell university , the university of california at davis , and washington state university .

current tcipg projects are focused on developing "trustworthy cyber infrastructure and technologies" for active demand management and wide - area monitoring and control , response to and managing cyber events , and risk / security assessments .

several bills introduced in the 112 th congress addressing the cybersecurity of the smart grid are summarized below .

much of the federal efforts related to the cybersecurity of the smarter grid relate to efforts to stay ahead of cyber - threats .

but such is the complexity of the cyber - threat universe ( with defined threats , perceived weaknesses , and the possibility of continual upgrades of both hardware and software systems ) that staying ahead of the threats could quickly evolve into a rapidly growing , never - ending cost center for utilities .

while a key to cost control is in assessment of the likely risks , cost recovery for reliability under current federal law is based on mandatory compliance with cip cybersecurity standards for reliability purposes .

cost recovery for smart grid expenditures or upgrades is voluntary under current law .

such discretionary treatment may possibly result in liability claims if damages result from an attack on smart grid systems .

while the "support anti - terrorism by fostering effective technologies act" of 2002 provides "risk management" and "litigation management" protection for qualified anti - terrorism technologies and others in the supply and distribution chain , such protections likely do not apply to electric utilities as adopters of smart grid technologies and devices .

current legislative and administration proposals largely speak to a prioritization of critical infrastructure facilities , with consideration to how these relate to national security , and national economic recovery .

however , recoverability from a cyberattack on the scale of something which might take down a significant portion of the grid will likely be very difficult .

maintaining a ready inventory of critical spare parts in close proximity to key installations would likely prove useful to quickening recovery efforts from some types of attack .

the current smart grid cybersecurity discussions largely focuses on the security of central station power plants and transmission systems .

however , the future smart grid may increasingly depend on renewable energy , fuel cells , and other distributed resources like energy storage as these technologies are increasingly integrated into the nation's energy framework .

the development of the smart grid with distributed and renewable power generation resources may add a level of security to the grid , since these resources do not have the fuel requirements of fossil generation .

damage to the fossil fuel delivery networks would likely impair operation of central station generating plants , depending on how much of an inventory of fuel is stored on - site .

this greater diversity of resource options would likely further enhance the smart grid's expected improvement in reliability due a greater diversity of resource options , joining together these newer elements with traditional power stations in the power grid of the future .

but the characteristics that these elements bring to the system could be considered in the design of cip standards and protocols .

although this report has focused on cybersecurity aspects of a smarter electrical grid , technologies being developed for use by the smart grid could also be used by natural gas pipeline , water supply , and telecommunications systems .

consideration could be given to applying similar control system device and system safeguards to these other vital utility systems .

consideration could be given to applying similar control system device and system safeguards to these other vital utility systems .

the electricity grid is connected to ( and largely dependent on ) these other resource and communications providers as the vast majority of power production today needs water for steam generation or natural gas for fuel .

similarly , natural gas pipelines use many electrically powered compressors to maintain pipeline pressure and move gas through the system , and the nation's water systems is a notable consumer of electricity for distribution and supply purposes .

these interdependent systems are also vulnerable to natural hazards such as earthquakes and tornadoes .

the remote sensing and other technologies expected to be employed by the smart grid could also help mitigate the effects of regional natural disasters on critical infrastructure , as these are expected to be capable of detecting outages and optimizing power flows to minimize damage and enable a more complete recovery .

