the workforce investment act ( wia ) was enacted in 1998 and replaced the job training partnership act ( jtpa ) as the federal government's primary employment and job training legislation .

title i of wia — workforce investment systems — authorizes job training and related services to unemployed or underemployed individuals .

funds authorized under title i , subtitle b of wia ( "statewide and local workforce investment systems" ) are allocated to states by formula and are used for workforce development activities .

the three formula grant programs in title i — youth , adults , and dislocated workers — authorize funding for employment and training activities available through the national system of one - stop centers and are provided by service providers in local communities .

title i of wia is administered by the employment and training administration ( eta ) of the department of labor ( dol ) .

the majority of funding for wia title i programs is provided through state formula grants .

for example , in program year ( py ) 2010 nearly $3 billion of the total title i funding of $5.5 billion was allocated by state formula grants .

wia allocation formulas are specified by statute , which defines formula factors , specifies factor weights , and prescribes the distribution of funds to states and localities .

the allocation formulas take the form of mathematical equations through which dol calculates the specific grant amounts to each state .

the dislocated worker program is the largest of the three title i grant programs and is intended to provide funding for employment and training activities for a specific group of unemployed individuals — dislocated workers .

in recent years , the dislocated worker program has provided approximately $1.2 billion annually in formula grants to states , the majority of which was subsequently suballocated to local areas within states .

interest in the dislocated worker program has intensified recently for several reasons .

first , while the dislocated worker formula is , partially by design , more volatile ( i.e. , the size of an individual state's grant varies from year to year ) than the two other state allocation formulas used in wia ( adult and youth programs ) , the recent recession and the large and rapid rise in the number of unemployed it produced has magnified the formula's allocation volatility .

in the past two to three years , several states have seen funding declines from the prior year in excess of 40% .

in addition , some states with high and persistent unemployment were the hardest hit in terms of funding cuts , even while experiencing rising levels of unemployment .

this recent pattern of large , unpredictable , and in many cases countercyclical , swings in funding fails to meet one of the underlying aims of the dislocated worker program — allocation of funds to states in a manner that consistently reflects their absolute and relative need and that consistently corresponds with changes in the state level of need .

second , the large shifts in state funding from year to year make it difficult to plan , budget for , and operate a program that is designed to be responsive to economic dislocations .

when states have rising unemployment , it becomes more difficult to provide employment and training services with level funding .

however , when funding declines , in a manner and at levels that cannot be anticipated , in times of rising unemployment , it is unlikely that states can consistently operate cohesive programs and can meet the demand for services .

third , in addition to concerns about the dislocated worker program formula leading to significant volatility and concerns about a mismatch between changes in unemployment and changes in funding , a fundamental misalignment between the formula factors and the intended population of the formula has also come under some scrutiny .

wia authorized a formula specifically to allocate resources for dislocated workers — a subpopulation of unemployed workers in general .

yet the formula as currently designed does not incorporate a measure that specifically identifies this subpopulation of workers .

thus , the stated intent in wia of targeting funds separately for dislocated workers does not match the formula specified in statute to allocate funds for this population .

as reauthorization of wia is considered , there is substantial interest in exploring ways to improve the formula design so that it better aligns with the statutorily specified goals of the dislocated worker program .

this report addresses issues related to the dislocated worker program allocation formula by examining the extent to which problems may exist in the current formula regarding alignment of the formula factors with the program aims and volatility in year - to - year allocations ; examining how aspects of the current formula's design may contribute to misalignment and volatility ; and analyzing the strengths and weaknesses of alternative design options that may have the potential of improving alignment and reducing year - to - year volatility in state grant levels .

a majority of funding for programs authorized by title i of wia is allocated by formulas .

wia title i state formula grant funds are allocated from eta to individual states by formulas ( discussed in the sections below ) .

there are three state formula grant programs in title i: adult , dislocated worker , and youth .

from these allocations , a portion of the funds are retained by the states for statewide activities and the remainder of the funds are suballocated to local workforce investment boards ( wib ) .

there are both required and allowable statewide and local employment and training activities .

statewide required and allowable employment and training activities include dissemination of the state list of eligible providers of training services , evaluations of state workforce investment programs , assistance to local areas in establishing one - stop delivery systems , operation of a fiscal and management accountability system in order to report on and monitor the use of wia funds , and various forms of technical assistance .

local required and allowable employment and training activities are centered on establishing and operating a local one - stop delivery system and providing core , intensive , and training services .

the programs for adult and dislocated worker participants in wia are structured around a sequential service strategy that consists of three levels of services: core , intensive , and training .

service at one level is a prerequisite for service at the next level .

that is , any individual may receive "core" services ( eg , job search assistance ) .

to receive intensive services ( eg , career planning ) , wia requires that individuals be unable , after receiving core services , "to obtain or retain employment that allows for self - sufficiency. .

to receive training ( eg , occupational skills , on - the - job ) , after receiving intensive services , an individual must have been unable to obtain or retain employment that allows for self sufficiency .

further , to be considered for training , an individual must also have the "skills and qualifications" to participate successfully in training ( as determined by a one - stop case manager ) , choose a training service linked to an occupation in the local area ( or be willing to locate to another area where the occupation is in demand ) , and be unable to obtain other grant assistance ( eg , pell grants ) for the training services .

the dislocated worker program is the largest of the three wia state formula grant programs , representing in fy2010 nearly 40% of total state formula grant funding ( $1.2 billion of the approximately $3 billion in state formula funding ) .

unlike the two other formula grant programs in title i of wia — adult and youth — the dislocated worker program clearly targets a subpopulation within the larger category of unemployed workers .

that is , wia carves out a separate program and separate funding stream for a population that is identified by a particular type of unemployment .

in addition , and unlike the wia programs for youth and adults , the dislocated worker program receives an annual allocation of more than $200 million ( $229 million in fy2010 ) to fund the national reserve , which funds , among other items , national emergency grants and various types of programs to respond to major economic dislocations .

the funds in the national reserve are allocated at the discretion of the secretary of labor but are part of the total funding for dislocated workers .

this section provides a brief discussion of key concepts used in allocating federal funds to states and localities by formula .

following that , the remainder of the section examines the specific design of the dislocated worker formula and some of the issues that have arisen about the performance of the formula .

as previously noted , there has been significant interest recently , primarily focused on two aspects of the dislocated worker formula — alignment with statutory intent and volatility .

this section of the report examines each topic .

first , with regard to alignment emphasis is placed on examining whether the formula factors focus on and measure the need of the target population of dislocated workers .

the dislocated worker formula is unlike the general wia formula for adults because it specifically identifies a subset of the unemployed population .

therefore , to match this statutory specification , it is necessary that the factors used to measure the population are sufficiently narrow in scope .

second , with regard to volatility emphasis is placed on examining whether the current formula generates types and amounts of volatility that may be undesirable .

that is , some degree of volatility may be necessary and desirable if it corresponds well with fluctuation in need .

on the other hand , if the volatility is not necessarily the result of funds following need , then the formula may not be functioning as intended .

additionally , as has been suggested , recently large year - to - year fluctuations in funding may undermine program operations .

before reviewing alternatives to the current formula , the examination thus far has demonstrated the following: the current dislocated worker formula factors do not align well with the general concept and the wia - specific definition of dislocated workers .

the current factors are measures of different facets of unemployment but do not measure the target population .

the current formula leads to highly volatile , and in many cases countercyclical , state annual allocations .

the volatility alone may make it difficult to plan and operate programs and services .

in addition , an increase in a factor value ( eg , an increase in the number of excess unemployed ) is often accompanied by a decrease in funding for that factor .

the current formula results in significant variation in the intensity of funding , or the allocation per capita ( per capita in the target population ) .

large annual fluctuations in the allocation per capita ( see figure 2 ) means significant inequity across years in the resources available per targeted population .

the excess unemployed factor in the formula generates much of the volatility in the formula .

the construction of this factor , which uses a threshold over which states are either on or off of the allocation , exacerbates any natural trends that shift funding among states from year to year .

given that the dislocated worker formula is likely to receive attention in upcoming wia reauthorization deliberations , this section of the report considers alternative formula factors and features , which may have the potential of enhancing alignment and reducing volatility .

while another approach to minimizing the effects of volatility might be to increase appropriations to create a constant level of funding during changes in target populations , in the current fiscal environment it is not clear that this is an approach likely to be taken .

no existing data source aligns perfectly with the wia definition of a dislocated worker .

based on the review of the dislocated worker formula above , however , the existing factors are a closer measure of the unemployed population than the population of dislocated workers .

this mismatch between the formula factors and the underlying population is important because the wia state formula grant program makes a distinction between unemployed populations by having two separate funding streams for adults — the adult allocation and the dislocated worker allocation .

the adult allocation is based on three factors , two of which — unemployment in areas of substantial unemployment and excess unemployment — are variations of the same core measure used in the dislocated worker formula: total unemployed .

there appears to be a mismatch between the intent of the formula construction , as expressed in creating different funding streams for adult and dislocated workers , and the practice of using similar or overlapping measures for the two state grant programs .

because there have been concerns about this mismatch , this section reviews several alternative factors for possible use in the wia dislocated worker formula .

the factors are evaluated on their alignment with the target population of dislocated workers and the attendant volatility of these factors .

following evaluation of the formula factors , there is an analysis of the ways in which varied formula features might be adjusted to improve the alignment between intent of the formula and its construction .

in addition to factors , formula features , which are elements of a formula that adjust the factors in a formula , provide another method to alter the allocation of funding .

at one end of the spectrum , a formula with only one factor ( eg , total unemployment ) might have no features .

that is , each entity subject to the formula would receive an allocation based solely on that entity's relative share of the factor in use .

most formulas , however , use a combination of features that transform the underlying factors .

in its current form , the wia dislocated worker formula uses two features — weighting of factors and a "threshold" feature for the excess unemployment factor .

the discussion below covers numerous possible formula features , many of which are used in other federal state or local formula grants , and provides information on the likely effect of each feature .

the list is not exhaustive but includes features found in other wia formulas as well as features in other allocation formulas .

the analysis in this report supports four conclusions .

first , the current factors used in the wia state grant formula for dislocated workers are not fully aligned with the target population .

the degree of misalignment varies by factor but in general the current factors measure a much broader labor market group — the unemployed — than the subgroup of dislocated workers as defined in wia .

second , allocations from the dislocated worker formula are volatile , with much of the volatility driven by the excess unemployment factor .

while some volatility is desirable in a formula ( to direct allocations to areas with changes in the dislocated worker population ) , there is often a disconnect between economic conditions and allocations .

the scale of the volatility ( swings in excess of 30% or more from year to year ) threatens the consistency of program operations .

third , beyond factor - driven volatility , however , the practice of appropriating level amounts of funding for the dislocated worker program irrespective of changes in unemployment and job dislocations also contributes to large swings in state allocations .

in the py2001 through py2010 period , appropriations for allocation to states through the wia dislocated worker program have averaged $1.19 billion per year , with a range from $1.15 billion to $1.27 billion .

thus , given a largely constant level of funding , as economic conditions and the number of dislocated workers increases or decreases , the wia dislocated worker program allocates the same total amount of funding in different ways .

the flat funding creates a zero - sum allocation , such that one state's gain in funding must result in another state's loss of funding , even if economic conditions point in the same direction for most or all states .

fourth , there are several alternative factors available to measure the dislocated worker population .

the alternative factors appear to be more closely aligned with the wia - defined population of dislocated workers and are generally less volatile .

there are also options to add formula features that may reduce some of the fluctuations in funding .

appendix a .

additional factors for the dislocated worker formula other factors for the wia dislocated worker formula were considered for analysis in this report .

those factors considered but not presented in this report are listed below , along with a brief justification for their exclusion from full analysis .

unemployment insurance initial claimants .

this series is part of the ui program data .

an "initial claim" occurs when an individual files a request to determine entitlement to or eligibility for ui or when an individual files a request to begin a subsequent period of eligibility within a benefit year or period of eligibility .

this measure of labor market dislocation is timely ( reported weekly ) and is reasonably well aligned with one of the wia definitions of a dislocated worker .

because one of the wia definitions of a dislocated worker includes "attachment to the labor force" as a criteria , the "first payments" series ( analyzed in the text of this report ) is slightly more aligned as it includes only those who receive a payment ( i.e. , have clear attachment to the labor market ) .

in sum , because there is no tradeoff in terms of timeliness or data availability and because the category of initial claimants includes some individuals who do not have sufficient labor force attachment to qualify for ui benefits , the ui initial claimants series was not used in this report .

permanent job losers .

this series is part of the cps data and counts permanent job losers and persons who completed temporary jobs .

from an alignment perspective , this data series would match part of the definition of a wia dislocated worker well as it captures workers who have lost jobs through no fault of their own and who may be unlikely to return to a previous occupation or industry .

the main drawback to this series , however , is timeliness .

due to sample size considerations , three - year averages would be required to generate reliable estimates at the state level .

given the importance of aligning allocations with need , a lag of this size may not reflect current conditions .

in addition , data for puerto rico are not available from this series .

displaced worker survey ( dws ) .

this series is a biennial supplementary survey to the cps .

in the dws , displaced workers are defined as persons at least 20 years of age who lost or left their jobs because of a company move or closure , insufficient work , or abolishment of a position or shift .

the survey , which is conducted in january , covers the three previous calendar years ( eg , the january 2010 dws covered the january 2007 through december 2009 period ) .

the dws would align very closely with the target populations in the wia dislocated worker formula .

data are not available at the state level , however , due to the sample size of the dws .

appendix b. coefficient of variation analysis for current and alternative wia dislocated worker formula factor .

