recently , as congress considers policies to foster economic growth , arguments have been made that some traditional expectations of fiscal policy should be revisited , namely that cutting spending will contract the economy in the short run .

under this view , what would normally be considered contractionary fiscal policy would instead be expansionary .

proponents of this view also argue that cutting spending rather than raising taxes would be a more effective means of increasing economic growth .

these arguments often refer to recent empirical studies of deficit reductions across countries .

this view contrasts with that held by most economists , which will be referred to as "mainstream economics. .

mainstream economics relies on a basic theory regarding policies to expand the economy in a downturn .

this theory can be found in economics textbooks and is used by government and private forecasters to project the path of the economy .

this view has been the basis for fiscal and monetary policy interventions to stimulate the economy for many years , under both republican and democratic administrations .

chairman bernanke of the federal reserve was referring to this view when he cautioned against large and immediate spending cuts .

the basic thrust of the model for fiscal policy is that increasing the deficit ( whether by increasing spending or cutting taxes ) expands an underemployed economy , and decreasing the deficit ( cutting spending or raising taxes ) contracts it .

just as economists generally consider spending cuts to be contractionary in the short run in an underemployed economy , they believe that deficits can be harmful in the long run by crowding out private investment .

there is widespread agreement that the continuation of current tax and spending policies will lead to an unsustainable path of the national debt .

the fundamental cause of these long - run problems predates the great recession and the increase in debt relative to gdp from that recession , and arises from the aging of the population and the growth in health care costs .

thus , to most economists , the policy challenge is a trade - off between the benefits of starting to address the debt problem earlier versus risking damage to a still - fragile economy by engaging in contractionary fiscal policy , or failure to continue with expansionary fiscal policy .

although the unemployment rate has been falling , it remains high , and the growth rate , while strong in the third quarter of 2012 ( 3.1% ) , was 1.3% in the second quarter of 2012 .

this report begins with an overview of this mainstream theory .

the next section of the report then examines the evidence that has been used to challenge this theory .

current fiscal policy theories began with a work published during the great depression by british economist john maynard keynes .

as a result , this type of policy is often referred to as keynesian , although there have been numerous refinements and developments in the theory .

these developments include , among others , the standard model ( referred to as is - lm ) that includes both monetary and fiscal policy , the refinement of the tradeoff between inflation and unemployment , leading to the notion of a natural rate of unemployment ( where policies tend to affect price rather than output ) , the incorporation of expectations , and modifications for an open economy ( where goods and capital flow across borders ) .

some commentators contrast keynesian economics with neoclassical economics .

neoclassical economics originated in the late 19 th century and theorizes that output and prices adjust to forces of supply and demand .

supply and demand are , in turn , driven by decisions made by economic agents ( consumers , workers , and producers ) who maximize their welfare .

most economists have both neoclassical and keynesian - style views , one applied largely to questions of microeconomics and the other to questions of macroeconomics .

since world war ii , government policy to address business cycles has generally been guided by some form of keynesian theory .

the fundamental concept behind this view of macroeconomics and fiscal policy is that prices in an economy do not immediately adjust to shocks , which can lead to unemployment of resources .

workers may become unemployed and capital may sit idle , due to a lack of sufficient demand .

to reduce unemployment , expansionary fiscal policy ( an increase in spending or a reduction in taxes to expand aggregate demand ) can be employed .

the magnitude of the effects of fiscal policy is measured by a multiplier .

if the government spends a dollar , then someone in the economy receives a dollar .

part of that dollar might be saved and part might be spent ; to the extent that it is spent , it increases aggregate demand in a second round .

the recipients of that second round of spending will in turn spend part of their receipts .

there are multiple rounds of spending , each diminishing a bit because part is saved , and the sum of all these rounds defines the multiplier .

as demand increases , businesses hire additional workers and purchase more capital goods to satisfy demand .

the strength of the multiplier depends not only on the share that is spent in the initial and subsequent rounds but also on the effect on interest rates and prices .

as demand increases it places upward pressure on interest rates , reducing private sector spending on investment and consumer durables , and also , in an open economy , attracting capital flows into the united states , appreciating currency , and reducing net exports .

when the economy is at full employment or close to full employment , the effects of a stimulus are more likely to lead to price increases rather than real output growth .

in this case , the deficit spending crowds out investment and net exports .

thus , even for a particular type of spending or tax cut its short run effects are likely smaller at higher interest rates , smaller for small open economies with a large trade sector and flexible exchange rates , and smaller for economies at or close to full employment .

under current circumstances , there is little indication that deficits have significantly crowded out investment or exports , since interest rates have remained extremely low .

they are also not likely to have led to price increases given significant unemployment in the u.s. economy and low inflation rates .

the estimated size of the fiscal multiplier also depends on assumptions about monetary policy and its response to a fiscal stimulus .

one might think of a neutral monetary response as one that permits the fiscal stimulus to increase interest rates , output , and prices ( in the context of the is - lm model , equivalent to keeping money supply fixed ) .

the monetary authorities may , at one extreme , keep the interest rate fixed , which will enhance the fiscal stimulus , or , at the other , keep prices fixed , which will offset the fiscal stimulus .

in the recent recession , both interest rates and inflation remain low .

in a fully employed economy , fiscal stimulus will not affect output , but rather the composition of output .

without an offsetting change in the nominal money supply , prices will rise to reduce the real value of money .

alternatively , the money supply can be contracted to be consistent with total output without a price increase .

as indicated in figure 1 , which plots growth rates since 1821 , the post - world war ii period has been characterized by much more moderate business cycles ( to the right of the vertical line ) , and limited instances of negative growth , as compared to those occurring in the latter half of the 19 th century and the first half of the 20 th century .

 ( note , however , that data for earlier years is less reliable. ) .

moreover , it is generally agreed one of the more significant contractions , in the early 1980s , was deliberately brought about by restrictive monetary policy ( which may , however , have been more restrictive than initially planned ) .

along with the practice of countercyclical monetary and fiscal policy ( or at least an understanding of what policies could make things worse , as they had in the past ) , business cycles may have been moderated by deposit insurance , automatic stabilizers ( transfer and tax systems that automatically increase the deficit during downturns ) , and the expectation that the government will counter business cycles , which may help to reduce panics in the first place , though some believe they may also increase the risk of speculative bubbles .

some debates have centered on whether fiscal or monetary policy ( or both ) should be used as tools of discretionary policy .

both are susceptible to policy lags .

some economists came to believe that political lags made fiscal policy ill - timed , while monetary policy could be enacted quickly .

others became less enamored of fiscal policy because it becomes somewhat less effective in an open economy .

at the same time , there are circumstances where traditional monetary policy does not work well ( at very low interest rates , for example ) or where a contraction appears to be serious enough to warrant both monetary and fiscal measures .

during the 2007 – 2009 great recession there was broad bipartisan agreement that fiscal stimulus should be used , as it was in both the bush and obama administrations .

the textbook consensus is that spending increases are more effective than tax cuts , because the full amount of the initial increase is actually spent , while some of a tax cut is initially saved .

spending in the form of transfers could also be partially saved , although it is believed that most transfers benefit lower - income recipients who are likely to spend all or most of the transfer .

different types of tax or spending policies may also have different effects depending on the portion initially saved .

at the same time , much federal government spending is funneled through the states and a portion of spending in the form of grants to states could also be saved .

the spending funneled through the states could include both government purchases of goods and services or transfers .

table 1 shows a list of multipliers provided by a major private forecaster during mid - 2008 .

it illustrates the different multipliers embedded in his forecasting model .

consistent with the theory above , the spending multipliers in this model are larger than tax cut multipliers .

among tax cuts , those that are likely to go to middle - and lower - income individuals ( notably a refundable tax credit ) have larger effects than those going to higher - income taxpayers ( such as the alternative minimum tax or taxes on dividends or capital gains ) .

this difference reflects different propensities to save: higher - income individuals tend to save more and cutting their taxes increases demand less per dollar of tax cut .

the multipliers also indicate that tax cuts for businesses ( such as accelerated depreciation and rate cuts ) are less effective , again because they are unlikely to induce spending .

these differential effects are consistent with the fundamental notion that the short - run problem is lack of demand and increased deficits are most effective when they induce spending .

table 2 shows a range of multipliers in a congressional budget office document released in 2010 .

the range is intended to encompass the views of most economists on the magnitude of multipliers .

they show a similar pattern to those in table 1 , although the estimates , especially at the bottom of the range , are considerably smaller .

in general , spending increases have a larger effect than tax cuts , and tax cuts directed to lower - and middle - income taxpayers have larger effects than those directed at high - income individuals or business investment .

the congressional budget office also provides multipliers for the first quarter of 2011 for specific provisions of the stimulus enacted in february 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) as the latest in a series of reports on the effect of the legislation .

their estimates indicated multipliers of 1.0 to 2.5 for government spending and transfers to the states for infrastructure , and 0.7 to 1.8 for transfers to the states for other purposes .

for direct transfers to individuals ( who have low incomes ) the multipliers were between 0.8 and 2.1 .

payments to retirees ( largely social security beneficiaries ) were 0.3 to 1.0 .

for taxes , tax cuts for lower - and middle - income taxpayers ( mainly those claiming the making work pay tax credit ) were 0.6 to 1.5 , while the increase in the alternative minimum tax exemption for higher - income individuals was 0.2 to 0.6. business tax cuts , mostly of a cash flow nature , were 0.0 to 0.4 .

these multipliers are consistent in general direction with those listed in table 1 and table 2 : larger for spending and larger for transfers and tax cuts for lower - income individuals than for higher - income ones .

the report also shows the estimated impact on unemployment ( at its peak in the third quarter of 2010 , reducing the unemployment rate between 0.8 and 2.0 percentage points ) and other variables on a quarter - by - quarter basis .

the current arguments for expecting spending cuts to stimulate demand appeal to empirical observations .

the proponents also offer an explanation of how their interpretation of these empirical findings could be correct despite their apparent contradiction with conventional theory .

if agents in the economy believe that reducing the deficit reduces the likelihood of more costly adjustments in the future , such as possible disruptions associated with a fiscal crisis , they expect their future income to be larger and have increased confidence to spend in the present .

proponents also argue that in some countries , where default on the government debt is seen as possible , deficit reduction may lead to a reduction in risk premiums built into interest rates , thus increasing demand and perhaps inducing asset price increases .

with current interest rates low in the united states , this second channel of effect seems unlikely to occur in the short run .

another argument that has been made , although not in close association with the empirical research , is that companies fear rising taxes in the future , which depresses investment .

alternatively , arguments are made that the deficit is directly crowding out investment .

this argument contrasts with the mainstream view that business investment in cyclical downturns is heavily affected by current demand ( this effect is called the accelerator ) , as well as being affected by interest rates , and signs of crowding out would be reflected in rising interest rates .

note that for the increase in expected future income to transform a contractionary fiscal policy into an expansionary one in the short - run , these results arising from expectations must not only arise but also be large enough to overwhelm the normal channels of contraction .

also , when the contraction involves government spending cuts that lead directly to a decrease in government employment , the demand effects must overcome this direct effect on unemployment .

several studies have examined the short run effects of fiscal consolidation or adjustments ( that is , spending reductions and / or tax increases ) on government debt and the economy .

two widely cited studies are discussed .

the critical part of each analysis is the identification of discretionary fiscal policy .

government spending , tax revenue , and the budget deficit can change due to automatic stabilizers that react to economic changes or to discretionary ( often legislated ) changes .

typically transfer payments ( eg , unemployment compensation ) increase and tax revenue decreases automatically when the economy enters a recession and , consequently , budget deficits increase .

the reverse is true when the economy recovers .

two methods have typically been used to identify discretionary fiscal changes: ( 1 ) use of cyclically adjusted fiscal variables , and ( 2 ) the action - based approach .

most studies use cyclically adjusted fiscal variables to separate fluctuations due to the business cycle from those that are discretionary .

the method used by alberto alesina and silvia ardagna was first proposed by olivier blanchard and has been described as simple and transparent .

the cyclically adjusted variable is the estimated value of the variable that would have prevailed had the unemployment rate been the same as in the previous year .

the adjustment only requires the value of the unemployment rate in the previous year and the elasticity ( how the fiscal variable changes when the unemployment rate changes ) .

although this method is simple and transparent , it also has some limitations .

first , the method assumes that the elasticities are constant over time ( and the business cycle ) .

evidence suggests that the elasticities are not constant over time and may behave asymmetrically over the business cycle — changes in the elasticity may be different as the economy enters a recession than when it comes out of a recession .

second , the international monetary fund ( imf ) notes that the method may suffer from measurement errors that are correlated with economic developments unrelated with the unemployment rate , such as asset price booms and busts .

lastly , the imf further argues that the method "ignores the motivation behind fiscal actions. .

it is , therefore , possible that some identified instances of discretionary fiscal policy changes bear no relation to actual fiscal policy changes .

the action - based approach to fiscal adjustment involves identifying specific policy actions to reduce budget deficits .

the imf , for example , examined various oecd , imf , and country - specific sources to identify discretionary and deliberate fiscal policy actions .

christina romer and david romer compare the cyclical adjustment and action - based methods for the united states and find that while action - based changes show up as cyclically adjusted changes , there is substantial variation in cyclically adjusted changes that are not in the action - based changes .

they conclude that "non - legislated factors are an important source of movements in cyclically adjusted measures. .

the discussion in the previous section relates to short - run effects .

long - term policy regarding budget deficits , their effects , and methods of addressing them raise different issues .

the focus turns to the supply side of the economy , the rate of growth of potential output , the distributional implications of policy , and the desirability of various government programs .

short - tem policy focuses on job creation .

economic theory , however , suggests that there is no reason to view general job creation as a long - run objective of government policies .

the economy can generate the jobs needed by the natural process of growth and market adjustment .

in 1961 and in 1991 the unemployment rate was the same , 6.7% .

employment , however , rose from 66 million to 117 million .

employment tends to grow over the long run ; the unemployment rate fluctuates .

long - term jobs policies , therefore , should not be aimed at increasing jobs ( which at full employment will only lead to inflation ) , although they can be designed to reduce structural or frictional unemployment ( such as improving the skills of disadvantaged workers ) .

there is general agreement , however , that in the long - run , reducing the deficit will increase output , because government dissaving crowds out capital spending in a fully employed economy and slows the rate of economic growth .

some of this crowding out effect might be offset by reduced net capital inflows ( arising from lower interest rates as the government's demands on capital markets decrease ) , but this increased private capital stock ownership , even if invested abroad , will accrue earnings and an increased standard of living to u.s. savers .

deficits place some of the burden of government on future generations .

deficits are not necessarily undesirable ; in addition to their use for short - term fiscal stimulus , they may be appropriate for financing spending whose benefits accrue to future generations .

for example , world war ii was financed in large part by deficit spending .

furthermore , deficits that grow at a rate less than or equal to gdp growth can be sustainable in that the debt - to - gdp ratio does not increase .

addressing the deficit is important in the united states , however , because u.s. debt is on an unsustainable course , at least under current policies .

a congressional budget office document , published before the tax cuts enacted in 2001 and 2003 were extended at the end of december 2010 , estimated that under current law the federal debt will rise from 62% of output to 80% by 2035 , and interest payments would rise from 1% to 4% of gdp .

under an alternative , but perhaps more realistic scenario ( which included permanent extension of the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts and growth in health costs ) the debt would grow to 185% of gdp and interest payments to 9% by 2035 .

this interest cost is equal to the entire individual income tax estimated to be collected in 2013 assuming the tax cuts do not expire .

although the debt increased during the recession due to automatic reductions in taxes and increases in spending along with legislative stimulus , the unsustainability of the debt is generally due to the growth in entitlements ( social security , medicare , and other health spending ) .

indeed , cbo projects declines in other spending as a percent of gdp .

medicare , for example , grows from 3.6% of output in 2010 to 5.9% in 2035 ( 7% in the alternative scenario ) .

these increases , combined to increased interest payments and little or no increase in revenues , lead to the unsustainable path .

the major determinant of the effects on growth is the magnitude of deficit and debt reductions .

some arguments are made that increases in taxes will reduce growth more than cuts in spending , because they will have supply side effects that reduce labor supply and savings .

most evidence , however , suggests that these responses are small .

moreover some kinds of spending cuts , such as those that support investment in physical or human capital , could reduce growth .

fundamentally , however , the nature of measures taken to control the deficit depend on many factors , including the preferences of americans for government programs .

for example , medicare costs are projected to grow because of the aging of the population and the increase in health care costs .

ultimately , however , the question is whether it is more desirable to cut medicare benefits in half , double taxes used to finance medicare , or make deep cuts in other government programs that are already being reduced relative to output ( or some combination ) .

the differential effect on growth of the alternative methods of reducing the deficit may well be a secondary issue .

the claim based on the evidence of alesina and ardagna ( and similar studies ) that policies traditionally viewed as contractionary , such as cutting spending , will increase growth in the short run in the united states , can be questioned on at least two grounds .

first , when a methodology that looks to intentions was used to select instances of deficit reduction , as in the imf study , the empirical results were consistent with traditional fiscal policy .

second , the deficit reductions in the alesina and ardagna study that were successful by the authors' measures were associated with economies generally above , or close to , full employment in most cases .

the united states is still operating considerably below potential output .

two major policy questions include when , and how , to reduce the deficit .

reducing the deficit while the economy is still fragile and well below full employment would likely involve further contraction that might not be desirable .

at the same time , the sooner long - run debt problems are addressed , the more room there is for the adjustments to be implemented gradually .

the mix of policies ( tax increases , spending cuts , and the types of either ) depend on many factors , including preferences for public programs and distributional objectives , as well as growth .

