issues and questions related to the killing of osama bin laden ( obl ) are multifaceted and may have operational , regional , and policy implications .

operational policy issues include congressional notification , legal considerations , and current and future military activities .

the killing of obl nearly 10 years after the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states poses many questions about the continuing destructive capabilities of aq , the effects on regional affiliates , and u.s. policy implications in pakistan and afghanistan .

near - and long - term security and foreign policy considerations may be reassessed with the killing of obl .

the national security community may seek to revise foreign policy and counterterrorism priorities while pursing actions to limit the possible threats to u.s. interests resulting from obl's death .

in the wake of obl's death , many practitioners and observers have expressed interest in the implications for u.s. national security strategy — whether and to what extent the u.s. government's prioritization of ct relative to other national security imperatives , the distribution of ct efforts among u.s. government agencies , and the relative balance of emphasis between ct and other concerns within key u.s. government agencies , ought to be adjusted .

such decision - making is likely to be shaped in part by assessments of the impact that obl's death has on the aq organization and its affiliates , by developments and considerations concerning other key u.s. national security interests , and by the current climate of relatively constrained resources .

the 2010 national security strategy ( nss ) repeatedly underscores the importance of the mission to "disrupt , dismantle and defeat al qaeda and its violent extremist affiliates in afghanistan , pakistan , and around the world. .

that mandate has been understood to include a broad range of activities including — according to the nss — protecting the homeland , securing weapons of mass destruction , denying safe havens , and building partnerships around the world .

in addition , there is a generally shared understanding among practitioners that multiple u.s. government agencies share responsibility for the mission to disrupt and defeat violent extremist organizations ( veos ) .

the nss calls for an "integrated campaign that judiciously applies every tool of american power — both military and civilian. .

the department of defense's ( dod's ) 2010 quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) recognizes a military role , naming "succeed[ing] in counterinsurgency , stability , and counterterrorism operations" as one of dod's six key missions .

the state department's first quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) , also released in 2010 , stresses that "the threat of terrorism and violent extremism has become more acute and more immediate," and it argues that countering that threat is not exclusively a military responsibility , but rather one shared by multiple agencies .

the nss , qdr , and qddr do not prioritize among the goals and objectives they name .

while countering violent extremist threats is understood to be important , existing unclassified strategic guidance does not make clear how important that mission is compared to other key missions .

some practitioners suggest that a sense of relative importance generally comes directly from senior leadership — from statements by the president and from guidance issued by the national security council ( nsc ) process ( i.e. , the tiered system of interagency policy committees , the deputies committee , the principals committee , and the nsc itself ) .

president obama has repeatedly stressed the goal of defeating aq and other veos in both written strategic guidance and public speeches .

he has further stated that under that rubric he directed , at the beginning of his administration , that killing or capturing obl would be the "top priority of our war against aq" , but that the united states would also continue to "disrupt , dismantle and defeat his network. .

in the wake of the u.s. operation against obl , president obama stressed , "his death does not mark the end of our effort. .

that statement does not , however , indicate whether the overall "defeat" mission will retain the same de facto importance relative to other national security priorities or to broader u.s. national interests .

to what extent might obl's death prompt a reduction in the relative importance of countering veos , compared to other u.s. national security imperatives , and to broader u.s. national interests ? .

in the wake of obl's demise , the u.s. government may reconsider not only how much effort to apply to countering veos , but also what balance of instruments of national power to apply to that effort .

that could affect the relative burdens borne by various u.s. agencies in countering veos .

key factors — about which assessments are likely to differ — include not only whether the threat has diminished ( or grown ) ; but also how and in what ways the threat may have changed qualitatively .

a more diffuse , less well - known , more opportunistic , less predictable set of violent extremist networks , for example , could pose different kinds of challenges and require different kinds of approaches to counter it .

a further factor is likely to concern how u.s. allies and partners around the world perceive the nature of the terrorist threat in the wake of obl's death .

while current national - level unclassified guidance — in particular the nss — does not assign roles and responsibilities in any detail , individual agencies , in their own unclassified guidance — including the qdr and the qddr — do assign roles and responsibilities to themselves , under the "defeating veos" rubric .

going forward , some may argue , for example , that obl's death and its expected impact on aq and its affiliates should signal both a decreased use of large - scale conventional military operations to counter veos , and an increased use of precision operations that leverage sophisticated intelligence assets and high - end surgical military capabilities , on the model of the obl operation .

others , focusing less on identified terrorist targets and more on the root causes of terrorism , may call for reassessing the efficacy of the mix of u.s. instruments applied to ameliorating conditions that feed recruitment and tacit popular acceptance of veos .

such measures include , for example , countering extremist ideology , and partnering with states around the world to help them develop security forces and / or judicial systems well suited for countering violent extremism .

in turn , those missions — and others — are typically executed by a combination of efforts by multiple u.s. government agencies .

for example , both dod and the state department execute "communications" programs , targeting a range of audiences in various ways , designed to counter violent extremist ideology .

a reassessment of the mix of tools might also include re - evaluation of agencies' respective roles .

to what extent will , and should , obl's demise trigger a reassessment of the balance of instruments of national power that the u.s. government commits to countering violent extremism , and of the distribution of roles and responsibilities among u.s. government agencies appropriate to that balance ? .

in considering refinements to the relative priority of ct , departments and agencies are likely to be steered primarily by guidance from the white house concerning both overall prioritization and the inter - agency distribution of responsibilities .

in addition , agencies are likely to conduct their own more detailed internal assessments of the requirements of their respective parts in a potentially refined ct mission , in the context of a resource - constrained environment .

dod's current unclassified guidance does not prioritize .

the 2010 qdr names four "priority objectives": "prevail in today's wars ; prevent and deter conflict ; prepare to defeat adversaries and succeed in a wide range of contingencies ; and preserve and enhance the all - volunteer force. .

under the "defeat" objective , in turn , the qdr describes a range of future challenges , which include "defeating aq and its allies. .

other challenges include responding to natural disasters , prevailing against state adversaries , securing weapons of mass destruction , stabilizing fragile states , protecting u.s. citizens , conducting cyberspace operations , and preventing human suffering — in short , a robust but non - prioritized list .

for dod , the president's guidance in april 2011 to identify $400 billion in additional cuts to the defense budget between now and 2023 , and dod's plans to conduct a "comprehensive review of missions , capabilities and america's role in the world" to inform that decision - making process , are likely to force the question of prioritization .

for the state department , internal debates might include , for example , the relative weights of the communications efforts to counter violent extremism , and to build partner capacity , as well as its proposal , pending congressional approval , to establish a bureau ( instead of the current office ) for counter - terrorism .

it is unknown how obl's death will affect aq - inspired homegrown jihadist terrorists targeting the united states .

on may 2 , 2011 , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi , the bureau ) and department of homeland security ( dhs ) issued a joint bulletin indicating that obl's death may motivate revenge - or publicity - seeking homegrown jihadists to attack the united states .

however , it is unlikely that his death will significantly change the counterterrorism investigative efforts of the fbi , the lead agency for investigating the federal crime of terrorism .

regardless , obl's demise underscores a number of issues the bureau confronts .

it is too early to chart the specific effects of obl's death on homegrown jihadists , who have accounted for more than 40 terrorist plots — 4 of which resulted in attacks — since 9 / 11 .

these plots and attacks reflect a global shift in terrorism toward decentralized , autonomously radicalized , violent jihadist individuals or groups who strike in their home countries .

global counterterrorism efforts have made it harder for international terrorist networks to formulate plots , place their recruits in targeted countries , and carry out violent strikes in locations far from their bases of operation .

aq and affiliated groups are moving "away from what we are used to , which are complex , ambitious , multilayered plots. .

regarding the nature of homegrown jihadist terrorism , at least four issues may emerge from obl's death: will homegrown jihadist plotting increase ? .

how will his death affect the radicalization of people interested in violent jihad who live in the united states ? .

how will it shape the popularity of surviving key jihadist intermediaries who inspire u.s. residents to radicalize and turn to jihadist terrorism ? .

intermediaries such as anwar al - aulaqi have allegedly influenced people involved in a number of recent homegrown terrorist plots .

finally , because obl's death potentially affects the radicalization process , it may be of value to assess the administration's progress toward developing and implementing a domestic counter - radicalization strategy .

it has not been entirely settled which agencies have what responsibilities when it comes to identifying domestic radicalization and interdicting attempts at terrorist recruitment .

since 9 / 11 , the bureau has arguably taken a much more proactive posture , particularly regarding counterterrorism .

it now views its role as both "predicting and preventing" the threats facing the nation , drawing upon enhanced resources .

in light of this transformed role , obl's death may offer congress the opportunity to explore issues related to the bureau .

how , if at all , will the demise of such a prominent terrorist figure alter the bureau's mission , priorities , and allocation of resources ? .

does the fbi , and the homeland security community more broadly , have the proactive capacity to quickly and efficiently task its human sources ( informants ) to ascertain what impact obl's death may have on homegrown jihadist extremists ? .

this addresses a broader issue: does a coherent domestic intelligence collection strategy exist to coordinate the efforts of the fbi , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , other federal partners , and state and local law enforcement elements ? .

how will the fbi use strategic , big - picture intelligence to develop a corporate understanding of the ways that the domestic threat will evolve in the wake of obl's demise ? .

in other words , has the bureau developed effective predictive capacity that can continually re - assess the changing terrorist landscape ? .

will the fbi alter its operations based on predictive strategic assessments in this area ? .

some government leaders and security analysts predict that the death of obl may be accompanied by near - term threats to u.s. global security interests .

numerous reasons are offered in support of this assessment , including the need for the core , affiliates , and adherents to prove viability and relevance in response to obl's death ; retribution to avenge his killing ; and the need to quickly conduct an attack due to concerns that information gleaned during the raid of obl's compound may jeopardize operational security .

if it is determined that obl remained an active decision - maker in the development of core aq strategy and terrorist operations , his death may have negative implications for the organization's ability to continue as a viable threat to u.s. interests .

while some analysts suggest that obl may have provided some level of support to aq - affiliated organizations , most of these entities appear to be self - sufficient and it is likely regionally focused terrorism - related activities would not be affected .

some fear that the death of obl could lead to a further degradation of the standing of core aq , which in turn may lead to an attempt by a leader of an affiliated aq organization to pursue a more aggressive global terrorist agenda in hopes of rising to place of prominence .

while some experts argue that obl's limited ideological appeal and operational role in aq suggest that the implications of his death will also be limited , senior u.s. counterterrorism officials view the death of obl as the possible beginning of the end of aq .

in a press briefing at the white house on may 2 , 2011 , an unnamed senior administration official offered the following assessment of the significance of obl's death and the prospect of continued threats to the nation: without a doubt , the united states will continue to face terrorist threats .

there's also no doubt that the death of osama bin laden marks the single greatest victory in the u.s. - led campaign to disrupt , dismantle , and defeat al qaeda .

it is a major and essential step in bringing about al qaeda's eventual destruction .

although al qaeda may not fragment immediately , the loss of osama bin laden puts the group on a path of decline that will be difficult to reverse .

as intelligence operations in the wake of the recent raid on obl's compound shed light on core aq and its affiliates' activities , policymakers may be presented with new information to help in determining how the u.s. and international counterterrorism communities might initiate changes to transnational security and foreign policy strategies .

these actions coupled with the ongoing activities by individuals in the middle east pursuing changes to the policies of current regimes may offer an opportunity for a reevaluation of u.s. foreign policy in the region .

some analysts argue that recent anti - authoritarian demonstrations and political change in some arab states run counter to obl's vision for the region .

others suggest that the outcome of political upheaval in the region has yet to be determined and that groups and individuals supportive of obl's ideology may yet successfully exploit recent developments .

on may 2 , secretary of state clinton argued that "history will record that bin laden's death came at a time of great movements toward freedom and democracy , at a time when the people across the middle east and north africa are rejecting the extremist narratives and charting a path of peaceful progress based on universal rights and aspirations .

there is no better rebuke to al - qaida and its heinous ideology. .

if demonstrators seeking change are successful in managing political transitions and ensuring lasting security in their countries , their efforts could further contribute to the decline of aq and its ideology .

