a stable , democratic , prosperous pakistan actively combating religious militancy is considered vital to u.s. interests .

pakistan is at the locus of several top - tier policy areas of urgent concern , including regional and global terrorism ; efforts to stabilize neighboring afghanistan ; nuclear weapons proliferation ; the kashmir problem and pakistan - india tensions ; democratization and human rights protection ; and economic development .

today pakistan is identified as a haven for numerous islamist extremist and terrorist groups , and is the world's most rapid proliferator of nuclear weapons , a combination that places it at the top of the international security agenda .

pakistan has been praised by u.s. leaders for its post - 2001 cooperation with u.s. - led counterterrorism and counterinsurgency efforts , although long - held doubts about islamabad's commitment to some core u.s. interests deepened dramatically in 2011 and may be altering the nature of the relationship in 2012 .

a mixed record on battling islamist extremism includes ongoing apparent tolerance of afghan insurgents and anti - india militants operating from its territory .

pakistan's troubled economic conditions and precarious political setting combine with perilous security circumstances and a history of difficult relations with neighbors to present serious challenges to u.s. decision makers .

the pakistani people have paid a heavy price as islamist radicalism has spread in the country and as its border region near afghanistan has become a haven for local insurgents , as well as arab and uzbek jihadists .

islamabad claims that the "war on extremism" has cost the country more than 37,000 civilian lives , nearly 6,300 security forces , and $78 billion in financial losses .

the u.s. national counterterrorism center reports there was an average of more than 26 terrorist attacks each week in pakistan in 2011 ; only afghanistan and iraq suffered a higher number of incidents .

pakistani officials regularly seek to remind the american audience of the country's sacrifices .

may 2011 revelations that al qaeda founder osama bin laden ( obl ) had found apparently years - long refuge inside pakistan marked a new era of intensive u.s. government scrutiny of a now tense and even adversarial relationship .

in september that year , the then - top u.s. military officer , admiral mike mullen , issued unprecedentedly strong and public accusations that pakistan was providing support to afghan insurgents who attack u.s. interests .

given mullen's strenuous efforts to develop a close working relationship with his pakistan counterpart , general ashfaq pervez kayani , the pronouncement was taken as a supreme expression of u.s. frustration .

to bookend 2011's bilateral turbulence of historic scale , in late november nato troops in afghanistan came under fire from two pakistani army outposts just across the shared border at salala .

retaliatory airstrikes left 24 pakistani soldiers dead .

a pentagon investigation determined poor coordination and miscommunication were to blame , and that nato troops had responded appropriately .

pakistan's government and people alike have expressed fury at what some suspect was an intentional strike .

following the incident , pakistani officials moved to scrap and renegotiate all existing bilateral agreements with the united states related to supply lines into afghanistan and any covert american activities inside ( or over ) pakistani territory , primarily those generated early in the 2000s by the governments of president george w. bush and president - general pervez musharraf .

islamabad has continuously demanded a full apology from washington as requisite for restored cooperation .

yet of the several ways islamabad's anger was expressed , the most contentious has been its closure of the pakistani ground lines of communication ( glocs ) that allow nato supplies to transit into afghanistan .

despite much anticipation of an imminent deal to reopen them , the glocs remain closed to date and the issue was blamed for overshadowing a may 2012 nato summit in chicago .

media reports have the pakistani negotiators seeking as much as $5,000 per truck , or what would be a 20-30-fold increase over last year — and senior u.s. officials refusing to entertain such a fee hike while railing at perceived "extortion" and "price gouging. .

only days after the failure to strike a deal on the glocs in chicago , a pakistani doctor who reportedly had participated in a cia operation to identify bin laden family dna received a 33-year prison sentence for treason , perplexing an american audience and angering many , including senior members of congress .

the senate appropriations committee responded within hours by attaching a unanimously approved provision to dock $1 million from u.s. aid funding in the fy2013 state and foreign operations appropriation for each year of the sentence unless the doctor is freed .

the administration has stated that it saw no reason for the conviction .

in many practical respects , the cooperative aspects of bilateral relations have remained frozen in 2012 , even before this most mutual exasperation in may .

the two governments — and , at a lower level , the diplomatic and security agencies within them — seem at loggerheads after a grueling series of crises .

anti - american sentiments and xenophobic conspiracy theories remain rife among ordinary pakistanis ; opinion surveys find that the united states has of late replaced india as the nation least favored by pakistanis ( a significant development , given the visceral , decades - old pakistan - india rivalry ) .

meanwhile , americans tend to have increasingly poor views of pakistan .

the state department warns americans on the high risks of travel in pakistan , and its own diplomats face travel restrictions there .

american civilians have been abducted in pakistan over the past decade .

one , daniel pearl , was executed .

islamist extremism and militancy in pakistan is a central u.s. foreign policy concern .

its arguably growing influence hinders progress toward key u.s. goals , including the defeat of al qaeda and other anti - u.s. terrorist groups , afghan stabilization , and resolution of the historic pakistan - india rivalry that threatens the entire region's stability and that has a nuclear dimension .

long - standing worries that american citizens have been recruited and employed in islamist terrorism by pakistan - based elements have become more acute .

several most - wanted enemies of the united states are widely believed to reside in pakistan , among them al qaeda chief ayman al - zawahiri , taliban chief mullah omar , and haqqani network leader sirajuddin haqqani .

some american intelligence officials reportedly suspect that zawahiri may be receiving protection from elements of the pakistani government .

over the past year , increasing numbers in congress have more forcefully questioned the effectiveness of current u.s. policy and the wisdom of large - scale u.s. aid .

some openly call for the curtailment of all u.s. foreign assistance to pakistan , and legislation significantly undercutting the administration's fy2013 aid request , as well as placing new conditionality on both aid and military reimbursements , is moving through congress in may 2012 ( see appendix ) .

congress appropriated about $2 billion in direct aid for pakistan in fy2012 , placing it among the world's leading recipients of u.s. foreign assistance ( see table 1 ) .

pakistan's ambassador to the united states has told u.s. lawmakers that "onerous" restrictions being placed on u.s. aid will be counterproductive to the goal of restoring cooperation and trust .

it seems clear that the closure of pakistani glocs to afghanistan has not been the logistical catastrophe that many pundits in both the united states and pakistan had expected .

in this respect , by keeping the routes closed , islamabad has "played its trump card" in relations with washington and not realized the hoped - for gains .

pakistan now risks finding itself increasingly isolated diplomatically , and working positively with the united states and nato may be the only way to change this course .

by bowing to domestic political pressures , the civilian government's negotiating strategy could see the country lose billions of dollars in foreign assistance , as well as its ability to influence post - war afghanistan .

missile strikes in pakistan reportedly launched by armed american predator and reaper unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) have been a controversial , but arguably effective tactic against islamist militants in remote regions of western pakistan .

the nominally covert program is overseen by the cia , but reports indicate that president obama personally approves the targeting "kill list. .

by one assessment , 118 drone strikes occurred in 2010 alone , more than during the preceding six years combined .

seventy more strikes were reported in 2011 .

the missile strikes in western pakistan reportedly have taken a significant toll on al qaeda and other islamist extremist militants , but are also criticized as an extrajudicial measure that kills civilians and may also contribute to militant recruitment .

the pakistani government regularly issues protests over the strikes — and the perception that they violate pakistani sovereignty fuels considerable anti - american sentiment among the pakistani public .

as per a may 2012 foreign ministry statement: "we strongly condemn these drone attacks .

we regard them as a violation of our territorial integrity .

they are in contravention of international law .

they are illegal , counterproductive , and totally unacceptable. .

still , most observers believe official pakistan has tacitly allowed the strikes and at times provided intelligence for them .

despite islamabad's persistent and sweeping rejection of drone strikes on pakistani territory , informed domestic debate exists , with some analysts welcoming the tactic as necessary and the best of several bad options .

there is no shortage of accounts suggesting that , as a tactic , the drone campaign has been effective against al qaeda and its fata - based allies .

messaging to pakistan appears to continue to be part of the program's intent: major strikes closely followed both raymond davis's march 2011 release and the administration's july 2011 announcement on partial suspension of u.s. military aid to islamabad .

most recently , a series of drone strikes came immediately after the may 2012 nato summit where president obama refused to meet with his pakistani counterpart .

top administration figures reportedly differ on the wisdom of continuing uav strikes in pakistan , with some state department and pentagon figures urging the cia to reduce the pace of its strikes .

while there is said to be widespread agreement on the tactical effectiveness of uav attacks , proponents of their more judicious use reportedly worry that any intense pace aggravates an already troubled relationship with pakistan and may risk destabilizing that country .

a mid - 2011 white house review of the program ultimately reaffirmed support for the cia campaign while also instituting some changes: the state department would play a greater role in strike decisions , pakistani officials would get more advanced notice , and strikes would be suspended when pakistani officials were visiting the united states .

the changes appear to have reduced the number of "signature strikes" undertaken against large groups of suspected militants .

in june 2011 , the president's top counterterrorism advisor , in referring to the armed drone program , claimed "there hasn't been a single collateral death because of the exceptional proficiency , precision of the capabilities we've been able to develop. .

three years after taking office , president obama publically acknowledged and defended the program's existence , saying it "had not caused a huge number of civilian casualties" and is "kept on a very tight leash. .

these claims are hotly disputed by independent analysts who track the strikes and estimate that 145-535 civilians have indeed been killed , including scores of children .

despite the killing of many hundreds of militants and dozens of their commanders , violence in western pakistan has hardly subsided as a result of missile strikes .

yet , in present circumstances , and with a coming drawdown of nato troops in neighboring afghanistan , many commentators believe the u.s. government may have no better option than to continue employing the tactic .

pakistani leaders have long sought access to central asia and "strategic depth" with regard to india through friendly relations with neighboring afghanistan .

such policy contributed to president - general zia ul - haq's support for afghan mujahideen "freedom fighters" who were battling soviet invaders during the 1980s and to islamabad's later support for the afghan taliban regime from 1996 to 2001 .

british colonialists had purposely divided the ethnic pashtun tribes inhabiting the mountainous northwestern reaches of their south asian empire with the 1893 "durand line. .

this porous , 1,600-mile border is not accepted by afghan leaders , who have at times fanned pashtun nationalism to the dismay of pakistanis .

both pakistan and afghanistan play central roles as u.s. allies in global efforts to combat islamic militancy .

ongoing acrimony between islamabad and kabul is thus deleterious to u.s. interests .

american and pakistani goals in afghanistan are far from fully compatible ; there is very little agreement beyond the shared interest in a negotiated settlement that leaves afghanistan relatively stable and secure .

pakistan — and especially its military and intelligence services — is widely believed to be seeking a post - nato afghanistan that is deferential to and perhaps even dependent upon islamabad , with kabul setting foreign policies that do not run counter to pakistani interests .

in contrast , the u.s. - led coalition endeavors to leave behind a capable and independent afghanistan .

such a result would almost certainly see the kabul government increase its cooperation with india .

if within this dynamic pakistan makes use of the quetta shura and haqqani network as proxies in its dealings with kabul ( as is widely assumed to have been the case for several years now ) , the administration's continued reliance on islamabad in creating and shaping the reconciliation process is likely to increase pakistan's leverage .

washington has continued to seek islamabad's support for afghan reconciliation talks , ideally by winning isi pressure on afghan insurgency leaders to negotiate .

yet tensions between the two governments' respective approaches are evident in the fact that americans want to "fight , talk , build," while pakistanis are seen to be taking a "cease - fire , talk , wait for the americans to leave" tack .

pakistani officials have been confused by a perceived lack of clarity in u.s. goals for afghanistan and in pressure from washington to employ force against anti - kabul militants in north waziristan even as the u.s. government seeks to talk with other insurgent groups .

some argue that washington risks rewarding pakistani intransigence by giving that country's security services a key role in brokering peace with the same insurgent forces they have fostered .

some even contend that the isi has spent the past decade trying to reinstate the taliban regime overthrown by the isaf coalition in 2001 .

long - standing worries that american citizens were being recruited and employed in islamist terrorism by pakistan - based elements became more acute in 2010 .

in may of that year , faisal shahzad , a naturalized u.s. citizen of pakistani origin , attempted to detonate a large , but crudely constructed car bomb in new york city's times square .

the pakistani taliban claimed responsibility for the attempted bombing , and the culprit himself confessed to having received bomb - making training in western pakistan .

four months later , shahzad received a mandatory life sentence in prison .

other cases linking u.s. citizens and residents with islamist extremism in pakistan and terrorist plots against american targets are abundant .

at least one pakistani - born american was complicit in the 2008 terrorist attack on mumbai , india .

in 2009 , federal prosecutors charged david coleman headley , a chicagoan convert to islam , with traveling to mumbai five times from 2006 to 2008 as scout for the attack by the pakistan - based let terrorist group ; he subsequently pleaded guilty to the charges .

his case was perhaps the first in which a former pakistani military officer was directly linked to terrorism suspects in the united states .

headley and another pakistan - born chicagoan , tahawwur rana ( a canadian national ) , are believed to have reported to a retired pakistani major suspected of being an let contact .

headley also interacted with ilayas kashmiri , a now - deceased former pakistani special forces commando with close ties to al qaeda .

the indian government energetically petitioned washington for direct access to headley as part of its own investigative efforts .

access was granted with an extensive interrogation in 2010 ; indian officials later said the information gleaned established an official pakistani role in the mumbai attack .

in may 2011 , a chicago court heard testimony in rana's trial ( rana was charged with material support of terrorism related to the mumbai attack ) .

three senior let members were also indicted in the case — let chief hafez saeed among them — along with a purported isi officer identified as "major iqbal. .

headley , the prosecution's star witness , detailed links between the isi and terrorism , and so added to already fraught u.s. - pakistan relations and suspicions about official pakistani involvement in supporting islamist militancy .

rana subsequently was acquitted on charges related to the mumbai attack , but was found guilty of aiding the let and of conspiring to attack a danish newspaper .

pakistan and china have enjoyed a generally close and mutually beneficial relationship over several decades .

pakistan served as a link between beijing and washington in 1971 , as well as a bridge to the muslim world for china during the 1980s .

china's continuing role as a primary arms supplier for pakistan began in the 1960s and included helping to build a number of arms factories in pakistan , as well as supplying complete weapons systems .

chinese companies and workers are now pervasive in the pakistani economy .

beijing intends to build two new civilian nuclear reactors in pakistan in what would be an apparent violation of international guidelines .

during chinese premier wen jiabao's late 2010 visit to islamabad , the governments signed 12 memoranda of understanding covering a broad range of cooperative efforts and designated 2011 as the "year of china - pakistan friendship. .

pakistani and chinese businesses also signed contracts worth some $15 billion covering cooperation in oil and gas , mining , space technology , heavy machinery , manufacturing , and other areas .

this added to the nearly $20 billion worth of government - to - government agreements reached .

pakistan appeared to react quickly and with purpose in august 2011 when beijing publically blamed islamist militants trained in pakistan for terrorist activities in china's western xinjiang province .

isi director pasha was dispatched to beijing with the apparent aim of assuaging china .

in 2012 , beijing has become more open in expressing concerns that uighur separatists train and find haven in pakistan ; chinese allegations that uighur militants have close links with other pakistan - based terrorist groups put stresses on bilateral relations .

as u.s. - india ties deepen and u.s. - pakistan ties have deteriorated , many observers see islamabad becoming ever more reliant on its friendship with beijing .

pakistani leaders became notably more and perhaps overly effusive in their expressions of closeness with china in 2011 .

prime minister gilani's may 2011 visit there — coming shortly after the abbottabad raid — elicited no major new embrace from beijing , but the chinese government did insist that the west "must respect" pakistan's sovereignty , and it agreed to expedite delivery to pakistan of 50 jf - 17 fighter jets equipped with upgraded avionics ( islamabad is also negotiating with beijing for the purchase of six new submarines for as much as $3 billion in what would be the largest - ever bilateral defense purchase ) .

the united states and china share an interest in seeing pakistan's counterterrorism capabilities strengthened .

while beijing continues to view its relationship with pakistan as providing a means of balancing against and perhaps even containing india's regional aspirations , it recognizes that pakistan - based terrorist groups could trigger the kind of full - blown pakistan - india crisis that would do great harm to chinese economic interests in the region .

these dynamics provide a basis for greater u.s. - china coordination "to improve the discipline and capacity of pakistan's military and intelligence services," and perhaps even elicit chinese pressure on islamabad to dismantle global jihadist groups such as let .

moreover — and despite diverging interests on india's regional role — the united states and china could expand cooperation into other vital areas , including nonproliferation , governance , and economic growth in pakistan .

chinese military and diplomatic support for pakistan continues to hinder india's regional ambitions .

indeed , as the united states seeks to deepen its partnership with india , china's geostrategic reliance on pakistan is likely to grow .

yet china's own aspirations and interests seem to dictate that beijing not make its pakistan policies with a narrow focus on balancing india alone .

a wider set of interests suggests that the "all - weather friendship" with pakistan no longer entails the kind of blanket support islamabad had come to expect in the past .

the chinese government reportedly is unlikely to place itself in the middle of any u.s. - pakistani rift , nor has it shown any desire to replace washington as islamabad's primary foreign benefactor .

pakistan's relations with its shia muslim - majority neighbor iran have long been troubled by differences over afghanistan ( the two countries actively supported opposing sides in the afghan civil war of the 1990s ) and by the presence in pakistan of anti - shia terrorist groups .

yet the two countries have cooperated in some areas and both governments aspire to realize the long - anticipated completion of a pipeline that would carry natural gas from iran to feed pakistan's unmet energy demands .

tehran claims that construction on its side of the border is complete and it reportedly has offered to provide pakistan with $500 million to finance construction on its side after a chinese consortium withdrew its involvement in the project .

as the u.s. government seeks to further isolate iran with sanctions related to its nuclear program , washington has repeatedly expressed opposition to this pipeline project .

in february , secretary of state clinton told a house panel that "actually beginning construction of such a pipeline [on the pakistani side of the border] ... would violate our iran sanctions law. .

the administration has made its concerns "absolutely clear" to islamabad , which remains insistent that it will complete the project .

tehran's further efforts to skirt international sanctions have included seeking barter deals with pakistan to trade oil for huge stocks of wheat and rice .

the security of pakistan's nuclear arsenal , materials , and technologies continues to be a top - tier u.s. concern , especially as islamist militants have expanded their geographic influence there .

pakistan has in the recent past been a source of serious illicit proliferation to aspiring weapons states .

the illicit nuclear proliferation network allegedly overseen by pakistani metallurgist a.q .

khan was disrupted after its exposure in 2004 , but neither khan himself — a national hero in pakistan — nor any of his alleged pakistani co - conspirators have faced criminal charges in the case , and analysts warn that parts of the network may still be intact .

while most analysts and u.s. officials believe pakistan's nuclear security is much improved in recent years , there is ongoing concern that pakistan's nuclear know - how or technologies remain prone to leakage .

moreover , recent reports indicate that pakistan is rapidly growing its nuclear weapons arsenal , perhaps in response to recent u.s. moves to engage civil nuclear cooperation with india , which the obama administration wants to see join major international nonproliferation regimes .

pakistan's appears to be the world's most rapidly growing nuclear arsenal at a time that china is planning to build two new nuclear reactors there in apparent violation of nuclear suppliers group guidelines .

the proposed deal poses a dilemma for the obama administration , which has requested that beijing justify the plan and seeks its approval through international fora .

pakistan is the setting for serious reported human rights abuses , some of them perpetrated and / or sanctioned by the state itself .

according to the u.s. department of state , although pakistan's civilian government has taken some positive steps , the overall human rights situation there remains poor , and that lack of government accountability remains a pervasive problem ; abuses often go unpunished , fostering a culture of impunity .

according to the may 2012 country reports on human rights for 2011 , the most serious human rights problems were extrajudicial killings , torture , and disappearances committed by security forces , as well as by militant , terrorist , and extremist groups .... other human rights problems included poor prison conditions , instances of arbitrary detention , lengthy pretrial detention , a weak criminal justice system , insufficient training for prosecutors and criminal investigators , a lack of judicial independence in the lower courts , and infringements on citizens' privacy rights .

harassment of journalists , some censorship , and self - censorship continued .

there were some restrictions on freedom of assembly and some limits on freedom of movement .

the number of religious freedom violations and discrimination against religious minorities increased , including some violations sanctioned by law .

corruption was widespread within the government and the police forces , and the government made few attempts to combat the problem .

rape , domestic violence , sexual harassment , "honor" crimes , abuse , and discrimination against women remained serious problems .

child abuse and commercial sexual exploitation of children persisted .

widespread human trafficking — including forced and bonded labor — was a serious problem .

societal discrimination against national , ethnic , and racial minorities continued , as did discrimination based on caste , sexual orientation , gender identity , and hiv status .

lack of respect for worker rights continued.... violence , abuse , and social and religious intolerance by militant organizations , and other nongovernmental actors contributed to a culture of lawlessness in some parts of the country .

among this litany of serious and ongoing human rights abuses , watchdog groups commonly rank pakistan as the world's most dangerous country for journalists , even as a raucous free press has emerged in the past decade .

"disappearances" and extrajudicial killings by pakistani security forces elicited acute u.s. concerns in late 2010 when evidence of abuses came to light .

the obama administration has declared that it will abide by "leahy amendment" provisions by withholding train and equip funding for several pakistani army units believed to be complicit in human rights abuses .

laws prohibiting blasphemy in pakistan are meant to protect islamic holy persons , beliefs , customs , and objects from insult or defilement .

they are widely popular with the public .

yet they are criticized by human rights groups as discriminatory and arbitrary in their use , which often arises in the context of personal vendettas , and can involve little or no persuasive evidence .

the laws again came under scrutiny in late 2010 when a pakistani christian woman was sentenced to death for what seemed to many a minor offense .

international human rights groups issued newly urgent calls for the law's repeal , and president zardari himself vowed to personally review the case .

yet the ppp - led government backed away from reform proposals after islamist hardline groups , including some with links to terrorist organizations , were able to rally a host of protestors .

as noted above , two of the most vocal government proponents of reforming the laws were assassinated earlier in 2011 .

the only other high - profile national politician pursuing reform efforts , national assembly member sherry rehman , was forced to withdraw her legislative proposal after her ppp leaders announced that no reforms would be undertaken .

in 2001 , congress renewed large u.s. assistance packages to pakistan .

by the end of 2011 , congress had appropriated about $15.3 billion in overt assistance over ten years , including more than $8.3 billion in development and humanitarian aid , and nearly $7 billion for security - related programs ( see table 1 ) .

in 2009 , both chambers of congress passed their own pakistan - specific bills authorizing increased nonmilitary aid to pakistan ( to $1.5 billion per year for five years ) and placing certain conditions on future security - related aid to that country .

the enhanced partnership with pakistan act ( eppa ) of 2009 , also known as the "kerry - lugar - berman" ( klb ) bill for its main sponsors , became p.l .

111-73 .

earlier that year , congress also established a new pakistan counterinsurgency capability fund ( pccf ) that is meant to enhance the ability of pakistani security forces to effectively combat militancy .

moreover , since fy2002 congress has appropriated billions of dollars to reimburse pakistan ( and other nations ) for its operational and logistical support of u.s. - led counterterrorism operations .

at nearly $9 billion paid to date , these "coalition support funds" have accounted for more than one - third of all overt u.s. financial transfers to pakistan since 2001 .

in recent years , more careful oversight of such disbursements reportedly has led to a major increase in the rate of rejected claims .

the administration's congressionally mandated pakistan assistance strategy report , issued in december 2009 , laid out the principal objectives of nonmilitary u.s. assistance to pakistan ( to help "in building a stable , secure , and prosperous pakistan" ) , a general description of the programs and projects designed to achieve these goals , and a plan for monitoring and evaluating the effort .

for fy2010-fy2014 , it proposed to devote $3.5 billion — nearly half of the $7.5 billion of the aid authorized by the eppa — to "high - impact , high - visibility" infrastructure programs , especially in the energy and agriculture sectors .

most recently , washington is considering making grants to help the pakistani government launch construction of the planned diamer basha dam in the country's far northeast .

the asian development bank is taking the lead on the roughly $12 billion project which , when completed in eight or more years , could generate 4,500 megawatts of electricity , enough to fill the country's entire current shortfall .

the administration reports having disbursed about $855 million in civilian aid funds during fy2011 , excluding emergency humanitarian assistance .

roughly half of such aid is distributed directly through pakistani government institutions .

still , the majority of appropriated klb funds have not been spent , in large part because of concerns about corruption and the capacity of pakistan's government and contractors to effectively oversee aid projects , and confusion over priorities .

the delay serves to reinforce pakistani perceptions that the united states cannot be relied upon to follow through on its promises .

security - related u.s. assistance to pakistan has included provision of extensive "train and equip" programs , but these were largely suspended in mid - 2011 .

major u.s. arms transfers to pakistan since 2001 have included items useful for counterterrorism operations , along with a number of "big ticket" platforms more suited to conventional warfare .

under multiple authorities , pakistan has received helicopters , infantry arms , and a wide array of other equipment .

pakistani officials have complained that u.s. - supplied defense equipment , especially that most needed for counterinsurgency operations such as attack and utility helicopters , was too slow in coming .

security assistance to pakistan's civilian sector is aimed at strengthening the country's law enforcement capabilities through basic police training , provision of advanced identification systems , and establishment of a new counterterrorism special investigation group .

as noted above , the circumstances of obl's death and subsequent developments have had major impact on both administration and congressional perceptions of the utility of current u.s. aid programs .

a substantive reevaluation of aid levels — and of the bilateral relationship more generally — began in 2011 .

such rethinking has become evident in significant reductions , as well as new restrictions and conditions , in pending fy2013 legislation ( see the appendix ) , and congressional figures have issued some of the strongest criticisms of pakistan as a u.s. ally seen in decades .

there appears to be growing recognition among observers that u.s. military aid has done little to stem islamist militancy in pakistan and may even hinder that country's economic and political development .

many of these analysts thus urge u.s. policy targeting effective nonmilitary aid , perhaps especially that which would strengthen pakistan's civil society .

three major bills authorizing and appropriating u.s. spending in fy2013 contain important pakistan - related provisions , including new reporting and certification requirements based on more stringent conditions .

first , the national defense authorization act for fy2013 ( h.r .

4310 , passed by the full house on may 18 , 2012 ) , would prohibit the secretary of defense from preferential procurement of goods or services from pakistan until such time as that country's government reopens the ground lines of communication ( glocs ) to afghanistan ( sec .

821 ( d ) ) ; limit fy2013 csf payments to pakistan to no more than $650 million ( sec .

1211 ( b ) ) ; withhold csf payments to pakistan unless the secretary of defense reports to congress on the claims process , any new conditions pakistan has placed on use of its glocs , and estimates any differences in transit costs from fy2011 to fy2013 ( sec .

1211 ( c ) ) ; withhold fy2012 csf payments to pakistan unless the secretary certifies that the islamabad government is 1 ) supporting counterterrorism operations against al qaeda , its associated movements , the haqqani network , and other domestic and foreign terrorist organizations ; 2 ) dismantling ied networks ; 3 ) preventing nuclear - related proliferation ; and 4 ) issuing visas in a timely manner for official u.s. visitors ( sec .

1211 ( c ) ; and limit the obligation or disbursement of fy2013 pcf funds to 10% of those appropriated or transferred unless the secretary of defense , with the concurrence of the secretary of state , reports to congress an updated strategy on utilization of the fund , metrics for determining relevant progress , and a strategy for enhancing pakistan's efforts to counter ieds ( sec .

1217 ) .

second , as approved by the senate appropriations committee on may 24 , 2012 , s. 3241 , a bill to fund the state department and foreign operations for fy2013 , contains provisions that would provide $50 million for the pccf ( about 6% of both the amount requested by the administration and the amount appropriated for fy2012 ) , but only if the secretary of state certifies that pakistan has reopened the glocs to afghanistan and that the funds can be used efficiently and effectively ; withhold all funds appropriated for pakistan under esf , incle , fmf , and pccf unless the secretary of state certifies that pakistan is ( 1 ) cooperating with the united states in counterterrorism efforts against the haqqani network , the quetta shura taliban , lashkar - e - taiba , jaish - e - mohammed , al qaeda , and other domestic and foreign terrorist organizations ; ( 2 ) not supporting terrorist activities against united states or coalition forces in afghanistan , and pakistan's military and intelligence agencies are not intervening extra - judicially into political and judicial processes in pakistan ; ( 3 ) dismantling ied networks ; ( 4 ) preventing nuclear - related proliferation ; ( 5 ) implementing policies to protect judicial independence and rule of law ; ( 6 ) issuing visas in a timely manner for official u.s. visitors ; and ( 7 ) providing humanitarian organizations access to detainees , internally displaced persons , and other pakistani civilians affected by the conflict ( sec .

7046 ( c ) ( 1 ) ) ( the secretary may waive these requirements if doing so is important to u.s. national security interests ) ; limit total state department aid to pakistan to about $800 million ( roughly 36% of the administration's request ) , including no more than $375 million for esf , $100 million for incle , and $250 million for fmf ( sec .

7046 ( c ) ( 2 ) ) ; further withhold $33 million of appropriated fmf funds unless the secretary of state certifies that dr. shakil afridi has been released from prison and cleared of all charged relating to the assistance provided to the united states in locating osama bin laden ( sec .

7046 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( g ) ) ; and require the secretary of state to submit to congress a spend plan for assistance to pakistan to include achievable and sustainable goals , benchmarks for measuring progress , and expected results regarding furthering development in pakistan , countering extremism , and establishing conditions conducive to the rule of law and transparent and accountable governance ; report biannually on the status of achieving that plan's goals and benchmarks ; and recommend that the secretary suspend all assistance to pakistan if this report finds pakistan is failing to make measureable progress toward stated goals and benchmarks ( sec .

7046 ( c ) ( 3 ) ) .

the bill provides that $100 million of the esf funds may be used by the president for overseas contingency operations if so designated by congress .

third , as approved by the house appropriations committee on may 25 , 2012 , h.r .

5857 , a bill to fund the state department and foreign operations for fy2013 , contains provisions that would provide no funding for pccf ; withhold all funds appropriated for pakistan under esf , incle , fmf , and pccf unless the secretary of state certifies that pakistan is 1 ) cooperating with the united states in counterterrorism efforts against the haqqani network , the quetta shura taliban , lashkar - e - taiba , jaish - e - mohammed , al qaeda , and other domestic and foreign terrorist organizations ; 2 ) not supporting terrorist activities against united states or coalition forces in afghanistan , and pakistan's military and intelligence agencies are not intervening extra - judicially into political and judicial processes in pakistan ; 3 ) dismantling ied networks ; 4 ) preventing nuclear - related proliferation ; 5 ) issuing visa in a timely manner for official u.s. visitors ; and 6 ) providing humanitarian organizations access to detainees , internally displaced persons , and other pakistani civilians affected by the conflict ( sec .

7046 ( c ) ( 1 ) ) ( unlike s. 3241 , this provision does not include a national security waiver ) ; require the secretary of state to submit to congress a spend plan for assistance to pakistan to include achievable and sustainable goals , benchmarks for measuring progress , and expected results regarding furthering development in pakistan , countering extremism , and establishing conditions conducive to the rule of law and transparent and accountable governance ; report biannually on the status of achieving that plan's goals and benchmarks ; and recommend that the secretary suspend all assistance to pakistan if this report finds pakistan is failing to make measureable progress toward stated goals and benchmarks ( sec .

7046 ( b ) ( 3 ) ) ; allow esf funds , notwithstanding any other provision of law , for cross border stabilization and development programs between afghanistan and pakistan or between either country and the central asian republics ( sec .

7046 ( c ) ) .

allow incle and fmf funds to be transferred to pccf and remain available until september 30 , 2014 as long as the secretary of state notifies congress 15 days before such action and specifies source of funds and implementation plan .

obligation of such funds are subject to sec .

7046 ( b ) of this act .

