between 1819 and 1857 , the room currently called statuary hall served as the hall of the house of representatives .

upon the completion of the current house chamber in 1857 , the fate of the old "hall of the house" was debated for many years .

perhaps the simplest was that it be converted into additional space for the library of congress , which was still housed in the capitol .

more drastic was the suggestion that the entire hall be dismantled and replaced by two floors of committee rooms .

eventually , the idea of using the chamber as an art gallery was approved , and works intended for the capitol extensions were put on exhibit ; among these was the plaster model for the statue of freedom , which was later cast in bronze for the capitol dome .

the lack of wall space effectively prevented the hanging of large paintings , but the room seemed well suited to the display of statuary .

beginning in november 1879 , statuary hall was first used for events .

the first two events were a reception and dinner for the society of the army of the cumberland on november 20 , 1879 , and a ceremony to close the centennial safe on november 22 , 1879 .

today , statuary hall is the home to many of the statues in the national statuary hall collection , which consists of two statues from each state .

a room in the house wing of the capitol may be reserved in one of two ways: through a chamber resolution or pursuant to the speaker's authority .

house rule i , clause 3 provides the speaker with the authority to assign unappropriated rooms ( i.e. , not already assigned to a committee , house leadership , or an officer of the house ) .

house rule i , clause 3 states except as otherwise provided by rule or law , the speaker shall have general control of the hall of the house , the corridors and passages in the part of the capitol assigned to the use of the house , and the disposal of unappropriated rooms in that part of the capitol .

for rooms jointly controlled by the house and senate ( eg , the rotunda and emancipation hall ) , a concurrent resolution is generally required to authorize use .

initially adopted in 1811 to provide the speaker with approval authority over events in the house chamber , clause 3 was last amended in 1911 , to provide the speaker with control over unappropriated rooms elsewhere in the house wing of the capitol .

since 1911 , the speaker has generally authorized use of rooms in the house wing of the capitol not otherwise appropriated .

since 2005 , 170 events have been held in statuary hall .

the house sergeant at arms , whose office provided data for this report , defines an event as activity that prevents public access to statuary hall for a period of time .

as a result , activities such as a brief wreath laying at a particular statue are not included .

table 1 reports the total number of events held in statuary hall since 2005 .

the appendix provides the date of each event and a brief description .

following receipt of the data from the house sergeant at arms , the congressional research service ( crs ) examined the events and divided them into four categories: ( 1 ) receptions and dinners , ( 2 ) ceremonies , ( 3 ) media events , and ( 4 ) memorial services .

the following sections provide a brief explanation of each category and examples of activities .

table 2 reports the number of events since 2005 , by category .

the largest percentage of events held in statuary hall ( 57.6% ) were receptions or dinners , hosted by both official congressional entities and private groups .

for example , the joint congressional committee on the inaugural ceremonies held the inaugural luncheon in statuary hall in 2005 , 2009 , and 2013 ; and the capitol historical society held a reception for new members of congress in the hall in 2005 and 2013 .

ceremonies account for 28.8% of the events held in statuary hall since 2005 .

these ceremonies include presentations of awards , unveiling of official portraits , commemorations of event anniversaries , formal wreath layings , and prayer services .

for example , the annual national moment of remembrance is held in statuary hall .

in addition , prior to moving the statue to emancipation hall in the capitol visitor center , an annual lei draping ceremony at king kamehameha statue was held in statuary hall .

statuary hall has also been occasionally used as the location for media availability , primarily after a presidential address to a joint session of congress in the house chamber .

media events represent 5.9% of the events held in statuary hall .

since 2005 , 13 memorial services ( 7.6% ) for current or former members of congress have been held in statuary hall: for representatives robert matsui ( january 5 , 2005 ) ; juanita millender - mcdonald ( may 17 , 2007 ) ; tom lantos ( february 14 , 2008 ) ; stephanie tubbs jones ( september 10 , 2008 ) ; john p. murtha ( march 30 , 2010 ) ; donald m. payne ( april 25 , 2012 ) ; speaker thomas foley ( october 29 , 2013 ) ; mark takai ( september 14 , 2016 ) ; robert michel ( march 9 , 2017 ) ; louise slaughter ( april 18 , 2018 ) ; and since 2016 , an annual u.s. association of former members of congress memorial service to honor former members who died in the past year .

since january 1 , 2005 , 170 events have been held in statuary hall .

table a - 1 contains a chronological list of these events , the date of the event , and the event type .

