interagency coordinative arrangements and activities — called for in public laws , executive orders , and administrative directives — appear to be growing in number , prominence , and proposals throughout virtually all individual policy areas and across - the - board .

underlying this growth are several developments: the increase in governmental responsibilities , cross - cutting programs , and their complexity ; the inadequate preparation for and response to severe crises ( in particular , the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks and the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes ) ; and heightened pressure to reduce or consolidate federal programs and expenditures .

this report examines formal interagency collaborative arrangements and activities , which are intended to enhance joint efforts and cooperation among independent federal agencies with shared responsibilities and overlapping jurisdictions .

the study examines the following: various types and understandings of collaborative activities and arrangements , as well as related concepts of interagency coordination , integration , mergers and reorganizations , networking , and partnerships ; background of relevant efforts ; rationales for interagency collaboration and the problems these are designed to address ; concerns and questions about the rationales ; difficulties in assessing interagency collaboration success or failure ; and factors affecting the adoption , evolution , and impact of collaborative activities and arrangements .

this congressional research service ( crs ) study builds on and supplements an extensive collection of materials , covering various aspects of interagency collaboration , current and past , which are cited in the bibliography at the end of the report .

that compilation identifies analyses of different subject and policy areas as well as different types of arrangements used among agencies .

the relevant studies — both current and historical — come from congressional committees , crs , executive branch entities , government accountability office ( gao ) , governmental commissions , professional associations , and scholars .

interagency collaboration — as a way to enhance cooperation among agencies with shared responsibilities and overlapping jurisdictions — has been used in at least two different ways: to mean a distinct type of activity and arrangement , or broadly to cover one or more other related types ( coordination , networking , integration , mergers , and partnerships ) .

these various collaborative arrangements and activities have advanced in the contemporary era for a number of reasons .

four major ones are: the growth and changing nature of governmental responsibilities ; political and economic pressures to reduce the size and scope of these responsibilities and to cut federal expenditures ; increases in the number , scale , complexity , and diversity of cross - cutting programs , with attendant increases in overlapping jurisdictions and shared responsibilities among agencies ; and the urgency and importance — in several notable cases ( eg , the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks and the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes ) — of restructuring the government's response to crisis situations .

these developments have led to clarion calls for improved collaboration , coordination , or clarification of functions and duties — along with other ways to enhance cooperation — among agencies with shared responsibilities and overlapping jurisdictions .

rationales for interagency collaboration are multiple in number and dimensions .

some of the rationales lend themselves to subcategories , differ in importance and currency , or overlap with and reinforce others .

moreover , the rationales not only embody policy - oriented benefits by a collective — for example , a product or service that is more effective and efficient than it would be otherwise — but also can bring about possible advantages or benefits for individual participants .

agencies engaged in collaborative efforts , for instance , might find mutual or reciprocal benefits for themselves or might gain support for certain vested interests .

these possible advantages might accrue directly or indirectly ( eg , to increase their own capabilities , improve their own products and services , or learn about different operational practices ) .

another by - product might be that collaborating on one project results in a quid pro quo among the participants .

yet another might be building compatible and reinforcing relationships over the long term with other participants .

some selective rationales for interagency collaboration — and the problems to be addressed — follow .

rationales are positive and promotional .

concerns and questions , however , might arise over whether performance can match the promise .

individual rationales , for instance , might rest on assumptions that are presented as givens rather than on assumptions that are explicitly defended .

along with this , some rationales — such as improving effectiveness , efficiency , and economy — might not be compatible goals in all cases .

for instance , start - up costs and possible downtime for personnel transferred to a new interagency arrangement ( designed to improve effectiveness ) could result in higher initial expenditures for the new arrangement vis - à - vis the existing non - collaborative approach .

another reason for possible higher expenditures of a collaborative venture over a non - collaborative one could involve added funding for the former .

its promoters might expect that a joint venture would use additional funding more productively as a collective than if it were dispersed among independent units operating separately .

this could improve effectiveness and productivity but would cost more .

moreover , interagency arrangements designed to improve performance in one area might hinder it in another .

an interagency arrangement added for one purpose might take away from some of the participants' other responsibilities , mandates , and priorities .

that is because interagency arrangements are not without cost to the participants in terms of funding , resources , personnel , and attention .

transfer of these to an interagency effort would remove them from the participants' other responsibilities and functions , unless off - setting developments occurred: new resources were added , the collaborative workloads were shared equitably , or the interagency arrangement resulted in increased efficiency and economy for the participants .

other concerns might arise over particular types of arrangements or their operation .

first of all , private sector organizations involved in public - private partnerships might not be equal to the challenge , because they might lack the capacity , capability , resources , and range of services needed .

as another matter , some partnerships , at least in certain arenas , have resulted in the government agency being "captured" by the private industry it is supposed to be regulating ; this can occur , in some cases , because the government regulators are dependent on the private companies for data , information , and self - regulation to a degree .

public - private partnerships might also be transformed into "iron triangles," "cozy little triangles," or "subgovernments. .

these terms refer to alliances of private entities and public agencies , sometimes supported by congressional panels , that develop mutually reinforcing relationships ; these , in turn , can dominate a policy area , often without adequate outside checks and controls .

public - private partnerships might also lead to so - called "shadow government. .

this ( negative ) characterization is applied to a structure in which a government agency no longer possesses the necessary capacity to carry out certain functions and duties , because its capabilities have been ceded to the private sector through extensive outsourcing .

 ( by comparison , others view private sector involvement as not only a vital ally but also a vitalizing force in implementing public policy. ) .

a separate concern is that the management and oversight of contractors and others in public - private partnerships might prove difficult or beyond the capabilities of the contracting organizations .

this could occur because of deficiencies and flaws in how well a federal agency or private company manages and oversees contracts .

the executive , importantly , might not possess sufficient expertise , experience , or resources to oversee private sector operations effectively ; and , consequently , the government might rely on the private sector to do so .

this could result in a low priority for and commitment to adequate management and oversight ; a lack of neutrality , objectivity , and impartiality ; ( the appearance of ) a conflict of interest ; and waste , fraud , and abuse .

problems might also arise because of certain restrictions on government access to relevant information , data , and personnel of the private contractors .

another limitation on effective oversight of such partnerships arises for two reasons: ( 1 ) the multiple levels and sources of contracting — sometimes reaching three or four deep and covering many individual operators — and ( 2 ) the bundling of contracts , in which offerings for a number of different purposes are combined in a single letting .

both of these complexities complicate audits , evaluations , and investigations , making it difficult to determine clearly responsibility for a project or program and its effectiveness .

furthermore , ( inordinately ) high expectations for a collaborative effort might be overly ambitious , thereby undervaluing any improvements , in the view of some observers .

in addition , some collaborative efforts might lack the capacity and capability to fulfill even modest expectations .

extending this line of reasoning , one public administrator and policy analyst viewed effective interagency coordination as not just elusive but , to some degree , illusory , as a search for the "philosopher's stone. .

finally , it is not always certain that an interagency collaborative arrangement is more effective or efficient than what it replaced .

at least in some cases , it is difficult to assess and compare the success or failure of such enterprises .

several difficulties arise in attempting to assess accurately and reliably the success of interagency collaborative arrangements , their initiation , evolution , and impact .

as background , first of all , there appear to be no systematic , comprehensive , long - term , current analyses or comparisons of such arrangements to assess how well these met their purposes and rationales .

nonetheless , two studies — a distant one commissioned by a senate select committee in 1937 and a recent one required by congress and assigned to gao in 2010 — provide information , data , and frameworks of analysis regarding interagency collaborative activities and arrangements ( or their absence ) across multiple policy and program areas .

to provide reliable comprehensive , systematic assessments , analyses could examine one type of interagency arrangement over time or across different settings and policy areas ; compare different types in one or more areas ; or , perhaps most importantly , compare a new interagency collective arrangement with a dispersed and decentralized structure it replaced .

none of these would be easy or inexpensive to accomplish .

reliable assessments of success and its counterpoint ( failure ) , moreover , are hampered for several reasons .

a fundamental one is how success is defined and determined in particular cases , including the setting of appropriate and reasonable criteria and standards for measuring it .

because there are different types of collaborative ventures — established for different purposes and with different powers — each might require different criteria and standards .

along with this , the perceived success at the end of a project or throughout an ongoing enterprise is in part determined by the expectations and objectives for the collaboration at its beginning ( as noted above ) .

accompanying this , the success of a collaborative enterprise is not necessarily an absolute .

instead , it might be partial: meeting certain standards but not others ; meeting some sooner than others ; or meeting some expectations but not others .

different estimations of success could also depend on who is conducting the evaluation — agency officials or a separate body , such as gao , an independent evaluator , or an office of inspector general — and what qualifications they possesses .

finally , a variety of other conditions and factors ( discussed further below ) influence the establishment , operation , and performance of an interagency arrangement .

for instance , a major interagency conservation effort could be aided or damaged by significant changes in the environment , which might be difficult to control for in any assessment .

as another illustration , assessments of public - private partnerships engaged in "welfare - to - workfare" programs would have to take into account various other conditions which could affect their impact .

these include , among others , the skills , training , and experience of the unemployed ; the state of the overall job market , which influences competition for employment opportunities ; the availability of appropriate - level jobs ; and the accessibility of support services , such as public transportation and day - care , if needed .

collaborative arrangements differ in structure , organization , authorities , purposes , size , scope , scale , life - span , and expectations .

one scholar recognized tensions and competitions — including political and organizational ones — surrounding agencies and other parties in initiating and maintaining interagency collaborative efforts .

such rivalries led to conflict among the involved agencies and related congressional committees .

these also led , in some cases , to conflicts between agencies , on the one hand , and various entities in the executive office of the president ( if these are involved ) , on the other , and to conflicts between the executive and legislative branches .

a number and variety of factors engender or endanger collaborative arrangements — whether these are initiated , maintained , transformed , or abolished — and determine their strengths and weaknesses .

these factors — both formal and informal , tangible and intangible — extend across three basic levels: systemic , structural and institutional , and individual .

included are: transformations in governmental responsibilities and broad - scale , wide - ranging public policies ; significant changes in the political and governmental environment surrounding a ( potential ) collaborative effort , including the substance and direction of the policy area , electoral developments , officials in government , and organizational characteristics of the agencies involved ; the urgency , scope , scale , and complexity of the problem being addressed ; expectations of what is to be accomplished and determining how extensive and demanding these expectations are , for the project and for the participants ; extent of a merger , realignment , or reorganization ; selection of which agencies or parts thereof are to be incorporated , in what capacity , and to what extent and degree ; location of a new structure that merges or integrates different agencies ; selection of a lead agency or officer in coordinative arrangements ; powers and resources available to a lead officer in a cross - agency arrangement , including those which already exist across - the - board , which apply to a specific project or program , or which are anticipated ; autonomy of the individual components ; organizational cultures within the agencies ; bureaucratic and administrative cultures within the agencies ; competition of a collaborative enterprise with other missions , mandates , responsibilities , strategic plans , and policy priorities among and within the participating agencies ; jurisdictional rivalries or "turf battles" among the agencies ; support for interagency collaboration versus support for agency autonomy , from power - brokers both inside and outside of government ; regularity , frequency , intensity , and direction of oversight by congress and the executive ; incentives for and benefits of participation ( mutual and reciprocal among agencies , agency - centered , or individual ) ; disincentives and costs of participation ; level and type of involvement , with policy and process formulation at one end of the spectrum and field operations at the other end ; capacity , capabilities , heritage , experience , and expertise of the agencies involved in a joint venture ; leadership skills and practices of the participants ; and confidence in the professionalism , competency , and integrity of the participants .

in 1937 — following the first phase of the new deal expansion of government responsibilities and the earlier ( largely unsuccessful ) multi - agency effort to enforce prohibition and the volstead act — the senate created a select committee to investigate the executive agencies of the government with a view to coordination .

the panel commissioned a study by the brookings institution , whose extensive and detailed report concluded that "to prevent duplication and , what is worse , working at cross purposes , it is essential that coordinating mechanisms be established and maintained. .

this conclusion and other complementary ones resonate in the contemporary era .

in 2011 , president barack obama , expanding on his state of the union address , emphasized that we live and do business in the information age , but the organization of the federal government has not kept pace .

government agencies have grown without overall strategic planning and duplicative programs have sprung up , making it harder for each to reach its goals… .

in areas as varied as surface transportation to job training , public health , and education , i have proposed to consolidate scores of programs into more focused , effective , and streamlined initiatives .

legislative initiatives have also called for overarching studies and advanced recommendations , both broad and selective .

the house of representatives added a section to its rules for the 112 th congress , to require committees , during the development of their oversight plans , to "include proposals to cut or eliminate programs , including spending programs , that are inefficient , duplicative , outdated , or more appropriately administered by state or local governments. .

previously , in 2010 , congress directed the government accountability office to look into a similar phenomenon annually: to identify "areas of potential duplication , overlap , and fragmentation , which , if effectively addressed , could provide financial and other benefits. .

the first gao report found 34 areas where agencies , offices , or initiatives have similar or overlapping objectives or provide similar services to the same populations ; or where government missions are fragmented across multiple agencies or programs .

these areas span a range of government missions… .

within and among these missions , this report touches on hundreds of federal programs , affecting virtually all major federal departments and agencies… .

reducing or eliminating duplication , overlap , or fragmentation could potentially save billions of tax dollars annually and help agencies provide more efficient and effective services .

as these legislative and executive reviews reflect , the concerns raised decades ago have been heightened in the contemporary era , because of the further growth in government responsibilities , cross - cutting programs , and complexities in public policies .

added to this are certain crises which demonstrated the inadequacies of existing structures and arrangements , along with increased pressures to reduce federal programs and budgets .

one response has been support for new , expanded , or improved interagency collaborative arrangements .

today's objectives underlying this refine and add to the earlier goals of preventing duplication and cross - purposes .

current rationales extend to a number and variety of objectives .

these include reducing policy fragmentation , improving effectiveness , increasing economy and efficiency , mitigating conflict and competition among agencies , enhancing agency productivity , developing an awareness of different perspectives and orientations , changing organizational and administrative cultures , and streamlining and improving executive and congressional oversight .

different types of interagency activities and arrangements are available to help bring about joint efforts and cooperation among separate federal agencies with shared responsibilities and overlapping jurisdictions .

six principal types — each given a working understanding and illustrated with examples here — are collaboration , coordination , integration , mergers , networking , and public - private partnerships .

using these concepts with clarity , consistency , and consensus , however , can meet a number of obstacles .

first of all , there is no agreed - upon straightforward , precise definition of them in the media , academic studies , statutes , or executive directives , where different types might be called for but without detailed descriptions or directions .

and their applications and understandings — along with their use in combination or as hybrids — are subject to a number of influences , including the setting , time , and heritages among diverse governmental organizations .

consequently , the terms have sometimes been employed interchangeably , inconsistently , or ambiguously .

despite the large and increasing adoption and promotion of interagency arrangements , questions arise over their rationales and underlying assumptions .

it is not always certain how successful some of the interagency arrangements are , either among or within the different types or over time .

part of the reason for this is the difficulty of conducting valid and reliable assessments of interagency arrangements .

this hurdle is made higher in attempts to compare one interagency arrangement to another , to a predecessor non - collaborative experience , or even to the same arrangement over time , because of changing conditions and intervening developments .

accompanying the difficulties in evaluating interagency collaborative arrangements are the numerous factors that influence them .

these include their political environment and policy context , as well as the resources , independence , authority , membership , leadership , and operational experience of the agencies involved .

such factors are analytically distinct on paper but are hard to account for separately in practice .

abramson , mark a. , et al .

"increasing collaboration. .

four trends transforming g overnment .

ibm center for the business of government .

2003. pp .

14-15 .

available at http: / / www.businessofgovernment.org .

bardach , eugene .

getting agencies to work together: the practice and theory of managerial craftsmanship .

brookings institution: washington , dc , 1998 .

congressional research service .

crs report rl31357 , federal interagency coordinative mechanisms: varied types and numerous devices , by [author name scrubbed] .

garrison , david ( counselor to the deputy secretary , u.s. department of health and human services ) .

interagency collaborations: are there best practices or just good practice ? .

a report to the president's management council via the national partnership for reinventing government .

january 18 , 2001 .

government accountability office .

managing for results: barriers to interagency coordination .

march 2000 .

gao / ggd - 00-106 .

_____ .

opportunities to reduce potential duplication in government programs , save tax dollars , and enhance revenue .

march 2011.gao - 11-318sp .

_____ .

results - oriented government: practices that can help enhance and sustain collaboration among federal agencies .

october 2005 .

gao - 06-15 .

linden , russ .

"collaborative intelligence. .

public manager , vol .

39 , spring 2010. pp .

20-26 .

podesta , john , et al .

a focus on competiveness: restructuring policy making for results .

center for american progress: washington , dc , 2010. pp .

1-10 .

salamon , lester m. , ed .

the tools of government: a guide to the new governance .

oxford university press: new york , 2002 .

schick , allen .

"the coordination option. .

in peter szanton , ed .

federal reorganization: what have we learned ? .

chatham house publishers: chatham , nj , 1981. pp .

85-113 .

seidman , harold .

"coordination: the search for the philosopher's stone. .

politics , p osition and power: the dynamics of federal organization ( fifth edition ) .

oxford university press: new york , 1998. pp .

142-157 .

stanton , thomas h. improving collaboration by federal agencies: an essent ial priority for the next administration .

national academy of public administration: washington , dc , 2007 .

stanton , thomas h. moving toward more capable gover nment: a guide to organizational design .

the pricewaterhousecoopers endowment for the business of government , 2002 .

available at http: / / www.endowment.pwcglobal.com .

stanton , thomas h. and ginsberg , benjamin , eds .

making government manageable: executive organization and management in the twenty - first century .

johns hopkins university press: baltimore , md , 2004 .

twitchell , david g. , et al .

"overcoming challenges to successful interagency collaboration " performance improvement .

march 2007 , vol .

46 , pp .

8-15 .

u.s. senate select committee to investigate the executive agencies of the government with a view to coordination [byrd committee] .

investigation of executive agencies of the government: preliminary report [prepared by the brookings institution] .

s. rept .

75-1275 , 75 th congress , 1 st sess .

washington , dc: gpo , 1937 .

wilson , james q .

bureaucracy: what government agencies do and why they do it .

basic books: new york , 1989. pp .

268-274 .

congressional research service .

crs report r40602 , the department of homeland security intelligence enterprise: operational overview and oversight challenges for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

_____ .

crs report rl33042 , department of homeland security reorganization: the 2sr initiative , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

_____ .

crs report rl31148 , homeland security: the presidential coordination office , by [author name scrubbed] .

_____ .

crs report rs22754 , national special security events , by [author name scrubbed] .

_____ .

crs report rs22840 , organizing for homeland security: the homeland security council reconsidered , by [author name scrubbed] .

_____ .

crs report r41520 , securing america's borders: the role of the intelligence community , by [author name scrubbed] ervin , clark kent [former acting inspector general of the department of homeland security] .

chapters on "the failure of intelligence," "preparing for a catastrophic attack," and "conclusion: closing the vulnerability gap. .

open target: where america is vulnerable to attack .

palgrave macmillan: new york , 2006 .

george , roger and rishikof , harvey , eds .

the national security enterprise : navigating the labyrinth .

georgetown university press: washington , dc , 2011 .

federal emergency management agency .

national response framework and strategic plan .

2010 .

both available at http: / / www.fema.gov / about / indx.shtm .

kaiser , frederick m. "creating the department of homeland security: an old approach to a new problem. .

in stanton , thomas h. , ed .

meeting the challenge of 9 / 11: b lueprint s for a more effective government .

m.e .

sharpe: armonk , ny , 2006. pp .

93-104 .

kean , thomas h. and hamilton , lee h. ( co - chairs ) .

bipartisan policy center .

national security preparedness group .

in u.s. senate committee on commerce .

the state of aviation security , testimony at hearings , 111 th congress , 2 nd sess .

january 20 , 2010 .

available at http: / / bipartisanpolicy.org / library / testimony / congressman - lee - hamilton - and - governor - tom - kean .

stanton , thomas h. , ed .

meeting the challenge of 9 / 11: blueprints for more effective government .

m.e .

sharpe: armonk , ny , 2006 .

u.s. commission on the prevention of weapons of mass destruction proliferation and terrorism .

world at risk: report .

2010 .

available at http: / / www.preventionwmd.gov / reort .

u.s. national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states [9 / 11 commission] .

final report .

washington , dc: gpo , 2004 .

u. s. senate committee on governmental affairs .

border management re organization and drug interdiction ( prepared by the congressional research service ) .

s. prt .

100-111 , 100 th congress , 2 nd sess .

washington , dc: gpo , 1988 .

the volume includes an extensive collection of studies and recommendations from congress , the executive , and private sector that date to 1912 , along with three crs analyses: kaiser , frederick m. "border management reorganization," pp .

1-36 ; bazan , elizabeth b. and fields , lou .

"illustrative sources of federal law enforcement authority related to border management," pp .

37-52 ; and hogan , harry l. "drug smuggling," pp .

53-61 .

congressional research service .

crs report rl34565 , building an interagency cadre of national security professionals: proposals , recent experience , and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

_____ .

crs report r41295 , intelligence reform after five years: the role of the director of national intelligence ( dni ) , by [author name scrubbed] _____ .

crs report rl30840 , the national security council: an organizational assessment , by [author name scrubbed] _____ .

crs report rl34455 , organizing the u.s. government for national security: overview of the interagency reform debates , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

commission on wartime contracting in iraq and afghanistan .

at what risk ? .

: correcting over - reliance on contractors in contingency operations ( second interim report to congress ) .

february 24 , 2011 .

section ii: agencies do not treat contingency planning as a core function ; and section iii: interagency organizational structures do not support contingency operations .

available at http: / / www.wartimecontracting.gov ( reference "reports" ) .

davis , geoff .

"interagency reform: the congressional perspective. .

military review .

july / august 2008 , vol .

88 , pp .

2-5 .

defense science board , office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , department of defense .

enhancing adaptability of u.s. military forces .

dod: washington , dc , 2010 .

george , roger and rishikof , harvey , eds .

the national security enterprise : navigating the labyrinth .

georgetown university press: washington , dc , 2011 .

government accountability office .

interagency collaboration: key issues for congressional oversight of national security strategies , organizations , workforce , and information sharing .

gao - 09-904sp .

september 2009 .

_____ .

national security: an overview of professional dev elopment activities intended to improve interagency collaboration .

gao - 11-108 .

november 2010 .

_____ .

national security: key challenges and solutions to strengthen interagency collaboration ( statement of john h. pendleton , director , defense capabilities and management , gao ) .

gao - 10-822t .

june 2010 .

government business council .

can the department of defense be more collaborativewithout jeopardizing security ? .

a candid survey of federal executives in the department of defense .

2010 .

available at http: / / www.govexec.com / gbc / dodcollaboration .

kean , thomas h. and hamilton , lee h. ( co - chairs ) .

bipartisan policy center .

national security preparedness group .

statement in u.s. senate committee on commerce .

the state of aviation security , testimony at hearings , 111 th congress , 2 nd sess .

january 20 , 2010 .

available at http: / / bipartisanpolicy.org / library / testimony / congressman - lee - hamilton - and - governor - tom - kean .

lamb , christopher j. and marks , edward .

chief of mission authority as a model for national security integration .

center for strategic research , institute for strategic studies , national defense university: washington , dc , 2010 .

mcchrystal , stanley a .

 ( retired general ) .

"it takes a network: the new frontline of modern warfare. .

foreign policy , march / april 2011 , pp.1-6 .

meyer , david a .

 ( major , u.s. army ) .

normalizing executive department boundaries: a timely first step to improving interagency coordination .

2007 .

available at http: / / www.dtic.mil / cgi - bin / gettrdoc ? location=u28doc=gettrdoc.pdf&ad=ada479422 .

office of the director of national intelligence [odni] .

reforming intelligence: the passage of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act .

odni: washington , dc , 2008 .

project on national security reform ( pnsr ) .

forging a new shield .

pnsr: arlington , va , 2008 ; and toward integrating complex national missions: lessons from the national counterterrorism center's directorate of strategic operational planning .

pnsr: arlington , va , 2010 .

both available at http: / / pnsr.org. / data / files / pnsr ( search under "major reports" ) .

u.s. commission on the prevention of weapons of mass destruction proliferation and terrorism .

world at risk: report , 2010 .

available at http: / / www.preventionwmd.gov / report .

u.s. national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states [9 / 11 commission] .

final report .

gpo: washington , dc , 2004 .

government accountability office .

high - risk series: an update .

gao - 11-278 , february 2011. pp.1-7 .

_____ .

personnel security clearances: overall progress has been made to reform the governmentwide security clearance process ( statement of brenda farrell , director , defense capabilities and management ) .

gao - 11-232t .

december 1 , 2010 .

_____ .

personnel security clearances: progress has been made to improve timeliness bu t continued oversight is needed to sustain momentum .

gao - 11-65 .

november 19 , 2010 .

u.s. senate subcommittee on oversight of government management , the federal workforce and the district of columbia .

security clearance reform: setting a course for sustainability .

hearing , 111 th cong. , 2 nd sess .

november 16 , 2010 .

congressional research service .

crs report r40856 , the debate over selected presidential assistants and advisors: appointment , accountability , and congressional oversight , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

_____ .

crs report rl31446 , reorganizing the executive branch in the 20 th century: landmark commissions , by [author name scrubbed] .

dean , alan l. and ink , dwight .

"modernizing federal field operations. .

making government manageable: executive organization and management in the twenty - first century .

thomas h. stanton and benjamin ginsberg , eds .

johns hopkins university press: baltimore , md , 2004. pp.192-197 .

environmental protection agency .

guidance for federal land management in the chesapeake bay ( may 12 , 2010 ) and chesapeake bay program ( regularly updated ) .

both available at http: / / www.epa.gov / region03 / chesapeake / indx.htm .

goldsmith , steven and donald f. kettl .

eds. , unlocking the power of networks: keys to high - p erformance government .

brookings institution: washington , dc , 2009 .

kamensky , john m. "regulatory partnerships: good or bad ? .

the business of government .

fall / winter 2010 , pp .

61-64 .

meriam , lewis and schmeckebier , laurance f. reorganization of the national government: what does it involve ? .

brookings institution: washington , dc , 1939 .

page , stephen .

"measuring accountability for results in interagency collaboratives. .

public administration review .

september / october 2004 , vol .

64 , pp .

591-606 .

"seminal nonprofit management issues. .

public administration review .

january / february 2011 , vol .

71 , pp .

45-86 .

"special issue on the future of public administration in 2020. .

public administration review .

december 2010 , vol .

70 , supplement 1 .

"spotlight on contracting out and privatization," public administration review .

july / august 2009 .

vol .

69 , pp .

668-726 .

tang , shui - yan .

"individual - level motivations for interagency cooperation. .

public administration review .

may / june 2005 , vol .

65 , pp .

377-378 .

white , leonard d. [a four - volume study in the administrative history of the united states government] .

the federalists: a study in administrative history .

greenwood press: westport , ct , 1978 ; the jacksonians: a study in administrative history , 1829-1861 .

macmillan: new york , 1954 ; the jeffersonians: a study in administrative history , 1801-1829 .

macmillan: new york , 1951 ; and the republican era , 1869-1901: a study in administrative history , macmillan: new york , 1958 .

