state governments rely on general sales and use taxes for just under one - third ( 31.7% ) of their total tax revenue — approximately $223 billion in fy2010 .

local governments derive 11.0% of their tax revenue — approximately $62 billion in fy2010 — from general sales and use taxes .

both state and local sales taxes are usually collected by vendors at the point of transaction and levied as a percentage of a product's retail price .

alternatively , use taxes , levied at the same rate , are often not collected by the vendor if the vendor does not have nexus ( loosely defined as a physical presence ) in the consumer's state .

consumers are required to remit use taxes to their taxing jurisdiction for the use of the product purchased .

compliance with this requirement , however , is quite low .

state and local governments are concerned that the expansion of e - commerce , which was estimated to reach approximately $3.9 trillion in 2012 , is gradually eroding their tax base .

this concern arises in part because the u.s. supreme court ruled out - of - state vendors are not required to collect sales taxes for states in which they ( the vendors ) do not have nexus .

in hopes of stemming the potential loss of tax revenue , several states are participating in an initiative to simplify and coordinate their tax codes — called the streamlined sales and use tax agreement ( ssuta ) .

the member states hope that congress could be persuaded to allow them to require out - of - state vendors to collect taxes from resident customers .

congress has a role in this issue because interstate commerce , in most cases , falls under the commerce clause of the constitution .

congress may be asked to consider taking an active role in the debate .

in the 113 th congress , s. 743 , approved by the senate on may 6 , and s. 336 ( senator enzi and others ) and their house counterpart h.r .

684 ( representative womack and others ) would grant ssuta member states and non - member states that meet less rigorous simplifications standards the authority to compel out - of - state vendors with greater than $1 million in remote sales to collect sales and use taxes .

previously , in the 112 th congress , s. 1452 and h.r .

2701 ( senator durbin and representative conyers ) would have granted ssuta member states the authority to compel out - of - state vendors in other member states to collect sales and use taxes .

h.r .

3179 ( representative womack ) would have also granted states the authority to compel out - of - state vendors to collect use taxes provided selected simplification efforts were implemented .

s. 1832 ( senator enzi and others including senator durbin ) would have granted ssuta member states and non - member states that met less rigorous simplifications standards the authority to compel out - of - state vendors to collect sales and use taxes .

a more passive approach by congress could involve states implementing the ssuta without congressional approval .

state enforcement of remote collection would likely face legal challenges , and the outcome of these legal challenges is uncertain .

this report intends to clarify significant issues in the remote sales tax collection debate , beginning with a description of state and local sales and use taxes .

the impact of congressional action ( or inaction ) on the remote collection issue will vary significantly by state .

for this reason , the report includes a state - by - state analysis of the sales tax .

in 1932 , mississippi was the first state to impose a general state sales tax .

during the remainder of the 1930s , an era characterized by declining revenue from corporate and individual income taxes , 23 other states followed suit and implemented a general sales tax .

at the time , the sales tax was relatively easy to administer and raised a significant amount of revenue despite a relatively low rate .

given the relative success of the sales tax in raising revenue , 45 states and the district of columbia added the sales tax to their tax infrastructure by the late 1960s .

the last of the 45 states to enact a general sales and use tax was vermont in 1969 .

the entity that drafted the original streamline sales and use tax agreement ( ssuta ) , the streamlined sales and use tax project ( sstp ) , was created in 2000 by 43 states and the district of columbia .

these states and the district of columbia wanted to simplify and better synchronize individual state sales and use tax laws .

its stated goal was to create a simplified sales tax system so all types of vendors — from traditional retailers to those conducting trade over the internet — could easily collect and remit sales taxes .

the member states believe that a simplified , relatively uniform tax code across states would make it easier for remote vendors to collect sales taxes on goods sold to out - of - state customers .

the sstp was dissolved once the ssuta became effective on october 1 , 2005 .

the latest amendments to the ssuta were approved may 24 , 2012 .

the ssuta agreement explicitly identifies 10 points of focus .

uniformity and simplification are the primary themes with state level administration of the sales and use tax a critical element in achieving the "streamlining" goal .

the 10 points of focus can be condensed into four general requirements for simplification: ( 1 ) state level administration , ( 2 ) uniform tax base , ( 3 ) simplified tax rates , and ( 4 ) uniform sales sourcing rules .

each is discussed in more detail in the following sections .

remote seller collection legislation at the federal level includes bills requiring ssuta adoption and bills that are not conditioned on ssuta approval .

state efforts have taken two tracks: adopting ssuta type simplification and / or implementing so - called amazon laws .

following is a brief discussion of this activity .

during the debate about so - called "streamlining" legislation , there are several economic issues congress may consider: ( 1 ) how will the ssuta influence the economic efficiency and equity of state tax systems ? .

 ( 2 ) what will be the impact of changes in the treatment of internet transactions on states that are more reliant on the sales tax ? .

 ( 3 ) what will the potential revenue loss be , absent changes in the treatment of internet transactions ? .

a summary of these issues follows .

a commonly held view among economists is that a "good" tax ( or more precisely , an efficient tax ) minimizes distortions in consumer behavior .

broadly speaking , economists maintain that individuals should make the same choices before and after a tax is imposed .

the greater the distortions in behavior caused by a tax , the greater the economic welfare loss .

a sales tax levied on all consumer expenditures equally would satisfy this definition of efficiency .

as noted earlier , however , under the current state sales tax system , all consumption expenditures are not treated equally .

the growth of tax - free internet transactions , both business - to - business and business - to - consumer , will likely amplify the efficiency losses from altered consumer behavior .

an alternative theory concerning economic efficiency in sales taxation is referred to as "optimal commodity taxation. .

under an optimal commodity tax , the tax rate is based on ( or determined by ) what is termed the price elasticity of demand for the product ( sometimes called the "ramsey rule" ) .

products that are price inelastic , meaning quantity demanded is unresponsive to changes in price , should be levied a higher rate of tax .

in contrast , products that are price elastic should have a lower rate of tax .

if products purchased over the internet are relatively more price elastic , then the lower tax rate created by effectively tax - free internet transactions may improve economic efficiency as behavioral changes are reduced .

however , the price elasticity of products available over the internet is difficult to measure , and the efficiency gain , if any , is suspected to be small .

an additional economic inefficiency arises if vendors change location to avoid collecting sales taxes .

the location change would likely result in higher transportation costs .

in the long run , it is conceivable that the higher transportation costs would erode the advantage of evading the sales tax .

for example , consider a virginia consumer who wants to buy a set of woodworking chisels .

the local virginia hardware store sells the set for $50 ( including profit ) .

an internet - savvy hardware store in georgia is willing to sell the same chisel set for $52 inclusive of profit and shipping costs .

so , before taxes , the local retailer could offer the chisels at a lower price .

the marginal customer , who is indifferent between the two retailers before taxes ( even though the internet is more expensive , it is more convenient ) , is therefore just as likely to buy from the internet retailer as from the local retailer .

virginia imposes a state and local sales tax of 5.0% , thus yielding a final sales price to the consumer of $52.50 .

given the higher relative price inclusive of the tax , the marginal consumer , along with many other consumers , would likely switch to buying chisels from the georgia - based internet retailer ( assuming these consumers do not feel compelled to pay the required virginia use tax on the internet purchase ) .

the diversion from retail to the internet in response to the non - collection of the use tax represents a loss in economic efficiency .

the additional $2 in production costs ( $52 less $50 ) represents the efficiency loss to society from evading the use tax .

note that in the absence of sales and use taxes , the internet vendor in the above example may yield to market forces and close up shop .

however , if the internet vendor continues to operate even without the tax advantage , it could be the case that consumers are willing to pay higher prices for the convenience of internet shopping .

if this were true , then the higher "production costs" for internet vendors would not necessarily result in an efficiency loss .

the sales tax is often criticized as a regressive tax — a tax that disproportionately burdens the poor .

assuming internet shoppers are relatively better off and do not remit use taxes as prescribed by state law , they can avoid paying tax on a larger portion of their consumption expenditures than those without internet access at home or work .

consumers without ready internet access are not afforded the same opportunity to "evade" the sales and use tax .

in this way , electronic commerce may arguably exacerbate the regressiveness of the sales tax , at least in the short run .

as computers and access to the internet become more readily available , the potential inequity arising from this aspect of the "digital divide" could diminish .

equity issues also arise with respect to businesses .

currently , local retailers are required to collect sales taxes for the state at the point of sale .

internet retailers , in contrast , are not faced with that administrative burden .

thus , two otherwise equal retailers face different state and local tax burdens .

in relatively high tax rate states , this disparity may be significant .

as noted earlier , consumers in these high tax rate states have a greater incentive to purchase from out - of - state vendors , exacerbating the tax burden differential .

the growth of internet - based commerce will have the greatest effect on the states most reliant on the sales and use tax .

in addition to having more revenue at risk , high reliance states also face greater efficiency losses because of their generally higher state tax rates .

as noted above , higher rates drive a larger wedge between the retail price inclusive of the sales tax and the internet price and thus exacerbate the efficiency loss from the sales tax .

states with low rates ( and less reliance ) would tend to have a smaller wedge between the two modes of transaction .

states with both a high rate and high reliance would tend to recognize the greatest revenue loss from a ban on the taxation of internet transactions .

researchers estimated in april 2009 that total state and local revenue loss from "new e - commerce" in 2012 would be approximately $11.4 billion .

"new e - commerce" is the lost revenue from states not collecting the use tax on remote internet transactions .

this estimate excluded purchases made over the telephone or through catalogs that would have occurred anyway .

california was projected to lose $1.9 billion ; texas , $870.4 million ; and new york , $865.5 million .

