on september 22 , 2010 , president obama signed the presidential policy directive on global development .

the directive called for the elevation of foreign development assistance as a national priority and outlined an integrated approach to development , diplomacy , and national security .

the global climate change initiative ( gcci ) — one of the three main pillars to the 2010 directive — aims to integrate climate change considerations into relevant foreign assistance through a range of bilateral , multilateral , and private mechanisms to promote sustainable and resilient societies , foster low - carbon economic growth , and reduce greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation and land degradation .

the gcci is divided into three main programmatic initiatives , or categories: ( 1 ) adaptation assistance , ( 2 ) clean energy assistance , and ( 3 ) sustainable landscapes assistance .

the global climate change initiative is funded through programs at the department of state , the department of the treasury , and usaid ( i.e. , gcci "core" agencies ) .

funds for these programs are appropriated in the administration's executive budget , the international affairs function 150 account , for state , foreign operations , and related programs .

recent trends in gcci budget authority have seen it fluctuate between $820 million and $950 million since fy2010 , and it accounts for less than 2% of total programming in the function 150 account .

recent budget authority for the gcci was reported as $945 million in fy2010 , $819 million in fy2011 , $857 million in fy2012 , $840 million in fy2013 , and $834 million in fy2014 .

funding for fy2015 has yet to be fully reported by agencies .

the administration's fy2016 gcci budget request is for $1,290 million , including $500 million for the unfccc green climate fund .

some additional funds for international climate change financing flow through programs at complementary agencies within the federal government ( eg , the department of energy , the environmental protection agency , the department of agriculture ) ; however , these allocations are defined outside the scope of the gcci and are not included in this report .

budget authority for gcci programming from fy2010 to fy2016 is presented by agency and account in table a - 1 .

congress is responsible for several activities in regard to the gcci , including ( 1 ) authorizing periodic appropriations for federal agency programs and multilateral fund contributions , ( 2 ) enacting those appropriations , ( 3 ) providing guidance to the agencies , and ( 4 ) overseeing u.s. interests in the programs .

congressional committees of jurisdiction for international climate change programs at the department of state , the department of the treasury , and usaid include the following: u.s. house of representatives committee on foreign affairs , u.s. house of representatives committee on financial services , u.s. house of representatives committee on appropriations , u.s. senate committee on foreign relations , and u.s. senate committee on appropriations .

as congress considers potential authorizations and / or appropriations for initiatives administered through the department of state , the department of the treasury , usaid , and other agencies with international programs , it may have questions concerning the purpose , direction , efficiency , and effectiveness of u.s. agency initiatives and current bilateral and multilateral programs that address global climate change .

some issues that may raise concerns over providing assistance include the following: f iscal constraints .

budget constraints may lead to questions about sustaining high levels of support for international development assistance in general , and international climate change assistance in particular .

the burden is exacerbated during times of economic downturn , when the federal government is hard - pressed to generate fiscal resources to adequately address domestic challenges and maintain basic levels of public services and quality of life .

some have suggested that retaining available funds for immediate domestic priorities , such as fostering renewed economic growth and creating jobs , should take precedence over global concerns for which many americans feel less urgency and responsibility .

potential for misuse .

national and international institutions that dispense financial assistance have been criticized on occasion for inefficient and bloated bureaucracies ; their lack of transparency about project procurement practices and operating costs ; and the proportion of their funds misused or lost through instances of graft , corruption , and other political inefficiencies .

some suggest revisiting operational guidance of these institutions before further appropriations are made .

uncertain results .

questions remain regarding the overall effectiveness of international financial assistance in spurring economic development and reform in lower - income countries , and , more specifically , in addressing issues of climate change and the environment .

many studies have examined the effects of international assistance provided to lower - income countries , including both bilateral and multilateral mechanisms , and have returned mixed results , making it difficult to reach firm conclusions that would support or oppose continued contributions .

uncertainties in climate science .

prevailing scientific research on the current and future impacts of greenhouse gas emissions on the global climate exhibits varying degrees of analytical uncertainty .

the lack of definitiveness in some data and in certain model projections has been offered by some as a reason to postpone and / or reconsider both domestic and international climate change assistance policies and programs .

some issues that may support providing assistance include the following: commercial interests .

some maintain that international climate change assistance benefits u.s. businesses , as support for low - emission economic growth may increase trade , commerce , and economic activity in the global marketplace for u.s. goods and services .

increased assistance may allow some u.s. industries to make competitive inroads into rapidly expanding markets , improve the advancement and commercialization of u.s. technologies , mobilize greater investment in related domestic sectors , and enhance job creation in the united states .

decreased funding may cede american influence in global markets to other economic powers still engaged with lower - income countries on environmental and natural resource issues ( eg , the european union , china ) .

investment efficiencies .

some argue that the costs of responding to tomorrow's climate - related catastrophes , instabilities , conflicts , and technological needs may be significantly higher than the costs of preventing them today .

some economists note that lower - income countries account for nearly all of the recent growth in global emissions and represent the cheapest near - term opportunity to mitigate ghg pollution as part of a cost - effective global solution .

natural disaster preparedness .

some claim that international climate change assistance is a means to support natural disaster preparedness around the globe .

assistance for adaptation activities to help "climate - proof" developing countries' infrastructure and other sectors may help avoid future capital and other losses ; minimize the redirection of resources to ad hoc disaster response and urgent humanitarian needs ; and avoid chronic humanitarian crises , such as food shortages , particularly for the resource poor in the least developed countries .

national security .

some defend international climate change assistance as a way to address and mitigate risks to national security .

according to a 2008 national intelligence assessment , the impacts of global climate change may worsen problems of poverty , social tensions , environmental degradation , and weak political institutions across the developing world .

some see international climate change assistance as a means to help make lower - income countries less susceptible to these threats , for the benefit of both the country and the security interests of the united states .

internatio nal leadership .

some see the promotion of international climate change assistance to lower - income countries as a method through which to increase u.s. leadership in global environmental issues .

through such leadership , the united states may be able to influence and set important international economic and environmental policies , practices , and standards .

