t he 409 units of the national park system bear a wide range of titles — national park , national monument , national preserve , national historic site , national recreation area , and national battlefield , among many others .

what is indicated by these different designations ? .

do they mean that units receive different protections with respect to development ? .

are certain activities permitted in one type of unit but not another ? .

are the units managed differently ? .

this report addresses questions that legislators have asked about park unit titles , when considering proposals to establish new park units , to redesignate existing units , or to change the provisions governing a unit .

it also discusses potential advantages and disadvantages of systemwide recommendations to simplify park nomenclature .

currently , there are no definitive criteria for naming a park unit .

bills to designate new units of the national park sys tem , or to rename existing units , may specify any title , even one not previously used in the park system .

the statutory authorities and management policies of the national park service ( nps ) generally apply to all units , regardless of title .

also regardless of title , congress may specify exceptions to nps laws , regulations , and policies in a given unit — for example , congress may authorize hunting or mining , generally prohibited in the national park system , in a particular unit .

while few statutory distinctions exist among the designations , their differences can nonetheless be meaningful .

in practice , congress has grouped similar units under similar titles , and has often followed precedents regarding the activities and management arrangements authorized in particular types of units .

the designations have thus developed distinctive characteristics .

in addition , a park's title can influence public perceptions of the park .

changes in designation may affect visitation patterns , which may have local and regional economic repercussions .

finally , a few designations indicate that units , in addition to being in the national park system , are also part of other legislatively established systems that confer their own protections .

the units of the national park system vary widely in their physical features and the purposes for which they were designated .

these differences are reflected in the names congress has bestowed when creating units .

more than 20 different designations have been used .

some ( such as "national park" ) are unique to the national park service , while others ( such as "national recreation area" ) are also used by other agencies .

in naming a new unit , congress may choose any existing title , or create a new designation .

national parks .

often referred to as the "crown jewels" of the park system , the 59 national parks contain some of the country's best - known natural attractions .

they are generally large , diverse areas with outstanding natural features and ecological resources .

they tend to be among the most strictly protected units in the park system , in that congress has historically been reluctant to authorize consumptive activities such as mining or hunting in the national parks .

national monuments .

national monuments are the only units in the national park system that may be established by the president , although they may also be established by congress .

most of the park system's 80 national monuments are smaller and less diverse than national parks , often preserving a single significant resource rather than a variety of natural and historical attractions .

beyond this , it is difficult to classify their attractions ; many contain historical or archeological artifacts , but others are notable for their natural features or recreational opportunities .

many national monuments originally proclaimed by presidents have subsequently been redesignated by congress as national historic sites , national parks , or other types of units .

national preserves .

the 19 national preserves are similar to national parks in their size and natural features , including geological attractions , flora , and wildlife .

however , the national preserves explicitly allow certain activities not generally permitted in national parks .

many preserves adjoin national parks , and were not incorporated within those parks specifically because congress wanted to allow uses ( such as hunting or oil and gas exploration ) that were not considered compatible with national park designation .

half of the national preserves are in alaska .

national reserves .

only two national reserves are part of the national park system .

they are similar to national preserves except that both are managed in partnership with state , local , or private entities .

national recreation areas .

nps manages 18 national recreation areas .

this designation was originally given to lands that surround bureau of reclamation reservoirs and feature water - based recreation .

it has since also been used for other outdoor areas , especially those in or near urban centers .

recreational activities , such as boating , fishing , or hunting , are often explicitly authorized in the legislation designating national recreation areas .

national lakeshores and national seashores .

as suggested by their names , these units consist of coastal and lakefront areas .

the 10 national seashores are on the atlantic , gulf , and pacific coasts , while the 4 national lakeshores are all on the great lakes .

recreation is a primary focus in these units , and many have roads , parking areas , and other facilities designed for beach visitation .

a number of national seashores and lakeshores permit hunting .

national rivers and wild and scenic rivers .

congress establishes wild and scenic rivers under the wild and scenic rivers act of 1968 ( p.l .

90-542 ) .

this act was designed to preserve rivers and surrounding landscape in their natural state , unaltered by dams or channels .

the national park service manages 10 wild and scenic rivers as stand - alone park units .

these wild and scenic rivers , and 5 other national rivers that are also park units , offer hiking , canoeing , and other outdoor activities ( sometimes including hunting ) .

national trails .

congress establishes national trails under the national trails system act of 1968 ( p.l .

90-543 ) .

the national park service manages 3 national trails as full park units ; all are designated as "national scenic trails," and all wind through multiple states .

the trails are managed for recreational use , primarily hiking .

national parkways .

the 4 national parkways encompass roads and surrounding parkland .

sites of cultural interest lie along their routes .

the parkways were designed for recreational driving through scenic countryside , although the george washington memorial parkway in virginia has become a heavily used commuter route .

national and international historic sites .

the 78 national historic sites and 1 international historic site designate places significant to u.s. history .

most are structures of historical interest , such as the homes of notable americans , or public buildings where important events occurred .

some mark the site of military actions , although other designations ( such as national battlefield or national military park ) are also available for military areas .

national historic sites are usually considerably smaller than national parks or national preserves .

several feature a single building and are less than 1 acre in size .

national historical parks .

like historic sites , the 50 national historical parks are notable for their connection with events or people of historical interest .

these entities usually extend beyond a single building or property .

many are not "parks" in the traditional sense of wide green spaces , but rather are urban tracts with a number of historically interesting buildings .

others , in less developed areas , may contain natural attractions in addition to their historical resources .

national battlefields , national battlefield sites , national battlefield parks , and national military parks .

the 11 national battlefields , 1 national battlefield site , 4 national battlefield parks , and 9 national military parks all designate locations of significant military actions .

they include landscapes where battles occurred ( primarily during the american revolution and the civil war ) and military and civil structures in those areas .

of the four designations , national battlefield parks and national military parks tend to be the largest .

national memorials .

national memorials need not be located at historically significant sites .

instead , many of the 30 national memorials , like the washington monument or the thomas jefferson memorial in washington , dc , are structures erected to commemorate people or events .

even when memorials occupy areas of historic interest , the site may be significantly altered from its historical state .

other designations .

the national park service administers a number of areas in the washington , dc , region that do not easily fit into the above classifications .

the park service classifies these 11 units as having "other designations" than the standard types , and they bear a variety of names .

for the most part , the different park titles signify different types of resources and attractions: a visitor expects to find historic buildings at a national historic site , natural attractions at a national park , and recreational opportunities at a national recreation area .

in some cases , however , the title has further implications .

it may signal information about who established the unit ( congress or the president ) , who manages it , and what activities congress has chosen to permit or prohibit in the unit .

a change to the title of a park unit requires an act of congress .

legislation to change unit designations — for example , to redesignate a national monument as a national park — is common .

in the 114 th congress , h.r .

3619 proposes to redesignate rock creek park in washington , dc , as "rock creek national park in the district of columbia" ; h.r .

2880 would redesignate the martin luther king jr. national historic site in georgia as a national historical park ; and h.r .

482 and s. 1696 would redesignate ocmulgee mounds national monument in georgia as a national historical park .

in the 112 th congress , p.l .

112-245 redesignated pinnacles national monument in california as pinnacles national park , and previous congresses have made similar title changes to other units .

an issue faced by congress is whether to continue using the current wide variety of park titles .

the national parks second century commission expressed concern that the range of park titles is confusing to visitors , and recommended reducing the number of titles in order to enhance branding and recognition of the parks .

in may 2010 testimony before the house natural resources committee , nps director jonathan jarvis also supported a simplified naming system: people do not have a problem identifying yosemite national park or yellowstone national park as parts of the national park system .

but many people would be surprised to learn that the appalachian national scenic trail , sleeping bear dunes national lakeshore , and saint croix national scenic riverway are also parts of the system .

one of the recommendations of the second century commission that we believe has merit is to substantially reduce the more than two dozen different park titles currently used for units of the national park system .

we feel strongly that a nomenclature with fewer titles would make the public more aware of the national park system as a whole .

recommendations to consolidate park titles have been discussed along with other marketing tools to increase park visitation , such as the national park system logo or public awareness campaigns .

increased recognition of the national park system "brand" could potentially boost visitation at under - recognized units , bringing consumers and jobs to surrounding communities .

on the other hand , it could be argued that a stricter nomenclature might reduce congress's flexibility to choose park names that reflect a unit's unique features .

in certain units , prescribed designations might not adequately convey to the public the full set of attractions to be found .

a few nonstandard names of park units — for example , the white house or the washington monument — are iconic american symbols , and efforts to tailor them to a prescribed set of park designations could prove unpopular .

moreover , as discussed above , opponents of efforts to rename individual parks often express concern that unwanted restrictions could accompany title changes .

if , in consolidating park titles systematically , congress also made new determinations about what activities could take place in certain types of units , or altered other management arrangements , these changes could provoke opposition .

there are no specific guidelines for park designations in the national park system .

congress has wide latitude when assigning titles in each unit's establishing legislation .

however , congress has followed certain patterns in designating park units , and the title may thus signal important information about the unit .

moreover , the title can influence congressional decision making: legislators may be more willing , for example , to allow hunting in a national preserve than in a national park , or to consider management partnerships in a proposed reserve or preserve .

titles may influence the public as well: tourists may be more drawn to a national park than a national monument , for instance , so that the choice of title can have local economic consequences .

congress may consider these elements when determining titles for new park units or weighing proposals to retitle existing units .

a further issue for congress is whether to simplify park nomenclature by reducing the number of titles currently in use .

a consolidated nomenclature could potentially increase public knowledge of and interest in park units that are currently hard to identify as part of the national park system .

on the other hand , more rigid naming conventions could restrict congress's flexibility to choose the most appropriate name for a unit .

