while some investigators disagree with the current risk assessments of climate science , most accept the findings of the u.s. national academies that the earth's climate has changed over the past century and that human activities — particularly emissions of greenhouse gases ( ghg ) through such activities as fossil fuel use , agricultural practices , and deforestation — have very likely caused most of the observed effects .

broadly agreed findings conclude that the world faces risks from the damaging effects of a changing climate unless ghg emissions are limited .

there is some political consensus internationally to try to stabilize ghg concentrations in the atmosphere at approximately 450 parts per million by volume ( ppm ) carbon dioxide - equivalent ( co 2 e ) , a volume which is projected to limit global warming to around 2˚c above pre - industrial levels .

some people argue that a 2˚c target , if attained within a sufficient time frame , might prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system , allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change , ensure that food production is not threatened , and enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner .

others suggest different target levels of varying stringency .

large - scale financial investments are projected to be needed to meet the global demand for energy , water , transportation , heating , and other infrastructure services in countries with growing populations and rising incomes .

financial requirements would be increased if countries made such investments with the additional consideration of addressing climate change .

proponents maintain that climate - relevant investments would promote low - emissions , high - growth economic development while simultaneously protecting the more vulnerable countries and communities from the effects of climate change .

some countries have begun to make moderate adjustments focusing , in particular , on energy efficiency strategies , low - emissions energy infrastructure , and sustainable land use , land use change , and forestry practices .

however , despite expressions of concern and commitment , the shift toward climate - relevant investment has been deemed slow by many .

further , while industrialized countries continue to contribute a disproportionally large share of global ghg emissions , and historically have contributed most of the global ghg emissions over the past two centuries , future emission growth is projected to arise mostly from the developing world , whose populations and economic aspirations continue to grow .

thus , even if developed country emissions are significantly curtailed , climate targets may not be met without the deployment of similar abatement efforts in the developing world .

while there is little doubt that the most efficient ghg reduction strategy would require efforts from all countries , a fundamental dispute centers upon who should pay for them and how .

most , if not all , low - income countries have argued that their success in abating ghg emissions and curtailing deforestation would depend critically on receipt of international financial and other support .

they argue that reducing their share of ghg emissions and adapting to the effects of climate change would incur costs above and beyond their normal economic growth trajectories .

these costs are particularly challenging to countries that have low incomes compared to industrialized nations , consider alleviating poverty as their first priority , and conclude that they have contributed only a minor share of the historical ghg emissions that force climate change .

higher - income countries , including the united states , have pledged financial assistance to lower - income countries in such fora as the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc , 1992 ) .

while vaguely defined , the unfccc pledges are not voluntary commitments , but treaty obligations , signed and ratified by the u.s. government .

more recently , the copenhagen accord ( 2009 ) stipulated — and the unfccc cancun agreements ( 2010 ) restated — that the wealthiest countries in aggregate would commit to provide up to $30 billion "fast start" financing in the 2010-2012 period and to mobilize $100 billion annually by 2020 to promote mitigation , adaptation , technology transfer , and capacity building efforts in lower - income countries .

the funding is to come from "a wide variety of sources , [both] public and private , bilateral and multilateral , including alternative sources of finance. .

the copenhagen accord is a non - binding political agreement among countries ; the implementation of the cancun agreements , as a product of the unfccc ad hoc working group on long - term cooperative action under the convention ( awg - lca ) , is still under negotiation by parties .

this report aims to inform congressional decision - making on u.s. provisions for financial assistance to low - income countries to address climate change .

it proceeds by first framing some perspectives on the u.s. role in international financial assistance for climate change .

it then addresses the following questions: 1 .

how much funding might be needed to address the problem ? .

2 .

what might the funding be used for ? .

3 .

where might the funding come from ? .

4 .

how might the funding be delivered ? .

the final section of the report summarizes past and current u.s. contributions to international climate change initiatives .

calls continue domestically and internationally for high - income countries to increase financial assistance to low - income countries to address climate change .

many in congress and the public at large may question why the united states should help finance other countries' efforts to reduce ghg emissions or to adapt to climate variability and change .

some claim that international financing would incur costs to the united states , or redirect funds that could be used for domestic purposes and send them overseas .

others , however , contend that international financing may offer potential benefits to the united states in terms of environmental protection , expanded commercial markets , and national security .

below is a brief outline of some of the arguments in support of and in opposition to the role of the u.s. government in foreign aid in general and international climate change assistance in particular .

the financial costs of coping with climate change may reach trillions of dollars .

these costs would aim to address some combination of mitigation activities ( i.e. , actions taken to eliminate or reduce the long - term risk and hazards of climate change ) and adaptation activities ( i.e. , actions taken to adjust to climate change , moderate potential damage , or cope with the consequences ) .

estimates of the projected costs vary widely depending upon assumptions made about the accepted levels of pollution , the ambitiousness of the global response , its structure , timing , and implementation , the potential climate - related damages , the affected sectors , as well as the methods of sourcing and delivering the necessary funds .

the stricter the emissions target , the higher the estimate .

the longer the response is delayed , the more threatening the damages may be , and the greater the resources required to respond to the threats .

bearing the costs of action ( or inaction ) are individuals , firms , local communities , national governments , and / or the international community .

as outlined in the previous section , trillions of dollars may be advocated over the coming decades to provide scaled - up , new , additional , predictable , and adequate financing for lower - income countries to enable and support their actions on climate change .

these investments would aim to upgrade and expand energy , industry , and transport infrastructure ; to manage land use , land use changes , and forestry practices ; and to support the implementation of adaptation activities for reducing climate vulnerability and building climate resilience .

having estimated the potential financial costs for climate change investment , the next step in the process would be to consider the sources from which these funds may be generated .

while markets that are privately constituted and self - regulated have delivered moderately to climate change investments world - wide , public institutions — including national governments , international organizations , and official financing mechanisms of the unfccc — continue to be key drivers for climate change investments , specifically in lower - income countries .

in the past , these institutions have relied heavily on government revenues to finance their activities .

but , with climate - related costs rising into the tens or hundreds of billions of dollars a year , it is unlikely that direct budget contributions from governments can meet the demand .

other sources of finance may be sought , and many proposals exist .

potential sources of international climate change financing for lower - income countries can be divided into five broad categories: ( 1 ) private sector ; ( 2 ) public interventions to stimulate private sector investment ; ( 3 ) public sector ; ( 4 ) innovative finance ; and ( 5 ) voluntary actions .

most potential sources of finance would require some measure of government action or oversight — either directly , through budget contributions or a transfer of funds , or indirectly , through state - sponsored regulations or other incentives to leverage private sector investment .

see appendix a for an extended glossary of terms related to the various sources of climate finance discussed in this section .

each of the categories identified above could potentially generate funds to address climate change in lower - income countries .

each has advantages and disadvantages .

there is no single set of criteria for comparing these options .

some of the criteria employed by commentators include the potential magnitude of funds that could be generated by each source ; the economic and / or the ghg - related efficiency of each source ; the practicality and predictability of generating funds from each source ; the plausibility of assessing the "additionality" of each source ; the overall accessibility and transparency of the funds provided and their use ; and the equity and incidence effects as expressed among countries or between higher and lower - income countries .

a brief summary of some of the more significant outstanding issues regarding the choice of sources is included in a discussion at the end of this section " caveats regarding sources " ; and a tabulated comparison of the various sources is offered in appendix b .

the previous section outlined many of the existing and proposed funding sources for investment in climate change mitigation and adaptation activities in lower - income countries .

the next step would be to consider the methods through which these funds could be transferred from contributing countries to their recipients .

a variety of mechanisms , organizations , and institutions for disbursing international climate change financing already exists .

all have a role in catalyzing climate action: mobilizing additional resources ; reorienting public and private flows toward low - carbon and climate - resilient investments ; supporting the research , development , and deployment of climate - friendly technologies ; and strengthening the institutional capacities of recipient countries .

mechanisms can be divided into three broad categories: ( 1 ) private or quasi - private sector , ( 2 ) public sector bilateral , and ( 3 ) public sector multilateral .

foreign direct investment ( fdi ) , export credit markets , non - concessional lending at the multilateral development banks ( mdb ) , and the various kyoto protocol market mechanisms at the unfccc ( eg , the clean development mechanism ( cdm ) ) would be classified as private or quasi - private sector mechanisms .

public sectors mechanisms would include contributing countries' official development assistance ( oda ) as well as many of the multilateral environment and development trust funds ( eg , the global environment facility ( gef ) ) and the concessional lending windows housed at the various institutions at the world bank group .

figure 5 presents a comparison of the financial flows for energy and infrastructure development — including development specific to climate change mitigation — in low - income countries per annum ( in this example , the analysis compares flows for the year 2007 ) .

the figure shows that total investment in all "mitigation - relevant" sectors ( i.e. , funding for economic development in all key sectors that shape future ghg emissions in developing countries , including energy , transport and water infrastructure , industry , waste management , agricultural , and forestry ) amounted to an estimated $316 billion , of which over 80% was from private sector funds .

it should be noted that "mitigation - relevant" investments need not be ghg reducing investments ( eg , both wind power generation and fossil fuel power generation are "mitigation - relevant" investments ) .

"mitigation - specific" investments ( i.e. , investments in which the primary objective is to reduce ghg emissions ) amounted to $20 billion in 2007 — or 6% of total key sector investment — of which approximately 60% was from private sector funds .

all of the mechanisms identified above could potentially deliver funds to address climate change in lower - income countries .

each has advantages and disadvantages , and there is no single set of criteria for comparing these options .

many critics contend that the overall architecture of financial mechanisms to address climate change is underfunded and unnecessarily complex .

the array of funds and financial institutions lack both strategic mandate and adequate coordination , leaving many gaps , overlaps , and inefficiencies .

divisions have arisen over the proper financial instruments to employ in lower - income countries ( eg , grants or loans ) as well as the role shared by the public and private spheres .

a brief summary of some of the more significant outstanding issues regarding the choice of sources is included in a discussion at the end of this section under " caveats regarding mechanisms . .

the united states has relied mostly on direct budget appropriations to finance climate change actions internationally .

congress is responsible for several activities in this regard , including ( 1 ) authorizing periodic appropriations for federal agency programs and multilateral fund contributions , ( 2 ) enacting those appropriations , and ( 3 ) overseeing u.s. interests in the programs .

oversight may come in the form of guidance ; please see box "some examples of legislative and executive branch guidance" in this section for examples .

currently , direct budget contributions from the u.s. government are appropriated to relevant federal agencies to support their bilateral and multilateral contributions to international climate change initiatives .

these appropriations are requested on an annual basis by the administration and enacted on an annual basis by the congress .

the majority of bilateral and multilateral contributions to international climate change initiatives is funded through programs at the department of state , the department of the treasury , and the u.s. agency for international development .

funds for these programs are appropriated in the administration's executive budget , function 150 , for state , foreign operations , and related programs .

historical budget authority for these programs through 2009 is presented in table 3 .

the current administration's budget authority and budget requests are presented in table 4 .

congressional committees of jurisdiction for international climate change programs at the department of state , the department of the treasury , and the u.s. agency for international development include the u.s. house of representatives committee on foreign affairs , ( various subcommittees ) ; the u.s. house of representatives committee on financial services , subcommittee on international monetary policy and trade ; the u.s. house of representatives committee on appropriations , subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related programs ; the u.s. senate committee on foreign relations , subcommittee on international development and foreign assistance , economic affairs , and international environmental protection ; and the u.s. senate committee on appropriations , subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related programs .

currently , no federally legislated system exists to require or assure future , predictable public financing for international climate change assistance ( eg , a mandated allocation of redirected fossil fuel subsidies ) .

similarly , no federally legislated market - based mechanism has been instituted that would contribute funds generated from the private sector for international climate change assistance ( eg , a ghg cap - and - trade program , which could incentivize international private capital investment through offset markets or provide internationally targeted funds through an allocation of auction or offset revenue ) .

u.s. participation in international negotiations for global environmental assistance stretches at least back to the 1972 united nations conference on the human environment ( unche ) , the first concerted effort by the international community to focus on the environment as a major topic of concern and attention .

therein , discussions among representatives from both industrialized and lower - income countries gave rise to a compromise on a doctrine to address both environmental and developmental policy .

governments at the time agreed that ( 1 ) the environment and development are two mutually reinforcing sides of the same coin , and ( 2 ) that industrialized countries would accept the principle of "incrementality" by which they would pay some or all of the additional costs of environmental initiatives in the developing world above and beyond the basic costs of development .

the relationship between the environment and development was further developed at the 1992 united nations conference on environment and development , in the document called agenda 21 , wherein a blueprint was detailed for putting sustainable development into practice .

agenda 21 also doubled the pledge by the industrial world to assist lower - income countries in poverty alleviation and environmental protection .

although agenda 21 was impressive in its scope and comprehensiveness , the policy was non - binding ; and some observers note that "the whole enterprise [was] heavily dependent on strong leadership from major countries , adequate financing , and effective institutional arrangements for follow - up ... none of which materialized. .

financial pledges were made to support climate change initiatives specifically under the 1992 united nations convention on climate change ( unfccc ) .

the united states , as a party to the unfccc , has committed to providing financial and technical assistance to lower - income countries' efforts in meeting their respective obligations .

historically , some of this assistance has flowed through the global environment facility — the official financial mechanism of the unfccc — to which the united states has contributed funding since 1993 .

further , at the 2009 unfccc conference of parties ( cop ) in copenhagen , denmark , and at the 2010 cop in cancun , mexico , the united states helped negotiate a package that included developed country pledges of an aggregated $30 billion of "fast start" climate financing for the period 2010 to 2012 and $100 billion annually by 2020 .

this funding is to come from a wide variety of sources , public and private , bilateral and multilateral , including alternative sources of finance , and be delivered through both new and existing fund arrangements , with governance structures providing for equal representation of developed and developing countries .

these negotiations are still pending and are currently non - binding .

the 2011 cop is scheduled to meet during december in durban , south africa to further negotiations toward a potentially binding treaty .

the obama administration has not yet specified what share of pledges it envisions the united states providing , nor a strategy for how to fulfill the long - term pledge .

historically , the united states' credibility on international climate change financing has been impaired by periodic under - funding .

the united states is currently $217 million in arrears for its assessed contributions to the global environment facility ( i.e. , 10% of the total u.s. pledge of $2,185 million since 1994 ) .

also , though the bush administration helped establish the clean technology fund in 2008 under the world bank and pledged to help capitalize it , the u.s. congress declined to appropriate the first u.s. payment of $400 million requested by the administration for fy2009 , and is far short of the $2 billion aggregated pledge the bush administration made for the period 2008-2012 .

further , recent appropriations fall well below what many countries envisage for the u.s. share of the $30 billion unfccc "fast start" pledge .

based on provisions in h.r .

1473 , most fy2011 enacted funding for international climate programs at the department of state , the department of the treasury , and usaid ( function 150 ) are drawn from larger line item agency categories .

allocations for these programs are at the discretion of the agency , in relation to its other programming , and have yet to be reported .

the obama administration's fy2012 budget request for international climate programs at the department of state , the department of the treasury , and usaid ( function 150 ) would fund near - term climate financing of slightly over $1.3 billion across three areas: ( 1 ) clean energy ( $652 million , up from $531 million enacted for fy2010 ) to reduce net ghg emissions from the energy sector , industry , and urban areas ; ( 2 ) sustainable landscapes ( $421 million , up from $169 million enacted for fy2010 ) to assist reduction of ghg emissions from deforestation and land degradation ; and ( 3 ) adaptation ( $256 million , up from $246 million enacted for fy2010 ) to focus on helping countries manage climate and weather - related risks and build resilience .

table 4 outlines recent u.s. budget authority and administration requests for international climate change assistance programs by agency .

for a more detailed description of the obama administration's global climate change initiative , its agencies , programs , funding , and purposes , please refer to appendix c .

appendix a. glossary of options for generating and disbursing financing to address climate change appendix b .

comparison of sources of climate change financing appendix c. u.s .

global climate change initiative "adaptation" ( $256 million fy2012 request , up from $246 million in fy2010 ) assisting countries manage climate and weather - related risks and build climate resilience .

"clean energy" ( $652 million fy2012 request , up from $531 million in fy2010 ) mitigating net greenhouse gas emissions from energy sectors using energy efficiency and low - emission technologies .

"sustainable landscapes" ( $421 million fy2012 request , up from $169 million ) reducing greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation and land degradation .

