a number of states and local governments have taken actions to address greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions .

these efforts cover a wide spectrum , from developing climate action plans to setting mandatory ghg emission standards .

for example , california is implementing regulations that address ghg emissions on multiple fronts , including a cap - and - trade program that began in january 2013 .

one of the most significant climate change developments at the state level is the regional greenhouse gas initiative ( rggi , pronounced "reggie" ) , which is based on an agreement signed by rggi governors in 2005 .

rggi is the nation's first mandatory cap - and - trade program for ghg emissions , which went into effect january 1 , 2009 ( see text box , "what is a cap - and - trade system ? " ) .

rggi currently involves nine states — connecticut , delaware , maine , maryland , massachusetts , new hampshire , new york , rhode island , and vermont .

the results of the rggi program may be informative to policymakers , because rggi may serve as a possible test case for a federal cap - and - trade program , providing insights into implementation complexities , the mechanics of various design elements , and lessons of potential design pitfalls .

several of rggi's design elements generated considerable interest during the development and debate of federal proposals to address ghg emissions .

the first section of this report provides an overview of the rggi cap - and - trade program and the participating rggi states .

the subsequent sections discuss selected issues raised by rggi that may be of interest to congress .

the final section provides some final observations that may be instructive to policymakers .

rggi is a sector - specific cap - and - trade system that applies to co 2 emissions from electric power plants with capacities to generate 25 megawatts or more — 164 facilities in the nine rggi states .

rggi's history began with discussions and meetings that date back to at least 2003 .

these activities eventually led to a 2005 memorandum of understanding ( mou ) that outlined the basic framework of the program .

in 2008 , the rggi states issued a model rule of cap - and - trade regulations that participating states could use to establish and implement their programs .

rggi designers expected the initial program to be a foundation for emissions trading and possibly expanded in future years by covering other emission sources / sectors , ghgs , or states .

the co 2 emissions from covered entities in the rggi states account for approximately 20% of all ghg emissions in the rggi states .

the vast majority of the remaining ghg emissions come from fossil fuel combustion in the industrial , commercial , residential , and transportation sectors .

pursuant to rggi's 2005 mou , the rggi states conducted a substantial design review of the program ( between 2010 and 2012 ) , which resulted in significant changes to the emissions cap and other cap - related design elements .

these changes took effect in 2014 and are discussed below .

the rggi states initiated a second design review in 2015 .

this process is ongoing .

rggi's cap - and - trade program includes many of the design elements that were proposed and debated in federal legislative proposals .

highlights include the following: three - year compliance periods .

at the end of a compliance period , covered entities submit one emission allowance for each ton of co 2 emissions generated .

a three - year compliance period should mitigate potential emission allowance price swings brought on by short - term market volatility .

emission allowance banking .

rggi allows covered entities to bank an unlimited number of emission allowances for future use .

the opportunity to bank emission allowances instills a substantial amount of flexibility into a trading program , effectively making annual emissions caps flexible over time , and reduces the absolute cost of compliance .

emission allowance auctions .

with some variance among the states , particularly in the early years , a substantial percentage ( 91% ) of emission allowances have been distributed through quarterly auctions ( discussed below ) .

the auctions include a reserve price , which sets a price floor for emission allowances .

consumer benefit allocation .

rggi states agreed that at least 25% of the emission allowance value would be distributed "for a consumer benefit or strategic energy purpose. .

allowance value distributions from rggi states have far exceeded this minimum requirement ( discussed below ) .

cost containment .

in 2014 , rggi states established a "cost containment reserve" ( ccr ) , which provides additional allowances to be sold at auction if certain price thresholds are met .

offsets use .

an offset is a measurable reduction , avoidance , or sequestration of ghg emissions from a source not covered by an emission reduction program .

to a limited degree ( discussed below ) , covered entities may submit offsets in lieu of the emission allowances needed to satisfy compliance obligations .

although rggi is one of the more aggressive state programs addressing ghg emissions , the program's first emission cap exceeded actual emissions since its inception in 2009 .

as discussed below , this result was unintentional .

the first cap never compelled regulated entities to make internal emission reductions or purchase emission credits ( or offsets ) .

after the program review in 2012 , rggi states lowered the emissions cap by 45% .

this change took effect in january 2014 .

this section includes a discussion of both the initial emissions cap and the revised emissions cap .

one of the more controversial and challenging questions for policymakers when designing a cap - and - trade program is how , to whom , and for what purpose to distribute the emission allowances .

in general , rggi states have answered the "how" question by employing auctions to distribute the vast majority of allowances .

perhaps the more important question for policymakers is what to do with the emission allowance value: in the case of rggi , allowance value predominately means auction revenues .

allowance value includes revenues generated through allowance auctions or by giving the allowances away at no charge to either covered or noncovered entities .

a covered entity recipient could use the allowances for compliance purposes , sell the allowances in the marketplace ( eg , to other covered entities ) , or bank the allowances for future use .

to realize the value of allowances received , a noncovered entity recipient would need to sell the allowances in the marketplace , either through a broker or directly to a covered entity .

during rggi's development , the program designers recognized that "emissions leakage" could potentially undermine the effectiveness of the rggi program .

leakage can occur when an emissions reduction program does not include all sources contributing to the environmental problem .

increases in emissions from uncovered sources may reduce emission achievements from covered sources .

this is a concern with the rggi program , because the rggi regime does not regulate emissions from electricity generated outside the region ( eg , in pennsylvania ) and then used within the region ( i.e. , "imported electricity" ) .

emissions leakage could occur if imported electricity replaces rggi in - state electricity generation , because emissions from in - state electricity are covered under the cap ; emissions from imported electricity are not .

in such a scenario , the quantity of leakage would depend on the sources of electricity generation involved in the tradeoff .

for example , maximum leakage would occur if imported electricity from a coal - fired power plant replaced in - state electricity generated from a zero - emission source .

rggi states have been monitoring electricity generation and co 2 emission levels from both rggi and non - rggi sources since the emissions cap took effect in 2009 .

in rggi's most recent monitoring report ( august 2016 ) , the authors compared activity between 2012 and 2014 to a pre - rggi baseline period ( 2006 through 2008 ) .

the report found that electricity generation from all non - rggi sources increased by about 12% , due largely to a 34% increase in imported electricity .

however , the report also found that the co 2 emission levels from non - rggi sources decreased by 0.5% .

this is likely related to ( 1 ) rggi state increases in electricity generation from hydropower and renewable sources ( figure 3 ) and ( 2 ) increases of imported electricity from hydropower , primarily from quebec .

after its 2012 program review , rggi participants stated: [t]he states commit , over the course of the next year , to engage in a collaborative effort ... to identify and evaluate potential imports tracking tools , conduct further modeling to ascertain energy and price implications of any potential policy on emissions associated with imported electricity , and pursue additional legal research necessary , leading to a workable , practicable , and legal mechanism to address emissions associated with imported electricity .

emissions leakage will likely remain a topic of discussion going forward , particularly with the onset of the revised emissions cap in 2014 .

federal policymakers may be interested in rggi's treatment of offsets .

an offset is a measurable reduction , avoidance , or sequestration of ghg emissions from a source not covered by an emission reduction program .

rggi limits offsets to 3.3% of a source's allowance submission , a relatively low percentage compared to california's cap - and - trade system and some federal proposals .

under rggi's original model rule ( 2009-2013 ) , the offset ceiling percentage could increase to 5% or 10% if the market price of an allowance exceeds $7 or $10 ( in 2005 dollars , adjusted annually ) , respectively .

however , as part of the design review in february 2013 , rggi states replaced this provision with the new cost containment reserve , discussed below .

rggi uses a standards approach — as opposed to performance - based system — for developing offsets: a project must satisfy a set of detailed requirements ( specific to a project type ) and be certified by a third party .

in contrast to recent federal proposals , which often allow a wide array of project types , rggi limits offset projects to five types , which must be located in rggi states: 1 .

landfill methane reduction ; 2 .

sulfur hexafluoride reductions from specific industrial activities ; 3 .

forest sequestration projects , including afforestation , reforestation , improved forest management , and avoided forest conversion ; 4 .

specific energy efficiency projects ; and 5 .

avoided methane from manure management practices .

some offset projects raise concerns , because they may not represent real emission reductions .

for offsets to be credible , a ton of co 2 - equivalent emissions from an offset project should equate to a ton reduced from a rggi power plant .

if illegitimate offset credits flow into an emissions trading program , the program would fail to achieve its primary goal — emission reduction .

regardless , according to the rggi offsets tracking database , no offset projects have been developed under the rggi program .

as part of the 2012 design review , rggi states decided to alter the cost containment provisions in the rggi program .

under the original model rule ( 2009-2013 ) , potential cost concerns were addressed by allowing for the use of additional offsets if emission allowance prices reached specific levels .

the revised model rule , which took effect in 2014 , eliminated this approach and added a cost containment reserve ( ccr ) to the cap - and - trade system .

the ccr provides additional allowances — 5 million in 2014 and 10 million each year thereafter — if certain price thresholds are met during one of the quarterly allowance auctions: $4 per ton in 2014 ; $6 per ton in 2015 ; $8 per ton in 2016 ; and $10 per ton in 2017 , increasing 2.5% each year thereafter .

the ccr was triggered in 2014 and 2015 ( figure 5 ) , allowing for the sale of 5 million and 10 million additional allowances , respectively .

in each instance , all of the additional allowances were purchased .

unlike some allowance reserve systems in other programs and proposals , allowances from ccr are not borrowed from future years , thus effectively increasing the cap if triggered .

an issue for both federal and state policymakers is how rggi's emission program would interact with the clean power plan , the environmental protection agency's ( epa's ) regulations that apply to existing power plants .

the rule establishes co 2 emission guidelines for states to use when developing plans that address co 2 emissions from existing fossil - fuel - fired electric generating units .

the final rule appeared in the federal register on october 23 , 2015 .

on february 9 , 2016 , the supreme court stayed the rule for the duration of the litigation .

the rule therefore currently lacks enforceability or legal effect , and if the rule is ultimately upheld , at least some of the deadlines would have to be delayed .

in addition , on march 28 , 2017 , president trump signed executive order 13783 directing federal agencies to review existing regulations and policies that potentially burden the development or use of domestically produced energy resources .

among its specific provisions , the order directed epa to review the clean power plan and three proposed and final rules related to it "for consistency with the policy set forth in ... this order" and , if appropriate , to "suspend , revise , or rescind" them .

thus , the status of the clean power plan is in flux , with major decisions possible from both the executive and judicial branches .

if implemented , epa's clean power plan would allow states considerable flexibility in meeting their co 2 emission rates or emission targets .

for example , states could establish new programs to meet their goals or use existing programs and regulations .

moreover , states could meet their goals individually or collaborate with other states to create ( or use existing ) multistate plans .

it is uncertain whether the scope and stringency of the rggi program would be sufficient to meet the targets in epa's clean power plan .

rggi's existing emission cap stops at 2020 ; the clean power plan's requirements begin in 2022 and continue through 2030 .

second , the new ccr has the potential to provide up to 10 million tons of additional allowances each year , making an analysis more challenging .

rggi participants began a second design review process at the end of 2015 .

according to the rggi website , the design review "will solicit stakeholder input on rggi program design elements , including considerations for compliance under the epa clean power plan. .

the nature of the rggi program changed significantly in 2014 .

comparing the first five years of rggi ( 2009-2013 ) to the existing program is an apples - to - oranges exercise .

the rggi states significantly altered their emissions cap in 2014 , and this new cap may have different effects than the original emissions cap .

it is uncertain how this new development may impact electricity use and prices in the rggi region and , in turn , the perception and support for the program .

as a group , the nine rggi states account for approximately 7% of u.s. co 2 emissions from energy consumption and 16% of the u.s. gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

table 2 indicates that rggi's aggregate co 2 emissions from energy consumption rank in the top 20 among nations .

but from a practical standpoint , the rggi program's contribution to directly reducing the global accumulation of ghg emissions in the atmosphere is arguably negligible .

however , when business and industry have confronted a growing patchwork of state requirements , these sectors have historically preferred a national policy .

rggi and other state programs , particularly developments in california , may have some influence on federal policymakers .

note that the combination of rggi and california co 2 emissions ( 749 million metric tons ) would rank above seventh , behind germany ( table 2 ) .

in addition , rggi's activities may create examples and / or models that could prove instructive for federal policymakers crafting more widespread applications .

the program has provided a training ground for personnel from multiple states and various professions to develop a specific expertise in emissions trading issues .

this knowledge base could be useful if a federal system were developed .

