in recent years , state and federal laws have facilitated law enforcement's expanded use of deoxyribonucleic acid ( dna ) for investigating and prosecuting crimes .

these laws authorize compulsory collection of biological matter , which local law enforcement agencies send to the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) for analysis .

the fbi then stores unique dna profiles in a national distributive database , through which law enforcement officials match individuals to crime scene evidence .

early laws authorized compulsory extraction of dna only from people convicted for violent or sex - based felonies , such as murder , kidnapping , and offenses "related to sexual abuse" — crimes associated with historically high recidivism rates and for which police were likely to find evidence at crime scenes .

however , in recent decades , new laws have greatly extended the scope of compulsory dna collection , both by expanding the range of offenses triggering collection authority and , more recently , by authorizing compulsory collection from people who have been arrested but not convicted .

opponents of dna databases suggest that dna databases are "orwellian" because of the amount of information about private citizens that they put into the control of the government .

the most frequent criticism is that the programs violate the fourth amendment to the u.s. constitution .

several federal courts have heard cases alleging that it is unconstitutional for an individual's pre - or post - trial release to be conditioned on dna collection .

another fourth amendment argument , albeit a less litigated one , contends that it is unconstitutional to permit the use of databanked dna profiles for purposes other than identifying a genetic match with a suspect .

the fourth amendment protects individuals' privacy from unreasonable searches and seizures by the government .

federal courts have generally held that compulsory dna collection from a person who has been convicted of a felony or other qualifying crime and placed under the supervision of the criminal justice system does not constitute an unreasonable search under the fourth amendment .

these courts found that a convicted felon has a diminished expectation of privacy and that dna profiling is a minimal intrusion into that privacy .

far fewer cases have given the federal courts an opportunity to decide whether dna collection from arrestees is also constitutional .

the two federal circuit courts of appeals to hear the question upheld the mandatory dna profiling of indicted arrestees , but no federal court has assessed the constitutionality of profiling arrestees in the absence of a grand jury indictment or judicial finding of probable cause .

similarly , the courts have not yet had an opportunity to articulate the constitutional limits on how databanked dna profiles may be used .

this report traces the expansion of the statutory authorities for dna databases and identifies emerging areas of consensus and discord among the federal courts over the fourth amendment consistency of compulsory dna collection and the use of dna databases .

it also predicts additional fourth amendment issues that may come before both congress and the federal courts in the near future .

dna is a complex molecule found in the nucleus and mitochondria of an organism's cells .

it consists of two strands of nucleotides , the sequence of which contains the information that forms the basis of the human genetic code .

the vast majority of human dna is exactly the same , but small variations in the sequencing of the nucleotides create people's distinguishing characteristics .

only identical twins share the same dna profile .

with the help of dna profiling technology , forensic scientists can examine different regions — or "loci" — of dna to develop a dna profile of the person from whom the dna was extracted .

because forensic analysts examine a select group of loci , the resulting dna profile may not necessarily be unique to that individual .

however , advances in technology have enabled analysts to produce increasingly discriminating profiles .

today , the probability that two unrelated individuals would share a dna profile derived from an uncontaminated sample of dna from a cell's nucleus is estimated to be one in a billion at most .

dna profiles are often compared to fingerprints .

as with fingerprints , law enforcement officers collect dna samples from specific classes of individuals , such as prisoners .

however , compulsory dna collection generally entails blood or saliva samples rather than finger impressions , and dna profiles can later match any of many types of biological matter obtained from crime scenes .

for these reasons , dna matching is considered a complement to , rather than merely a supplement for , fingerprint analysis in identifying criminal suspects .

the fbi administers dna storage and analysis for law enforcement agencies across the country .

fbi analysts create dna profiles by "decoding sequences of 'junk dna.' .

so - called "junk dna" is the name for dna loci that are "not presently recognized as being responsible for trait coding. .

because junk dna is not currently "associated with any known physical or medical characteristics," its use in forensic analysis prevents , at least for the time being , dna profiles from containing private or sensitive information about the subject .

typically , a law enforcement agency's phlebotomist collects a blood or saliva sample from the subject pursuant to state or federal law .

the sample may then be analyzed and converted into a dna profile by a public laboratory ( or outsourced by that public lab to a private one ) that adheres to the fbi's quality assurance standards .

assuming the laboratory and analyst that generated the profile are adequately credentialed , the resulting dna profile may then be entered into the combined dna index system ( codis ) .

codis includes dna profile databases composed at the local , state , and national levels .

at the national level , the national dna index system ( ndis ) facilitates sharing of dna profiles among participating law enforcement agencies throughout the united states .

at each level , profiles are categorized into forensic ( crime scene ) profiles , offender profiles , and arrestee profiles .

as of march 2011 , ndis contained over 9,535,059 offender profiles .

codis is primarily evaluated by the number of criminal investigations that codis aids .

as of march 2011 , codis had assisted more than 135,500 investigations , suggesting that between 1% and 2% of all samples taken from an offender have assisted a criminal investigation .

the categories of individuals from whom law enforcement officials may require dna samples have expanded in recent years .

the federal government and most states authorize compulsory collection of dna samples from individuals convicted for specified criminal offenses , including all felonies in most jurisdictions and extending to misdemeanors , such as failure to register as a sex offender or crimes for which a sentence greater than six months applies , in some jurisdictions .

in addition , the federal government and some states now authorize compulsory collection from people whom the government has arrested or detained but not convicted .

as amended , the dna analysis backlog elimination act 2000 , discussed below , authorizes compulsory collection from individuals in federal custody , including those detained , arrested , or facing charges , and from individuals on release , parole , or probation in the federal criminal justice system .

under the federal law , if an individual refuses to cooperate , relevant officials "may use or authorize the use of such means as are reasonably necessary to detain , restrain , and collect a dna sample. .

state laws vary , but nearly all states authorize compulsory dna collection from people convicted for specified crimes , and a small but growing number of states also authorize compulsory collection from arrestees .

the fourth amendment to the u.s. constitution provides a right "of the people to be secure in their persons , houses , papers , and effects , against unreasonable searches and seizures. .

two fundamental questions arise in every fourth amendment challenge .

first , does the challenged action constitute a search or seizure by federal or local government and thus trigger the fourth amendment right ? .

second , if so , is the search or seizure "reasonable" ? .

the supreme court has not accepted a case reviewing a compulsory dna collection statute .

however , the courts have uniformly held that compulsory dna collection and analysis constitutes a search , and thus triggers fourth amendment rights .

accordingly , compulsory dna collection and profiling laws violate the fourth amendment if they fail the reasonableness test .

in addition to the constitutionality of compulsory dna collection , a second set of emerging fourth amendment issues with dna database programs concerns the retention and use of dna samples and profiles .

for example , in united states v. mitchell , discussed above , the arrestee argued that the indefinite retention of his dna profile would violate the fourth amendment .

however , the third circuit declined to reach the merits of his argument because mitchell's dna sample had not yet been collected , rendering its potential retention not yet ripe for judicial review .

federal law requires the fbi to expunge dna profiles for people who receive acquittals or whose convictions are overturned .

courts have pointed to these provisions as reducing the intrusiveness of collecting dna samples from arrestees .

this case law suggests that sources of lawfully collected and databanked dna maintain some degree of privacy interests in their dna profiles .

however , it is not clear whether convicted felons retain those rights as well , and , if they do , what types of actions would unreasonably intrude upon those rights .

despite the "rapid pace of technological development in the area of dna analysis," much of dna's scientific value remains a mystery .

as mentioned , fbi analysts rely on junk dna precisely because it is not believed to reveal sensitive medical or biological information .

partly for that reason , proponents of expansive dna collection argue that any privacy intrusion resulting from dna storage or analysis is minimal at most .

for example , when he introduced the amendment that authorizes collection and analysis of dna from arrestees in the federal system , senator kyl emphasized that storage of dna samples would not intrude upon individuals' privacy rights , stating that "the sample of dna that is kept ... is what is called 'junk dna' — it is impossible to determine anything medically sensitive from this dna. .

likewise , courts have assumed that dna analysis and storage involves only a minimal privacy intrusion .

however , language in some opinions suggests that this assumption might change if scientists discover new uses for junk dna .

the first , second , and third circuits have all suggested that "discovery of new uses for 'junk dna' would require a reevaluation of the [fourth amendment] reasonableness balance. .

in addition , at least two judges on the ninth circuit have expressed concern about the potential for profiles developed from junk dna to yield more sensitive information about their sources in the future .

scientific research on junk dna is still emerging , and some research suggests that junk dna contains more genetic information than previously assumed .

for example , in october 2008 , university of iowa researchers released study findings showing that junk dna has the potential to "evolve into exons , which are the building blocks for protein - coding genes. .

other scientists have similarly hypothesized that there are "gems among the junk" in dna .

hence , a remaining question is whether use of junk dna will continue to offer superficial identifying information or whether it will reveal more detailed medical or biological characteristics .

the nation , all 50 states , and many localities have adopted some type of dna database program .

over time , congress and state legislatures have expanded the types of crimes and circumstances that can result in dna collection and databanking .

congress has demonstrated concern toward some aspects of dna databanking by requiring expungement of a dna profile in certain circumstances , prohibiting most non - forensic uses of dna profiles and databases , and restricting familial searching .

however , in general , congress has taken a supportive attitude toward dna databanking and incentivized the development , expansion , and integration of dna databases .

as dna database programs have widened in scope and grown in numbers , their consistency with the fourth amendment's prohibition on unreasonable searches and seizures has increasingly been challenged .

in the context of compulsory dna collection , courts have widely upheld laws mandating the collection of dna from persons who were convicted and are subject to the penal system's custody or supervision .

far fewer cases have given the federal courts an opportunity to decide whether dna collection from arrestees is also constitutional .

the two federal circuit courts of appeals to hear the question upheld the mandatory dna profiling of indicted arrestees , but no federal court has assessed the constitutionality of profiling arrestees in the absence of a judicial finding of probable cause .

courts have generally upheld the indefinite use and storage of a lawfully databanked dna profile after its source's conviction .

however , not all courts agree that any post - conviction use of those profiles is constitutionally acceptable .

in particular , observers are now raising questions about the fourth amendment consistency of using databases for non - forensic purposes and for familial searching .

currently , these concerns are largely confined to the scholarly literature — they have not come before a federal court — and primarily centered on state database programs .

unlike some state dna databases , the national dna index system ( ndis ) and the combined dna index system ( codis ) can not be used for either non - forensic research or intentional familial searching .

however , the increase in states that authorize familial searching suggests that it may not be long before the constitutionality of familial searching comes before a federal court .

much of the fourth amendment analysis of these issues depends on the current state of scientific knowledge on dna and , more importantly , "junk" dna — that is , the subset of dna used to create databanked profiles .

decisions upholding dna databanking programs have often described junk dna as empty or meaningless genetic material because it is believed to reveal no sensitive information about its source .

however , recent scientific research is challenging the accuracy of this description .

while it may be too early for courts to give weight to this new research as fact , some have suggested that the constitutionality of dna database programs should be reevaluated if "junk" dna is ultimately found to reveal sensitive genetic information .

