over the last decade , driven in part by recognition that global health efforts help bolster broader u.s. foreign policy goals , global health programs have received unprecedented attention and resources ( figure 1 ) .

u.s. support for global health has been rooted in humanitarian concerns , but since the 1990s , it has been especially motivated by concern over emergent and reemerging infectious diseases and the threats they pose to international development , stability , and security .

outbreaks of diseases like severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) , pandemic influenza , and hiv / aids have led a succession of presidents to give global health a high priority and to launch several health initiatives in response .

in 1996 , for example , president bill clinton issued a presidential decision directive ( pdd ) that deemed infectious diseases a threat to u.s. national and international security and called for u.s. global health efforts to be coordinated with those aimed at counterterrorism .

following the release of the directive , president clinton requested $100 million in 1999 to fund the leadership and investment in fighting an epidemic ( life ) initiative to expand u.s. global hiv / aids efforts .

president george w. bush recognized the impact of infectious diseases on global security as well in his 2002 and 2006 national security strategy papers .

along with these statements , president bush created several global health initiatives , including the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , the president's malaria initiative ( pmi ) , and the neglected tropical diseases ( ntd ) program .

president barack obama also recognized the risk of infectious diseases and linked the capacity of developing countries to prevent and respond to disease outbreaks to u.s. national security .

in 2009 , president obama announced the global health initiative ( ghi ) to coordinate the health initiatives established during the bush administration as well as other united states agency for international development ( usaid ) and centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) bilateral health programs , increase investments in health areas that he deemed underfunded , and bolster the health systems of weak and impoverished states .

through the state department's 2010 quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) and the 2010 national security strategy , the obama administration has emphasized the importance of coordinating defense , health , and development efforts and cited the strategic value of improving health around the world , particularly across the middle east .

the administration sees the ghi as an integral part of a "smart power" approach to foreign policy , whereby diplomacy , development ( including health ) , and defense are leveraged as mutually reinforcing tools .

congress funds bilateral and multilateral health assistance through three appropriations: state , foreign operations and related programs ( state - foreign operations ) ; labor , health and human services , and education ( labor - hhs ) ; and department of defense .

these funds support global health efforts managed and conducted by usaid , cdc , and the department of defense ( dod ) as well as pepfar - related efforts that are coordinated by the department of state and implemented by several u.s. agencies ( figure 2 ) .

under pepfar , the united states also supports multilateral efforts to combat hiv / aids , including through contributions to the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis and malaria ( global fund ) and the joint united nations program on hiv / aids ( unaids ) .

the obama administration's global health initiative represents an effort to improve the alignment and coordination of these various programs , and to track the multiple lines of funding for these programs under a comprehensive global health budget .

the obama administration named the state department the head of this effort until september 2012 , when leadership of ghi is supposed to transfer to usaid if certain benchmarks are achieved .

nearly 90% of u.s. global health programs are funded through the global health programs ( ghp ) account ( formerly called the global health and child survival ( ghcs ) account ) in state - foreign operations appropriations .

funding through the ghp account supports bilateral and multilateral global health programs managed by usaid and hiv / aids programs coordinated and managed by the department of state under pepfar .

charts outlining global health spending provided through state - foreign operations and labor - hhs are included in the appendix .

congress also makes funds available for global health through other accounts within state - foreign operations , including the development assistance and the economic support fund accounts .

appropriators do not , however , specify how much should be made available for global health activities through these accounts .

through labor - hhs appropriations , congress finances bilateral health programs implemented by cdc , and provides resources to support international hiv / aids and malaria research conducted by the national institutes of health ( nih ) .

congress has historically supported an additional contribution to the global fund through labor - hhs appropriations , although beginning in fy2012 the contribution has come from state - foreign operations appropriations alone .

defense appropriations fund hiv - prevention efforts conducted by dod and provide resources to dod to support global malaria research .

in addition to funds congress provides specifically for global health , u.s. agencies and departments may use other portions of their budgets on global health programs .

for example , cdc uses some of its funds to support global tb programming , although it does not receive a direct appropriation to do so .

u.s. agencies and departments also transfer funds among each other .

for instance , the department of state transfers the majority of the funds it receives from congress for global hiv / aids activities to implementing agencies such as usaid and cdc .

likewise , usaid may transfer funds to cdc for field research and evaluation of global health programs .

u.s. agencies also receive funds to implement programs that simultaneously address development and health challenges .

these efforts may include improving access to clean water , addressing the negative consequences of climate change and rapid urbanization , supporting the vulnerable in conflict or post - conflict environments , and responding to natural emergencies .

in light of these different funding streams and a lack of consensus on exactly which programs and activities constitute global health assistance , estimates of u.s. global health spending by u.s agencies , think tanks , and other observers vary .

a number of advocacy groups , for example , consider water and sanitation activities as part of global health assistance .

similarly , the websites of some u.s. agencies and departments describe a broader view of global health aid than what is provided through congressional appropriations .

for example , usaid cites its work related to health system strengthening and environmental health as global health activities .

cdc also includes collaborative responses to global health emergencies , such as cholera outbreaks and pandemic influenza , with international organizations like the world health organization ( who ) and the united nations children's fund ( unicef ) among its global health work .

the section below describes bilateral health activities funded by congress .

this includes global health programs implemented by usaid and cdc as well as interagency presidential global health initiatives including the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , the president's malaria initiative ( pmi ) , the neglected tropical disease program ( ntd program ) , and the global health initiative .

while the presidential initiatives are described , activities conducted by each agency as part of these initiative are not detailed here , such as pepfar - related efforts by dod and nih .

likewise , funding for multilateral organizations , like the global fund , is not discussed in detail .

the bulk of u.s. global health assistance is aimed at mitigating the impact of infectious diseases , especially hiv / aids , through three presidential initiatives: pepfar , pmi , and the ntd program .

the global health initiative became the first u.s. global health effort that was not aimed at a particular disease or at a set of related diseases , such as the ntd program .

instead , ghi intends to coordinate activities supported by ongoing presidential global health initiatives and other bilateral health efforts through usaid and hhs .

each of these initiatives has served to garner attention and resources for the targeted diseases or programs .

on december 23 , 2011 , the president signed the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) .

in spite of the prolonged debate over potential cuts to global health programs , the act demonstrated continued congressional support for global health programs .

the act made $8.2 billion available to usaid and the state department for global health activities through the global health programs ( ghp ) account , roughly $336 million more than fy2011 funding levels ( figure 3 ) .

compared to the fy2011 levels , the $8.2 billion included level or increased funding for most global health programs .

in particular , the act included $2.6 billion for usaid global health programs ( +$127 million ) and $1.3 billion for the u.s. contribution to the global fund through the state department ( +$551 million ) .

in contrast , the act included $4.2 billion for state department hiv / aids programs ( - $343 million ) , a decrease from fy2011 levels .

the president's fy2013 budget request includes $8.5 billion for global health activities under the ghi , including $7.9 billion through the ghp account .

the request represents a 3.8% decrease in ghi funding from fy2012-enacted levels and marks a potential shift in global health funding trends , which has seen increases for more than a decade .

compared to fy2012 funding levels , the request for funding through the ghp account includes decreases for almost every global health program area .

notable decreases include $3.7 billion for state department hiv / aids programs , down 12.8% from fy2012 ; $578 million for usaid maternal and child health programs , down 4.6% from fy2012 ; $619 million for usaid malaria programs , down 4.8% from fy2012 ; $224 million for usaid tuberculosis programs , down 5.1% from fy2012 ; and $67 million for usaid neglected tropical diseases programs , down 24.7% from fy2012 .

the increases included in the request are $530 million for usaid family planning and reproductive health , up 1.2% from fy2012 ; and $1.65 billion for the global fund , up 27% from fy2012 .

the fy2013 budget request for cdc global health is $363 million , a slight increase from fy2012 .

when compared to fy2012 levels , the request includes steady funding or slight increases for most program areas .

the largest increases occurred in two funding categories: global immunization ( +9.4% ) and nih hiv / aids research ( +6.7% ) .

while the fy2013 budget request would represent a shift in global health funding trends , the administration argues that the decreases do not reflect changes in its commitment to global health , u.s. global health goals , or overall program implementation strategies .

instead , it contends that proposed reductions in global health funding reflect increased efficiencies brought about by better integration between programs , greater use of community health workers and nurses , increased country contributions to programs , cheaper shipping costs of medicines , and reduced per - person treatment costs .

scaling back funding for pepfar programs in some countries also represents an attempt to transfer costs to countries with growing capacity and domestic investment in the hiv / aids response , such as south africa , ethiopia , and kenya .

ogac has also stated that funding is being reduced in countries where significant resources from other donors are available or where hiv prevalence is particularly low , including , most prominently , ethiopia .

the administration argues that despite reduced funding , it will still be able to fulfill the ghi targets , including the president's recent pledge to support treatment for 6 million hiv - positive people worldwide by the end of 2013 .

early action and debate within both the house and the senate on fy2013 appropriations indicate that congress may not support proposed reductions in funding for many global health programs .

certain program areas , however , will likely be the subject of ongoing congressional debate , including family planning and reproductive health as well as the u.s. contribution to the global fund .

the united states is among the world's largest donors for global health , particularly for efforts related to hiv / aids .

not only does the united states spend more than any other country on addressing the global hiv / aids pandemic , it also accounts for roughly 30% of all donor pledges to the global fund .

the u.s. role in global health has been both applauded and criticized .

supporters have celebrated the attention the united states has brought to several global health issues , particularly through pepfar , pmi , and the ntd program .

at the same time , critics have opposed some of the ways in which these programs have been implemented .

for example , some experts have criticized the united states' past use of parallel health systems created for u.s programs in lieu of relying on existing national systems , arguing that they have led to unnecessary duplication and have done little to support country ownership of global health programs , the functioning of national health systems , or broader responses to global health issues .

regardless of opposing views of u.s. global health programs , there is consensus that the size of u.s. global health assistance affords the united states significant influence in how global health aid is carried out .

this section analyzes some issues the second session of the 112 th congress might face as it debates global health programs and spending levels .

global health has been a central issue in congressional debates over foreign assistance programs and funding levels .

some expect that global health reform will be an area of ongoing congressional concern , both as a way to potentially reduce spending and to improve the effectiveness of aid .

the global health initiative suggests a new direction for global health programming , but it remains to be seen whether congress will support the administration's requests for funds to achieve the goals laid out in ghi .

in determining funding levels for global health programs , congress may consider the extent to which the united states should invest in new global health areas , ways that the united states can encourage country ownership of global health programs , the appropriate balance of funding between bilateral and multilateral programs , and the role that the united states should play in global health , particularly in relation to other donors .

along with debating issues related to u.s. global health assistance , congress may also wish to consider its own role in determining how u.s. global health programs are implemented .

congress has exercised growing involvement in shaping global health programs through funding distribution guidelines , spending directives and limitations , and priority - area recommendations .

global health analysts have debated whether congress's elevated role has helped or hindered the efficacy of global health programs .

for example , some argue that congressional spending directives have limited the ability of country teams to tailor programs to in - country needs .

others argue that congressional mandates and recommendations serve to protect critical areas in need of support and can facilitate the implementation of a cohesive global health strategy across agencies .

possible passage of legislation by the 112 th congress related to ghi may require congress to reflect on how it can best support an effective and efficient response to global health needs .

