the export - import bank of the united states ( ex - im bank , exim bank , or the bank ) operates under a renewable charter , the export - import bank act of 1945 ( p.l .

79-173 ) , as amended .

as part of its legislative responsibilities concerning the ex - im bank , a central issue for congress is whether to reauthorize the bank's charter , and if so , for how long and under what terms .

congress's decisions on this issue could affect u.s. export promotion activities and u.s. industries whose exports are facilitated by the bank's operations .

ex - im bank reauthorization emerged as a topic of debate in the 112 th congress , as the authority of the bank would have expired unless extended by congress .

in 2006 , congress had extended the bank's authority through september 30 , 2011 ( p.l .

109-438 ) .

since then , congress had extended the bank's authority through appropriations vehicles , the latest of which had extended the bank's authority through may 31 , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) .

the 112 th congress considered several pieces of legislation related to ex - im bank's authority , and ultimately passed a bill to extend the ex - im bank's authority through fy2014 ( h.r .

2072 ) .

the scope of this report is limited to ex - im bank reauthorization issues .

for a general overview of the ex - im bank's programs , budgets , and overall issues see crs report r42472 , export - import bank: background and legislative issues , by shayerah ilias .

congressional examination of the ex - im bank for reauthorization generally has included examining the bank's effectiveness and efficiency of the bank in supporting exports broadly and in particular sectors , specific bank policies , and its competitiveness in comparison to foreign ecas .

many of the issues discussed below arise from congressional statutes and mandates incorporated into the ex - im bank's charter .

a range of potential options are available to the 112 th congress as it considers reauthorization of the ex - im bank .

some stakeholders may support or oppose the bank generally , while others may be broadly supportive of the bank but take issue with some of its specific policies and programs .

reauthorization of the ex - im bank historically has been a fairly routine process in congress .

however , it became a more controversial debate in the 112 th congress , with the often divergent interests of various members and stakeholders coming to the forefront — including business groups that support the ex - im bank , seek a longer - term increase in the bank's authority and a higher exposure cap , and contend that the bank's support is critical in offsetting official international export credit competition ; companies , including a u.s. airline company , that contend that the bank's activities place them at a commercial disadvantage by benefiting foreign competitors ; and other critics that consider the bank to be a form of corporate welfare and question the role of government in export promotion and financing .

the 112 th congress considered several pieces of legislation related to the ex - im bank's reauthorization , ultimately passing an amended version of h.r .

2072 ( miller ) , the export - import bank reauthorization act of 2012 .

as passed , h.r .

2072 extends the ex - im bank's authority through fy2014 .

the bill includes other provisions , including to: increase the bank's lending authority to $120 billion in fy2012 , $130 billion in fy2013 , and $140 billion in fy2014 — with the increase in lending authority for fy2013 and fy2014 contingent on the bank maintaining a "default rate" of less than 2% and on submitting various reports ; require the bank to monitor and report to congress on the "default rate" of its financing , and , in the event that the rate exceeds 2% , to submit a report to congress on a plan to reduce it to less than 2% ; require the bank to provide a notice and comment period for bank transactions exceeding $100 million ; require the secretary of the treasury to initiate and pursue negotiations with other major exporting countries , including members of the oecd and non - oecd members , to substantially reduce — with the ultimate goal of eliminating — subsidized export financing and other forms of export subsidies ; to negotiate with all countries to eliminate all aircraft export credit financing by state - sponsored entities covered by the oecd aircraft sector understanding ; and to provide annual reports to congress on the progress of such negotiations ; require the bank to develop and make publicly available methodological guidelines to be used by the bank in conducting economic impact analyses of its transactions ; require the bank to review its national content policy , taking into consideration factors such as whether the policy captures both the direct and indirect costs of u.s. production of goods and services , the competitiveness of ex - im bank's national content policy relative to foreign ecas , the impact on the u.s. manufacturing and services workforce , any recommendations of the ex - im bank advisory committee , and the impact of the policy on incentives to create or maintain operations in the united states and to increase the level of u.s. jobs ; direct the government accountability office ( gao ) to analyze the ex - im bank's methodology for calculating how many u.s. jobs are created or maintained through ex - im bank support ; prohibit ex - im bank from supporting transactions with persons unless they self - certify that they are not engaged in sanctionable activities with respect to iran , related to the iran sanctions act of 1996 ; the comprehensive iran sanctions , accountability , and divestment act of 2010 ; and part 560 of title 31 of the code of federal regulations ( commonly referred to as the "iran transactions regulations" ) ; require certification in the event that a person has engaged in sanctionable activity with respect to iran , such that ex - im bank financing would be prohibited unless the president has waived the imposition of sanctions on the person ( such as for national interests reasons ) , pursuant to the iran sanctions act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-172 ) , or has taken other specified actions ; allow up to 1.25% of the surplus of the bank during fy2012 , fy2013 , and fy2014 to be used to update the bank's information technology systems ; increase textile industry representation on the ex - im bank's advisory committee ; extend the sub - saharan africa advisory committee until september 30 , 2014 ; and increase other reporting requirements of the bank , including provisions related to the bank's exposure limit , risk management , and support for small business .

h.r .

2072 was introduced and referred to the house financial services committee on june 1 , 2011 .

the final version of h.r .

2072 passed by congress reflects amendments to the bill adopted by the house , following a bipartisan compromise reached by the house majority leader and the house minority whip on may 4 , 2012 .

for example , as originally drafted , h.r .

2072 would have extended the bank's authority for an additional year ( to fy2015 ) , would have incrementally increased the bank's exposure cap to a higher level ( to $160 billion in fy2014 and subsequent years ) , and did not include any requirements to conduct international negotiations to reduce and eliminate officially backed export credit financing .

on may 9 , the house passed an amended version of h.r .

2072 , considering the bill under suspension of the rules .

the house passed the bill by a vote of 330-93 .

on may 15 , 2012 , the senate passed h.r .

2072 , without further amendment by a vote of 78-20 .

prior to voting on h.r .

2072 , the senate voted down five amendments concerning ex - im bank activities in various ways: s.amdt .

2100 ( lee ) would have phased out the ex - im bank's authority and required the president to initiate negotiations with other major exporting countries to end subsidized export financing .

s.amdt .

2101 ( paul ) would have prohibited ex - im bank financing for projects in a country in which the government or central bank holds debt instruments of the united states .

s.amdt .

2102 ( corker ) would have included certification requirements for the bank , such that the bank could finance transactions only if foreign ecas were providing financing for similar transactions , or in cases in which private sector financing was unavailable or prohibitively expensive .

in addition , it would have required the bank to maintain a ratio of capital to the outstanding principal balance of loans and loan guarantees of not less than 10% .

s.amdt .

2103 ( vitter ) , among other things , would have prohibited the bank from making or guaranteeing a loan that is subordinate to any other loan ; restricted financing of certain fossil fuel projects in foreign countries , related to cases in which the ex - im bank identifies domestic fossil fuel projects that could benefit from ex - im bank financing ; and prohibited the extension of ex - im bank credit for projects that involved the manufacture of renewable energy projects in foreign countries .

s.amdt .

2104 ( toomey ) would have prohibited an increase in the ex - im bank's lending authority to more than $100 billion until the secretary of the treasury certified that the secretary had initiated international negotiations to eliminate export financing programs .

it also would have prohibited an increase in the lending authority to $120 billion until a multilateral agreement to eliminate export financing has been completed .

in the senate , the primary legislative vehicle for ex - im bank reauthorization was s. 1547 ( johnson ) , the export - import bank reauthorization act of 2011 , which was introduced on september 13 , 2011 .

it was reported by the senate banking , housing , and urban affairs committee and placed on the senate legislative calendar under general orders .

among other things , s. 1547 would have extended the ex - im bank's authority through fy2015 and would have increased the bank's lending authority incrementally to $110 billion in fy2012 , $120 billion in fy2013 , $130 billion in fy2014 , and $140 billion in fy2015 .

the final version of h.r .

2072 reflects certain provisions from the senate legislation , including enhanced transparency and accountability requirements for the bank , stronger restrictions against companies doing business with iran , and revised domestic content requirements .

prior to final consideration of h.r .

2072 , several other pieces of legislation were considered that also would have extended the ex - im bank's authority .

for example , s.amdt .

1836 ( cantwell ) was offered as an amendment to the jumpstart our business startups act ( h.r .

3606 , p.l .

112-106 ) .

like s. 1547 , the amendment would have extended the bank's authority through fy2015 and would have increased its exposure cap incrementally to $140 billion in fy2015 .

a cloture motion on the amendment did not pass , and it was ruled non - germane .

the amendment subsequently was introduced in the house as h.r .

4302 ( larsen ) .

legislation also was introduced in the congress to terminate the ex - im bank ( h.r .

4268 , amash ) .

