at the heart of the intelligence effort lies a paradox .

intelligence is valuable only if it can be shared with consumers who need it , but , to the extent that it is more widely shared , risks of compromise are enhanced .

the necessary goal is to find the best balance between adequate sharing and effective information security .

the current director of national intelligence ( dni ) , james r. clapper , has referred to the need to find the "sweet spot" between sharing and protecting information .

on a daily basis , professional intelligence officers attempt to find the "sweet spot. .

compromising secrecy can result in the loss of a source but restricting dissemination of information too narrowly may mean that it does not reach those who need it .

the basic approach taken by the u.s. government has been focused on establishing "need - to - know. .

sensitive information is made available only to those persons with appropriate clearances and a "need - to - know" that information for the performance of their duties .

the complex systems for handling classified information , especially intelligence information , require careful background investigations of persons with access to classified information , approval by their agencies , and determinations that specific individuals or offices need to use specific classified information .

the contemporary u.s. intelligence community with its sixteen agencies is very large .

the defense intelligence agency ( dia ) alone is said to have over 16,000 employees and the national security agency ( nsa ) , the central intelligence agency ( cia ) , the national reconnaissance office ( nro ) , and the national geospatial - intelligence agency ( nga ) also employ thousands of individuals and contractors .

thousands more work for the intelligence organizations of the four military services .

in many agencies an organizational culture has evolved over time that encourages a deep commitment to the agency's mission and emphasizes support to a limited number of clients .

the cia and the state department's bureau of intelligence and research ( inr ) focus on cabinet officials and the national security council ( nsc ) staff .

agencies in the department of defense ( dod ) naturally focus on supporting the work of the pentagon and the operating forces , especially those engaged in combat .

in addition to the challenges involved in keeping information secure , organizational cultures and close ties to specific consumers have , however , the potential to discourage sharing information with other agencies .

some observers of bureaucratic practice have perceived a tendency for agencies to restrict dissemination of information that might provide leverage in the decisionmaking process .

in the aftermath of the 9 / 11 attacks in 2001 , a consensus emerged that information sharing , especially between intelligence offices and law enforcement officials had been deficient and had contributed to the failure to detect the plot in advance .

the u.s. intelligence community , now concentrating on the counterterrorism mission , moved to ensure that information with any potential relevance was shared with counterterrorism analysts throughout the federal government .

 ( to a much greater extent than in other areas of intelligence concern , couterterrorism requires that bits of information from widely disparate sources be pieced together in a coherent pattern. ) .

the consensus in supporting intelligence information sharing persists .

at the confirmation hearing for general clapper as dni in july 2010 , senator dianne feinstein , the chairman of the senate select committee on intelligence ( ssci ) , advised the nominee that "every day of every week , month by month , the dni must assure coordination between intelligence agencies to eliminate duplication and improve information sharing. .

in april 2011 , president barack obama explained his nomination of general david petraeus to serve as director of the central intelligence agency: "he understands that staying a step ahead of nimble adversaries requires sharing and coordinating intelligence. .

better information sharing throughout the federal government and especially among the agencies of the intelligence community has become a priority for both the executive branch and congress .

in the aftermath of 9 / 11 , major legislation included significant provisions to encourage and , in some cases , mandate greater sharing of information and these provisions have been implemented by both the bush and obama administrations .

investigations of the september 11 , 2001 attacks by the two congressional intelligence committees and the 9 / 11 commission ( the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ) concluded that a central obstacle to acquiring advance information on the plot was the inability to bring together all information that had been acquired about the plotters — there were many clues but they were retained in the files of different agencies .

to some extent , information was not shared because of bureaucratic inertia , but in others efforts by determined analysts were quashed by officials determined to ensure that the "wall" between law enforcement and intelligence entities was not breached .

historically , the federal government has taken two complementary approaches to this paradox — intelligence information is provided only to those who have appropriate clearances , i.e .

 , they have had background investigations and been judged to be loyal , trustworthy , and capable of safeguarding classified information .

having a clearance is not , of course , sufficient to gain access to sensitive information ; there must also be a "need - to - know," i.e .

the individual must have a work - related requirement for access to the information not just generalized curiosity .

in theory everyone obtaining access to a given piece of classified information has ( a ) a clearance indicating that he or she is loyal and trustworthy and ( b ) a need for the information to perform his or her professional responsibilities .

in actuality , of course , as with any human system , there can be mistakes .

the number of genuine "secret agents," foreign agents who have been successfully deceptive during their background investigations are very few but not non - existent .

much more numerous are individuals who can be bribed or who become disenchanted with their supervisors , or with a current u.s. policy , and proceed to illegally provide classified information to foreign governments or organizations .

also very damaging are individuals ( or whole organizations ) that become careless in handling classified information .

even as information sharing was being made a statutory imperative , it was widely understood that any effort to share more information among intelligence agencies increased the risks of information being stolen or compromised .

various types of technical approaches were identified to maintain the security of shared information .

considerable attention to these approaches was reflected in the 2003 report of the markle foundation's task force on national security in the information age which has had an important influence on approaches to information sharing issues .

the task force maintained that there are no smart cards or tokens that cannot be cracked , biometrics are not 100 percent reliable , and high - quality passwords are difficult to remember , manage , and enforce .

with all of these technologies there are also people and process issues ( such as enrollment procedures and audit trails ) that can undermine their integrity .

therefore , a multifactored system is a preferable approach .

multifactor authentication typically combines a password with a token or smart cart and can include other forms of authentication including biometrics , challenge codes and questions , and profile access matching .

authentication is strongest when a part of the information resides with the user , a part with the token or smart card , and a part in the network .

credit card companies , good users of multifactor authentication , rely on tokens ( credit cards ) , passwords ( pin ) , challenge questions ( "what's your mother's maiden name ? .

 ) , and profile matching ( "is this a typical charge for this individual ? " ) .

counterterrorism requires wide varieties of disparate types of information , e.g .

visa applications , flight manifests , ties to hostile organizations , conversations with known terrorists , efforts to obtain restricted materials , etc .

in counterterrorism and other intelligence missions the intelligence analyst may be involved in piecing together stray bits of information .

this greatly complicates establishing need - to - know standards .

the wmd commission argued: if rigidly applied , the 'need - to - know rule is incompatible with a networked environment .

in a networked environment , providers of information cannot know for sure when a user 'needs' a particular piece of information .

instead .

 .

 .

users of this service must be given access to all information broadly available on the network within the clearance levels of the individual user , and consistent with applicable privacy and civil liberties guidelines .

as the bush administration's 2007 national strategy for information sharing stated: information acquired for one purpose , or under one set of authorities , might provide unique insights when combined , in accordance with applicable law , with seemingly unrelated information from other sources , and therefore we must foster a culture of awareness in which people at all levels of government remain cognizant of the functions and needs of others and use knowledge and information from all sources to support counterterrorism efforts .

a particular complication of using information sharing to support counterterrorism efforts is the difficulty in maintaining separate procedures for handling information regarding u.s. persons .

many types of information including phone or email traffic may involve u.s. persons even if the particular target is a foreign national .

congress and the executive branch continue to address these and related issues in regard to provisions of the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) and related legislation .

information sharing has proven to be essential for the counterterrorism mission and it is likely to be vital in other areas such as cybersecurity and in counterintelligence efforts aimed at preventing foreign exploitation of sensitive u.s. defense technologies .

other missions , such as gathering intelligence on the military plans and capabilities of foreign countries , may require less information from law enforcement agencies .

a major result of the 9 / 11 investigations was the usa patriot act ( p.l .

107-56 ) and other legislation that removed most of the "wall. .

subsequently , the justice department modified the federal rules of criminal procedure to permit release of information relating to counterintelligence or foreign intelligence from grand jury investigations to other government agencies with strict protections against misuse .

it was recognized , however , that removing restrictions on information sharing was by itself inadequate ; there was a need to establish an organizational structure to ensure that information sharing was not just legally possibly but institutionalized in routine agency practice .

the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) established the position of the dni with statutory authorities to foster information sharing .

specifically , the legislation provided that the dni: shall have principal authority to ensure maximum availability of and access to intelligence information within the intelligence community consistent with national security requirements .

further , the dni shall: ( a ) establish uniform security standards and procedures ; ( b ) establish common information technology standards ; protocols , and interfaces ; ( c ) ensure development of information technology systems that include multi - level security and intelligence integration capabilities ; ( d ) establish policies and procedures to resolve conflicts between the need to share intelligence information and the need to protect intelligence sources and methods ; ( e ) develop an enterprise architecture for the intelligence community and ensure that elements of the intelligence community comply with such architecture ; and ( f ) have procurement approval authority over all enterprise architecture - related information technology items funded in the national intelligence program .

the national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) was also established within the office of the dni with specific statutory authorities providing access to all information relevant to terrorist plots .

nctc analysts make use of data from all intelligence and law enforcement agencies as part of its counterterrorism responsibilities .

in addition , the bush administration published executive order 13388 on october 25 , 2005 that mandated sharing of terrorist information and established an information sharing council chaired by the information sharing environment program manager and composed of representatives from major agencies with counterterrorism responsibilities .

in october 2007 a national strategy for information sharing described and provided guidance on information sharing at the federal , state , local and tribal levels and with the private sector and foreign partners .

intelligence sharing has contributed to a number of significant successes .

often mentioned is the arrest of najibullah zazi before he could successfully detonate explosives in the new york city subway in 2009 along with a number of other plots planned to occur in the u.s. and against u.s. interests abroad .

most recently , the successful attack on osama bin laden in may 2011 has been officially credited to cooperation among the cia , nsa , and nga in particular .

however , despite the best efforts — and significant successes — of the intelligence community in recent years in identifying terrorist plots and providing solid intelligence to policymaking agencies and to military forces fighting in two wars , several important cases suggest that significant impediments to information sharing have persisted .

on the other hand , sharing of information led to unauthorized disclosures on the internet and in the media that have reportedly jeopardized intelligence sources and undermined u.s. diplomacy .

there are a number of technical approaches to reducing opportunities for unauthorized sharing of information .

computers can be configured to prevent downloading of large document files .

computers can also be programmed to make any downloads identifiable by date , time and individual .

according to media accounts some of these features have been available on government systems but were not activated .

congress may choose to determine if these reports are accurate and if changes currently being planned by the intelligence community have been instituted .

in calling for legislation to address the dangers of unauthorized information sharing , hpsci chairman rogers emphasized the need for "smart access," which is "an identity - based information security management system that improves our ability to detect and deter the few bad actors , and not unnecessarily punish responsible actors by denying them access to the sensitive information they need to get their work done. .

congress may wish to review the information sharing environment to ensure that there are proper boundaries to intelligence information sharing and that appropriate metrics are established to assist in determining what information must be limited to a very narrow set of consumers .

as noted above , however , it may be very difficult , given the requirements of counterterrorism , to know in advance what information a counterterrorism analyst will "need to know. .

although these analysts will need to be able to draw on a multiplicity of databases , observers suggest that there are ways to categorize information according to especially sensitive programs and all agree that not every analyst needs to be able to see every piece of information .

an oft - cited concern is the tendency to over - classify documents which adds to administrative burdens and undermines respect for the classification process .

it is possible to limit dissemination of especially sensitive information , whether it is sensitive because of the nature of its contents or because it was acquired from an especially sensitive source .

it is also possible to prevent the downloading and reproduction of large masses of information .

it is possible to trace the identities of those who had access to particular pieces of information .

ultimately , however , security depends on the loyalty of cleared officials at all levels .

a clerk with the right access can unlawfully transfer highly sensitive information as readily or more readily than a senior official .

some highly sensitive information — the identity of an agent or the fact that a code has been broken — can be found in a short document or even memorized for verbal transmission .

those responsible for information security must of course be aware of the extent of the interest in acquiring classified u.s. information .

foreign countries ( including friendly ones or even allies ) may not turn down opportunities to gain insight into u.s. policymaking or military capabilities .

various anti - american organizations worldwide eagerly seek information that can damage or embarrass the u.s. government .

major media outlets , not all of which are in foreign countries , consider themselves free to publish classified information regardless of possible damage to u.s. persons , interests , or foreign supporters .

there is , in short , an active market for classified information held by u.s. intelligence agencies with thousands of officials having some access .

personnel security is a crucial part of the problem .

despite procedural and technical approaches taken to limit misuse of classified information , disloyal or careless officials can be the source of leaks .

for the u.s. intelligence community , the policy decision of whether the emphasis should be on "need - to - know" or the "need - to - share" can be viewed as a false choice .

information must always be shared with those with a genuine need to know even if this potential universe is a large one .

at the same time , congress may wish to ensure that clearance procedures are thorough as well as expeditious .

more rigorous analyses of instances in which cleared personnel have transferred or sold classified information may lead to improved procedures for maintaining security .

there may well be more technological approaches that will make it possible to establish greater accountability for the use of classified intelligence information intelligence efforts are never risk - free .

acquiring information is often hazardous ; analysis efforts can be wrong and result in mission failure and the loss of life .

good analysis can be delayed or not provided to the right consumer in a timely manner resulting in expensive wasted efforts .

congressional oversight of intelligence activities can improve executive branch performance and provide encouragement to intelligence officials to prevent compromises of sensitive materials .

ultimately , however , a degree of risk seems inevitable .

government officials must also accept the enduring reality of a media culture that is prepared to publish official secrets and considers such disclosure a patriotic contribution to democratic discourse .

that individual civil servants or servicemembers can be very harshly punished for their role in releasing information while editors and reporters are honored and celebrated seems to some as paradoxical .

ultimately the security of information , as is the case with the security of the nation , depends on those who willingly uphold the oaths that they have taken .

