concerns about developed - country sovereign default risks have grown in the aftermath of the 2007-2008 financial crisis and have intensified in the past year as some eurozone countries have been facing several fiscal pressures .

a sovereign default occurs when a sovereign government is unable to meet its financial obligations .

although u.s. treasury securities , which represent nearly all federal debt , have long been considered risk - free assets , the magnitude of federal deficits and the projected imbalance between federal revenues and outlays has raised concerns among some .

the size of federal deficits and the projected imbalance between federal revenues and outlays have raised concerns among some , including the rating agency standard & poor's ( s&p ) , which downgraded the u.s. sovereign credit rating from aaa to aa+ on august 5 , 2011 .

s&p also cited as a factor "political brinksmanship" in debt ceiling negotiations , which raised the spectre that the united states might default on some of its obligations if the debt limit were not raised before treasury's projected deadline of august 2 .

prices for treasuries suggest that financial markets continue to consider federal debt instruments a safe haven despite the s&p downgrade .

continued concerns about rising federal debt and the ability of policymakers to reach solutions to fiscal challenges could raise borrowing costs and negatively affect capital markets .

many believe that risks were underestimated before the 2007-2008 financial crisis .

some macroeconomists spoke of a "great moderation," reflected in reduced volatility of real economic output , which was seen to have resulted from improved monetary policy , more flexible labor markets , resurgent economic growth , and greater sophistication of financial markets .

in hindsight , many financial risks appear to have been underappreciated .

more recent analysis and commentary has put greater emphasis on managing and understanding risks .

for example , one prominent macroeconomist noted that "there is no such thing as an absolutely safe sovereign. .

a former chief economist of the international monetary fund ( imf ) and a coauthor note that from a broad historical perspective , sovereign defaults have not been uncommon .

financial analysts use many indicators to evaluate various risks associated with holding government securities .

some risks , such as interest rate risks , are generated by wider market trends .

sovereign default risks may depend on macroeconomic conditions , spending and revenue policies , as well as political and international factors .

some analysts use market prices for derivative financial instruments known as credit default swaps ( cdss ) to track sovereign default risks .

although cds prices may indicate market assessments of default probabilities , the market for u.s. cdss is small and thinly traded , which reduces its reliability as a measure of the federal government's fiscal condition .

a credit default swap is a financial contract in which one party promises to pay another party if a third party defaults .

the third party , in this case , is known as the "reference entity. .

in the case of a cds on u.s. sovereign debt , the u.s. government is the reference entity .

a typical cds contract on sovereign debt specifies that a buyer , in exchange for an annual fee set by the market and paid quarterly , obtains from a seller specified protection against default and broadly similar events affecting securities issued by a country ( i.e. , the reference entity ) .

for "cash - settlement" cds contracts , the buyer would receive a cash payment equal to the difference between the fair market value of the specified asset and its par value if a "credit event" occurs .

other cds contracts , known as physical settlement cdss , require the buyer to surrender the asset in return for a payment equal to its par value if a credit event occurs .

par , or face value , is the value of a bond at maturity .

for widely held cdss , recovery values are typically determined through an auction - based procedure specified by the international swaps and derivatives association ( isda ) .

cdss are part of a larger class of financial instruments known as credit derivatives , which allow investors to hedge against or speculate that risks that a company or country will fail to meet its financial obligations may rise or fall .

the market for credit derivatives has grown enormously since the mid - 1990s .

in legal terms , a cds is a bilateral derivative contract traded in the over - the - counter ( otc ) derivatives market .

it transfers from one party to another the risk that a specified reference entity will experience a "credit event. .

the cds protection buyer typically pays a periodic fee to a protection seller in return for compensation if a reference entity experiences a credit event .

the reference entity , such as the u.s. government in this case , is almost never a party to the credit default swap contract .

in a typical sovereign cds , such as for the united states , credit events include failure to pay , repudiation or moratorium on debt , and certain debt restructurings .

failure to pay means a failure by the reference entity ( in this case , the u.s. government ) to make any payments due on its obligations .

for u.s. sovereign cds , there is an automatic grace period of three business days after the date of a missed payment before a "credit event" is triggered for the purpose of cds .

this is true for the purpose of cds payments even if the underlying debt instrument does not specify any grace period , or specifies a shorter grace period .

also , under standard cds contracts for sovereign u.s. debt , a credit rating agency's downgrade of the u.s. credit rating does not constitute a "credit event. .

the maturity of the credit default swap need not match the maturity of an asset issued by the reference entity — that is , a 10-year bond may be protected by a cds that provides protection for only one year .

five - year cdss have been the most widely traded , although cds with shorter and longer maturities — up to 10 years — are also traded .

some observers find it helpful to think of a cds as a tradable form of insurance , whereas others find it more analogous to a put option on a debt instrument .

a put option gives its holder the right to sell a specified asset at a given price by a set date .

someone who thinks an asset will fall in price would value such an option .

banks can use cdss to offload risks tied to certain assets while retaining legal ownership of the assets .

cds markets enable investors with negative information unrecognized by other traders to exploit that information , which could help discourage the emergence of pricing bubbles in asset markets , or could help limit their duration .

sovereign cdss can provide a convenient way for major financial institutions to take positions or hedge risks associated with a region or a national economy .

some , however , have contended that cds markets could also destabilize asset markets or financial institutions in some situations .

when a buyer purchases cds protection on u.s. treasury securities ( often termed "treasuries" ) , the seller of the cds , in exchange for a stream of payments , essentially agrees to pay the cds buyer in case of a credit event that affects u.s. treasury securities .

for many years , u.s. treasury securities have been considered assets basically free of default risks .

the emergence of a market in credit default swaps for u.s. government securities , and the growth in volume for this market in 2011 , suggests that some investors believed a small but non - zero default risk exists .

investor concerns became more acute during the latter stages of the 2011 debt limit discussions .

as noted above , standard & poor's ( s&p ) downgraded the united states' sovereign credit rating from aaa to aa+ on august 5 , 2011 .

prices for treasuries suggest that financial markets continue to consider federal debt instruments a safe haven despite the s&p downgrade .

some financial market and federal budget analysts view price trends of u.s. cdss as an indicator of the risks of a sovereign default by the federal government .

cdss may help insure against default or other events that may damage the interests of those holding claims on the u.s. government .

although prices of u.s. sovereign cdss remain low compared with cds prices of fiscally distressed eurozone countries , five - year u.s. cds prices have risen since early 2009 , as shown in figure 1 .

for instance , the economist noted that u.s. cds prices rose from about 20 basis points in 2010 , to more than 40 basis points in mid - 2011 , as debt ceiling discussions in congress remained unresolved .

large changes in u.s. cds rates in 2008 appeared to track events that could have affected the long - term fiscal situation of the u.s. government , such as the failure of indymac bank , the lehman brothers bankruptcy , and aig's attempts to negotiate a bridge loan from the federal reserve .

prices for five - year cdss on federal debt are currently about 55 basis points ( bps ) , in the range of germany and major corporations such as target and walmart .

a cds contract with a notional value of $1 million and a price of 55 bps would require payment of $5,500 over the course of a year .

notional value represents the par amount of credit protection bought or sold .

the net notional value for u.s. cdss , which excludes amounts from offsetting positions , totaled $4.6 billion for the week ending july 8 , 2011 .

at a price of 55 bps , insuring $4.6 billion of u.s. treasuries would then cost a total of $25.3 million , a small amount by the standard of global financial markets .

the depository trust and clearinghouse corporation ( dtcc ) reported only 1,004 u.s. cdss for the week ending july 8 , 2011 .

the number of cdss traded on u.s. sovereign debt — though traded on a small and illiquid market — has been reported in the financial press to have grown noticeably , particularly since around mid - may , as the u.s. debt ceiling debate has intensified .

figure 1 shows trends in u.s. cds prices and number of contracts since late 2008 .

what would constitute a "credit event" for a u.s. cds holder is important , as it determines whether , and when , a buyer of cds protection is paid by the cds seller .

committees organized by the international swaps and derivatives association ( isda ) determine when a credit event has occurred .

although failure to make a timely interest payment generally would constitute a credit event , several other situations could also trigger a credit event .

typical credit events include failure to pay , bankruptcy , restructuring , repudiation , or a moratorium .

if a credit event occurs and if fair market value of the asset is below the par value , the resulting gap as a percentage of par value is known as the recovery rate .

a credit event might occur that would leave an asset's value at or above par , implying a recovery rate of 100% , in which case the cds buyer would receive nothing .

for example , many treasury securities trade well above par because interest rates have fallen since they were issued .

were a credit event to occur that left such securities above par , cds holders would receive zero payment .

for any sovereign cds that used the standard isda documentation , the isda committee , at the request of a cds buyer or seller , would determine whether a particular event would constitute a triggering credit event according to terms of the relevant isda documentation .

the isda standard contract provides detailed definitions of what would constitute a credit event , which the isda committee would then apply and interpret in a given case .

those entering into such contracts generally agree to be bound by the decisions reached by this isda committee .

in a typical sovereign cds , such as for the united states , credit events include failure to pay , repudiation or moratorium on debt , and certain debt restructurings .

failure to pay means a failure by the reference entity ( in this case , the u.s. government ) , to make any payments due on its obligations .

for u.s. sovereign cds , there is an automatic grace period of three business days after the date of a missed payment before a "credit event" is triggered for the purposes of cds .

this is true for the purposes of cds payments even if the underlying debt instrument does not specify any grace period , or specifies a shorter grace period .

also , under standard cds contracts for sovereign us debt , a credit rating agency's downgrade of the u.s. credit rating does not constitute a "credit event" .

in a june 28 , 2011 , letter to the financial times , robert pickel , the executive vice chairman of isda , addressed concerns regarding what would constitute a credit event for the purposes of greek sovereign cdss .

he noted that the committee would review any potential credit event , analyze isda's cds definitions of a credit event , and then vote on whether the potential event was covered under the definitions .

he noted that , in the case of greece , "it is well understood in the cds market that certain types of restructuring will not trigger a credit event. .

jean - claude juncker , head of a eurozone council of finance ministers , was quoted as saying in may 2011 that a "kind of reprofiling" of greek debt could be under consideration .

for some , this appeared to reflect an attempt to avoid outcomes that would trigger cds payments .

on july 21 , 2011 , the european council announced a framework , which emphasized voluntary measures , to support greece .

the framework included a call for further austerity measures by the greek government , a stretchout of greek government bond obligations , eu support for private sector bonds , and in conjunction with the international monetary fund ( imf ) , support totaling 109 billion euros .

implementation of those measures would require further action by member states and eu institutions .

one prominent financial journalist termed the arrangement a "bailout" and "a kind of default. .

as of this writing , no query has been filed with isda to determine whether this support package constitutes a credit event .

markets for contingent contracts , such as cdss , can provide valuable information about the probability of the occurrence of defined events as perceived by financial markets .

economists have long noted that market prices may convey valuable signals about economic fundamentals .

more recently , economists have engineered markets in order to induce individuals to reveal private information .

in some cases , however , predictions drawn from such markets have not always performed as well as predictions generated in more traditional ways .

under strong technical assumptions , default probabilities can be extracted from cds prices conditional on an assumed recovery rate .

the recovery rate , were a credit event to occur , would be one minus the percentage loss deemed to have occurred .

for example , if an analyst assumed a recovery rate would be 95% , then a default probability could be inferred from a cds price .

the reliability of inferred default probabilities , however , may be low for several reasons .

in small and thinly traded markets , a few large trades might have strong effects on prices .

large spreads between bid and ask prices ( i.e. , offered buying and selling prices ) can affect reliability of inferences about default probabilities .

prices for cdss on u.s. treasuries , therefore , may be an imperfect and potentially misleading indicator of actual sovereign default risks .

in thin markets , investors with strong information but weak financial backing may have difficulty leveraging insights into trading profits .

such traders seeking financing may experience conflicts between revealing some information to signal credibility while keeping enough information private to maintain a trading advantage .

this may discourage some traders from participating in these markets , which in turn hinders the flow of information to markets .

in addition , information or the ability to understand the consequences of key information may not flow smoothly in markets , but may respond sharply at a few key turning points .

for example , cdss on the investment banks bear stearns and lehman brothers , as well as insurer aig , moved dramatically before their bankruptcies .

even if cds prices are an imperfect signal of credit events , they may nonetheless react systematically to economic or political events .

cdss , however , probably provide a more useful indicator of sovereign default risks for countries whose sovereign cdss are more actively traded .

thus , pricing and volume trends for sovereign cdss on countries facing more immediate fiscal challenges , such as greece and portugal , where default risks appear more salient due to higher levels of fiscal stress , may be more informative indicators .

volumes of outstanding contracts and trading activity for u.s. cdss are limited in comparison with cds markets for several eurozone countries .

cds markets have been more active for sovereigns such as greece , ireland , and portugal , which have been facing investor concerns over potential defaults or restructurings ; and for the larger countries spain and italy , reflecting concerns that eurozone fiscal pressures could spread .

cds markets on emerging market ( em ) government debt has typically been more active than cds markets for governments of developed countries .

the cds market on u.s. cdss , as noted above , is illiquid and thinly traded .

on june 15 , 2011 , dow jones reported that the one - year cds spread for the united states was at 43 basis points — higher than the 41 basis points spread for brazil , and that the cost of insuring one - year u.s. debt against default had been rising since mid - may on worries related to the debt ceiling .

price trends for selected governments and their banking sectors are presented in appendix figure a - 1 .

president obama signed the budget control act of 2011 ( s. 365 ; p.l .

112-25 ) on august 2 , 2011 , which included provisions to raise the debt limit and reduce deficits .

the narrowing of the spread between one - year and five - year cdss on treasury debt in the first half of 2011 , as shown in figure 1 , suggests that market concerns were focused on debt limit constraints facing the u.s. treasury .

the consequences of not raising the debt limit before that point , according to some financial analysts , could be severe .

debt limit concerns appear to have decreased demand for longer - maturity treasury securities and increased demand for shorter - term securities , as some financial institutions take steps to ensure liquidity .

while u.s. cds prices rose to a record high of about 82 bps before passage of the act .

after the budget control act was enacted , u.s. cdss fell to previous levels , trading at about 55 bps in mid august 2011 .

u.s. cdss have been trading in the same price range as germany's , but far below cds prices for greece , portugal , and ireland .

for example , in mid august 2011 , greek cdss traded around 1700 bps , portuguese cdss around 800 bps , and irish cdss around 700 bps .

prices for treasuries suggest that financial markets continue to consider federal debt instruments a safe haven despite the s&p downgrade .

treasury price trends shortly after enactment of the budget control act suggested an unwinding of liquidity positions taken beforehand , leading to a slight increase in yields on shorter maturity treasuries , while longer maturity treasury yields fell , perhaps reflecting renewed concerns about economic growth and events in the eurozone .

while passage of the budget control act eased concerns about the u.s. treasury's ability to meet federal financial obligations for the time being , market participants remain concerned about longer - term fiscal challenges facing the u.s. government , even if the relevant horizon for those issues extends well beyond the window of a five - year cds contract .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , the government accountability office ( gao ) , the imf , and others consider the federal government's current fiscal path unsustainable .

moreover , the tenor of the debt limit discussions raised additional concerns among credit rating agencies , among others .

protection of the federal government's full faith and credit in the long term , according to most public finance experts , requires measures to bring the trajectories of spending and revenues into line with each other .

