the taxpayer relief act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-34 ) created a $500-per - child nonrefundable tax credit to help ease the financial burden that families incur when they have children .

since 2001 , legislative changes , particularly those made by the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 ( egtrra ; p.l .

107-16 ) and the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) , have altered the structure of this tax benefit .

specifically , the amount of the credit per child has increased and the credit has been made partially refundable , expanding the availability of the credit to some low - income families .

the american taxpayer relief act ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) made the egtrra changes to the child tax credit permanent .

the protecting americans from tax hikes ( path ) act ( division q of p.l .

114-113 ) made the arra change to the child tax credit permanent .

the goal of this report is to analyze the economic impact of the child tax credit .

this report first provides a brief overview of the current structure of the credit , followed by an economic and distributional analysis of the credit .

the economic analysis focuses on the equity ( i.e. , "fairness ) of this tax provision , based on different definitions of equity , and examines the limited impact of the credit on taxpayer behavior .

this report does not provide an in - depth examination of the history of the credit .

families with children may be eligible to claim a tax credit for each eligible child , subtracting the amount of the credit from their tax bill in order to reduce the taxes they owe .

the child tax credit has three key features .

amount: the credit equals a maximum of $1,000 per child .

refundability: families with little or no income tax liability may be able to claim the credit as a refund .

the amount of the refund is equal to 15% of a taxpayer's earnings above $3,000 , up to the maximum amount of credit for the family .

this is referred to as the "earned income" refundability formula .

phase - out: the credit is phased out for higher - income taxpayers .

specifically , the credit is reduced by $50 for every $1,000 a family's modified adjusted gross income ( agi ) exceeds specific income thresholds .

the monetary parameters of the credit ( credit amount , refundability threshold , and phase - out threshold ) are not indexed for inflation .

the child tax credit can also offset a taxpayer's alternative minimum tax ( amt ) liability .

the current structure of the child tax credit benefits taxpayers over a wide range of income , as illustrated by table 1 .

roughly half ( 52.4% ) of the child tax credit benefits go to taxpayers with cash incomes under $40,000 , whereas the other half go to those making more than $40,000 .

roughly the same proportion of the child tax credit goes to taxpayers with agi between $10,000 and $20,000 ( $18.0% ) as goes to those with agi between $50,000 and $75,000 ( 16.9% ) , underscoring the fact that this tax credit provides significant benefits to both low - income and middle - income families .

most taxpayers with incomes above $200,000 will be ineligible for the credit due to the phase - out thresholds .

egtrra and arra , which first made the credit partially refundable and then expanded refundability respectively , expanded the credit's availability to lower - income americans , especially those with incomes between $10,000 and $20,000 .

prior to this expansion , the credit was largely available only to middle - and upper - middle - income taxpayers .

as previously noted , the egtrra provisions were made permanent by atra , while the arra changes were made permanent by the path act .

although the current credit is generally available to low - income taxpayers , it provides little benefit to extremely poor taxpayers .

taxpayers with incomes under $10,000 receive 3.6% of the child tax credit , even though they make up 16.8% of tax units .

this suggests that this provision may not benefit the very poor in proportion to their population .

taxpayers with very low income ( i.e. , less than $10,000 ) do not benefit from the child tax credit ( or receive a very small credit , less than $1,000 per child ) for two reasons .

first , taxpayers with very low income do not have any income tax liability and so cannot claim the nonrefundable portion of the child tax credit .

even if the taxpayer had one qualifying child — and so would be able to reduce their tax liability by $1,000 — if they do not owe any federal income taxes , they cannot reduce their taxes by the credit amount .

this is one rationale for making tax credits refundable ( i.e. , available to taxpayers with little or no tax liability ) .

the child tax credit is refundable .

however , the child tax credit is only refundable if taxpayers have earnings above $3,000 , and the refund is calculated as 15 cents for every dollar of earnings above this $3,000 threshold .

hence , the second reason the very poor do not claim the credit , or claim less than the full value of the credit , is that their low income prevents them from fully benefiting from the refundable portion of the credit .

for example , a taxpayer with two children and earnings of $10,000 would , based on the refundability formula , be eligible for $1,050 in child tax credits , as opposed to the maximum amount of $2,000 .

a taxpayer with two children needs $16,333 in earnings to be able to claim the full $2,000 of child tax credit .

generally , economists evaluate tax policy — like the child tax credit — through three different lenses: the equity ( or fairness ) of the provision ( which necessitates defining fairness ) , how the tax provision affects taxpayers' behavior ( again , the intended behavior must be specified ) , and the complexity of administering the tax provision .

these three lenses are often referred to as equity , efficiency , and administration , respectively .

a provision may be seen differently through these lenses .

for example , a tax provision may simplify the tax code ( improve administration ) , but result in an undesirable behavior ( reduce efficiency ) .

hence economists tend to evaluate a tax provision using these three approaches to provide the most complete economic analysis of the provision .

as with other tax provisions , this report will analyze the child tax credit through the lenses of equity , efficiency , and administration .

specifically: equity: economic theory suggests that there are two ways to analyze the fairness of a provision , vertical equity and horizontal equity .

vertical equity states that groups with more resources should pay more taxes , whereas horizontal equity states that families with the same circumstances should pay the same taxes .

while the child tax credit is generally evaluated as vertically equitable , because it reinforces the progressivity of the current tax code , economists have differing views on whether it is horizontally equitable .

efficiency: when examining the efficiency of a tax provision , economists examine how a tax provision affects taxpayer behavior , in terms of encouraging a taxpayer to do more or less of a certain activity .

theoretically , the child tax credit may have effects on taxpayer behavior , in terms of encouraging taxpayers to work and to have children , but there is currently very little evidence to support or refute these theories .

administration: tax policies — like the child tax credit — can be analyzed with respect to their effect on the complexity of the tax code .

the administration of a tax provision can affect whether it ultimately achieves its economic or policy goals .

there are a variety of tax benefits available to families with children , and the addition of the child tax credit , while beneficial to many families , has made the tax code potentially more complicated especially for lower - income taxpayers .

the following section examines in detail the child tax credit in terms of its impact on equity , taxpayer behavior , and tax administration .

policymakers may consider modifying the current parameters of the child tax credit .

the impact of modifications will depend on a taxpayer's income .

modifications that benefit middle - and upper - middle - income taxpayers include increasing the amount of the credit per child and increasing the phase - out thresholds .

modifications that benefit lower - income taxpayers include reducing the refundability threshold or increasing the current refundability rate .

these changes will likely have significant budgetary cost that policymakers may consider alongside policy goals they may achieve by increasing this tax benefit .

tax benefits compose a substantial proportion of the federal benefits that go to families with children .

according to one study , of the five largest spending and tax programs on children , three are tax provisions — the child tax credit ( number two ) , the eitc ( number three ) , and the exemption for dependents ( number four ) .

only medicaid spending on children is higher .

the refundable portions of the eitc and child tax credit are structured to direct assistance to low - income families , and could reflect an increased interest by congress in providing financial assistance to low - income workers through the tax code as opposed to transfer payments .

in fact , the refundable portion of the eitc and child tax credit ranked fourth and sixth respectively in outlays among programs targeted toward low - income populations .

some experts believe that the different eligibility rules for different child - related tax benefits make it increasingly difficult for taxpayers to claim these benefits .

this complexity results in direct financial costs for taxpayers , who may choose to use paid preparers instead of preparing their returns themselves .

according to irs data , more than half of taxpayers with income below $50,000 use paid tax preparers .

president bush's 2005 presidential panel on federal tax reform summarized the complexity of claiming the child tax credit , "figuring out whether you can claim the child tax credit ... requires the skills of a professional sleuth: you need to complete eight lines on a tax form , perform up to five calculations , and fill out as many as three other forms or schedules. .

much of the complexity in child - related tax benefits is related to differing definitions of what constitutes an eligible child , specifically the different age limits of qualifying children among the different tax benefits .

the child tax credit is limited to children under 17 years old , unlike other tax benefits , such as the dependent exemption , that can be claimed by taxpayers with children as old as 23 .

increasing the age of eligible children would have significant budgetary costs .

one study estimated that expanding the child tax credit to 17- and 18-year - olds would reduce revenues by $6.1 billion in 2011 .

beyond the differing eligibility definitions used for different child tax benefits , the tax benefits themselves are structured differently .

the interaction of these different structures has led to middle - income families receiving a smaller total benefit than some higher - income taxpayers , as illustrated in the figure 1 .

president bush's 2005 panel on federal tax reform recommended simplifying the tax code , including child tax benefits , but to date these proposals have not been adopted .

specifically , the panel recommended consolidating the standard deduction , personal exemption , and child tax credit into one tax benefit , a family tax credit .

more than five years later , some experts have again proposed reducing the complexity of these provisions and making their benefits more transparent by combining child tax benefits into a uniform child credit .

while such a proposal could significantly simplify eligibility rules as well as the calculation of the benefit , policymakers would need to consider the competing functions of current tax benefits as they create a uniform benefit .

for example , some benefits like the eitc and refundable portion of the child tax credit subsidize earnings , whereas the nonrefundable portion of the child tax credit provides a uniform benefit per child for taxpayers with sufficient earnings that do not exceed the phase - out level .

because of this distinction , policymakers might consider creating different uniform credits based on the purpose of the credit , whether the purpose of the credit is to subsidize earnings of low - income taxpayers or provide a benefit for having children .

the most recent changes to the child tax credit were made by the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 ( egtrra ; p.l .

107-16 ) and the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

these changes , while once temporary , are now permanent .

policymakers interested in potentially modifying the child tax credit in the future may be interested in understanding the economic impact of these past legislative changes .

the data indicate that while the arra modifications did provide relatively more benefit to lower - income taxpayers , the egtrra changes benefited more children .

the analysis will then turn to the implications of extending the arra modifications , both on the number of children who will be affected as well as the budgetary cost , with similar data on the impact of the egtrra changes provided for comparison .

impact of egtrra versus arra modifications to the credit egtrra and arra substantially changed the structure of the child tax credit .

egtrra increased the value of the credit from $500 per child to $1,000 per child and made the credit partially refundable using the earned income formula .

at the end of 2012 , atra made these changes permanent .

arra expanded upon egtrra's changes to refundability by lowering the earnings threshold of the earned income formula to $3,000 .

the protecting americans from tax hikes ( path ) act ( division q of p.l .

114-113 ) made the $3,000 threshold permanent .

distributional impact a distributional impact of a tax benefit indicates the share of a tax benefit received by taxpayers at different income levels .

table a - 1 illustrates the different impacts of the egtrra and arra provisions on taxpayers based on cash income .

overall , approximately 60% of the child tax benefits from egtrra went to taxpayers with cash income above $50,000 .

by contrast , 70.5% of child tax benefits under arra went to taxpayers with cash income of less than $20,000 .

in addition , after the egtrra modification went into effect , research indicates that qualifying hispanic and african american households were less likely to receive the full value of the child tax credit then qualifying white households .

specifically , in 2005 , when all the child tax credit provisions of egtrra were effective , 49.5% of households with qualifying african american children and 46.0% of households with qualifying hispanic children were ineligible to receive the full credit due to low incomes , in contrast to 18.1% of households with white children .

estimates of the distributional impact on tax filers of the egtrra and arra provisions are currently unavailable , but can reasonably be expected to approximate the distribution in table a - 1 .

recent data ( provided in figure a - 1 ) do , however , provide information on the impact in 2013 of these modifications in terms of the number of children who benefit .

 ( although the data are presented in terms of the number of children who benefit , the tax credit is actually claimed by their parents , ostensibly for children's benefit. ) .

these data provide another way to analyze the impact of the egtrra and arra changes to the credit .

number of children affected by egtrra versus arra changes according to estimates provided by the tax policy center , both the egtrra and arra changes to the child tax credit are estimated to have a significant impact on the benefits received by millions of children , as illustrated in figure a - 1 .

in 2013 , the egtrra provisions are estimated to result in 18.6 million children being eligible for the credit who otherwise would not receive this tax benefit if the egtrra changes had expired .

in addition , 3.4 million children in 2013 are estimated receive a larger credit as a result of the egtrra provisions .

the extension of the arra modifications is estimated to have a lower overall benefit in terms of the impact on children .

approximately 17.1 million children in 2013 will benefit from the extension of arra child tax credit provisions as opposed to 22 million children that benefit from the egtrra provisions .

the majority of children who will benefit from the arra modification would receive a larger credit ( 10.2 million children ) , while fewer will be newly eligible ( 6.9 million children ) .

cost of extending egtrra and arra modifications to the credit historical data provide estimates of the comparative costs associated with the egtrra and arra modifications , indicating that a majority of the cost is due to the egtrra provisions .

the joint committee on taxation's revenue estimates for the 2010 tax act isolated the costs of extending the egtrra and arra provisions for two years ( 2011 and 2012 ) and indicated that 78% of the cost of these policies was associated with the extension of the egtrra provisions .

specifically , the cost of the two - year extension of egtrra child tax credit provisions was $71.7 billion over 10 years ( 2011-2020 ) , whereas the cost of extending the arra provisions was $19.7 billion over the same period .

of the total annual cost of the child tax credit in 2012 , approximately 60% was a result of the egtrra changes , 16% was a result of arra modification , and 24% was a result of the underlying parameters of the pre - egtrra and arra credit .

