on october 5 , 2011 , the u.s. supreme court will hear oral argument in golan v. holde r , a case considering whether congress had the power under the copyright clause of the u.s. constitution to grant copyright protection to creative works that have already entered the public domain .

in 1994 , congress enacted the uruguay round agreements act ( uraa ) of 1994 ; section 514 of the uraa "restored" copyright protection to certain foreign works that had been in the u.s. public domain , in order to bring the united states into compliance with the berne convention for the protection of literary and artistic works of 1886 , which the united states had joined in 1989 .

these foreign works had lost or never obtained copyright protection in the united states because their creators failed to comply with certain mandatory statutory formalities that were required by the federal copyright act at that time , such as filing registrations with the u.s .

copyright office or affixing copyright notice to them ( identifying the copyright owner and date of publication ) .

in 2001 , a group of artists , performers , businesses , teachers , publishers , archivists , and movie distributors who had depended on artistic works in the public domain for their livelihoods , filed a lawsuit against the federal government challenging the constitutionality of the uraa .

they argued that ( 1 ) the law's restoration of copyrights in foreign works that had been in the public domain interfered with their first amendment rights to use , perform , and distribute them , and ( 2 ) the law exceeded the congress's authority under the copyright clause .

the u.s. court of appeals rejected these constitutional arguments in two separate rulings , holding that § 514 of the uraa was a valid exercise of congress's power and that it did not violate the plaintiffs' free speech rights because the law is a content - neutral regulation of speech that was narrowly tailored to serve a substantial or important governmental interest — securing copyright protection for american works in foreign countries , as many of the united states' trading partners ( who were signatories to the berne convention ) had made clear that they would restore american copyrights that were in their public domain only if the united states restored foreign copyrights .

the u.s. supreme court granted the plaintiffs' petition for a writ of certiorari on march 7 , 2011 , in order to consider the following questions: 1 .

does the copyright clause of the united states constitution prohibit congress from taking works out of the public domain ? .

2 .

does section 514 of the uraa violate the first amendment of the united states constitution ? .

similar to the plaintiffs in eldred , the plaintiffs in golan v. holder are orchestra conductors , educators , performers , publishers , film archivists , and motion picture distributors who rely on the free availability of artistic works in the public domain for their livelihoods .

one of the plaintiffs , lawrence golan , performs and teaches works by foreign composers including dmitri shostakovich and igor stravinsky .

prior to the enactment of the uraa , the plaintiffs used or performed works by foreign artists in the public domain such as sergei prokofiev's "peter and the wolf. .

because § 514 of the uraa restored copyright protection to these foreign works and many others that had previously been in the public domain , the "plaintiffs are either prevented from using these works or are required to pay licensing fees to the copyright holders — fees that are often cost - prohibitive for plaintiffs. .

in 2001 , the plaintiffs filed a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of § 514 of the uraa as well as the copyright term extension act , arguing that both exceed congress's powers under the copyright clause and that both violate the first amendment .

in march 2004 , the u.s. district court for the district of colorado granted the government's motion to dismiss the plaintiffs' challenge to the ctea as it had been subsequently foreclosed by the supreme court's opinion in eldred v. ashcroft .

the district court also granted summary judgment to the government on the plaintiffs' two uraa claims , ruling that congress had the power to enact § 514 of the uraa under the copyright clause and that the plaintiffs "had no protected interest in the now - copyrighted works. .

in 2007 , the u.s. court of appeals for the tenth circuit affirmed the district court's dismissal of the ctea claims and upheld the district court's conclusion that § 514 of the uraa did not exceed congress's power under the copyright clause .

however , the tenth circuit court of appeals ruled that the plaintiffs "have shown sufficient free expression interests in works removed from the public domain to require first amendment scrutiny of § 514. .

the appellate court explained that "[b]ased on the eldred court's analysis , we examine the bedrock principle of copyright law that works in the public domain remain there and conclude that § 514 alters the traditional contours of copyright protection by deviating from this principle. .

the appellate court then remanded the case to the district court to conduct a first amendment review of the ctea , to determine "whether § 514 is content - based or content - neutral," and to apply the appropriate level of constitutional scrutiny .

on remand , the government and plaintiffs agreed that § 514 is a content - neutral regulation of speech that should be subject to intermediate scrutiny .

the district court granted the plaintiffs' motion for summary judgment , ruling that "to the extent section 514 suppresses the right of reliance parties to use works they exploited while the works were in the public domain — section 514 is substantially broader than necessary to achieve the government's interest" in complying with the terms of the berne convention and is thus unconstitutional .

in 2010 , the u.s. court of appeals for the tenth circuit reversed the district court's judgment , finding that § 514 does not violate the first amendment because it advances an important governmental interest and that it is not substantially broader than necessary to advance that interest .

the court explained that in order for an act of congress to survive intermediate scrutiny , "the statute must be directed at an important or substantial governmental interest unrelated to the suppression of free expression. .

the important governmental interest that the federal appellate court identified in this case was "protecting american copyright holders' interests abroad. .

the court cited congressional testimony that described how "billions of dollars were being lost each year because foreign countries were not providing copyright protections to american works that were in the public domain abroad. .

as the appellate court noted , § 514 of the uraa would alleviate these economic harms to u.s. copyright holders because , according to congressional testimony , "the united states' trading partners had represented that they would restore american copyrights only if the united states restored foreign copyrights. .

the appellate court also ruled that § 514 is narrowly tailored to further this legitimate government interest .

the supreme court will hear oral argument in golan v. holder on october 5 , 2011 .

justice kagan has recused herself from golan .

her recusal means that only eight justices will consider the case ; thus , it raises the possibility of a 4-4 tie vote , in which event the tenth circuit's three rulings regarding the constitutionality of § 514 would stand — ( 1 ) § 514 of the uraa did not exceed congress's power under the copyright clause , ( 2 ) § 514 "alters the traditional contours of copyright protection" to require first amendment scrutiny , and ( 3 ) § 514 does not violate the first amendment because it advances an important governmental interest in securing greater protections for american authors abroad .

the petitioners ( the plaintiffs in the case ) argue that "[f]or two hundred years , copyright legislation was consistent with a simple command: what enters the public domain remains in the public domain," and that congress , in enacting the berne convention implementation act , followed this tradition .

however , when congress enacted the uraa , it "marked a startling and dramatic departure from the traditions of u.s. copyright law. .

according to the petitioners , by removing works from the public domain , the uraa has violated the "limited times" restriction of the copyright clause "by turning a fixed and predictable period into one that can be reset or resurrected at any time , even after it expires. .

furthermore , the uraa violates the first amendment , the petitioners argue , because it "places substantial burdens on core speech and expression rights that once belonged to petitioners and other members of the american public. .

such burdens on the petitioners' speech rights are not justified by any important government interest , the petitioners assert .

the u.s .

solicitor general submitted the government brief on the merits defending the constitutionality of § 514 of the uraa , arguing that congress had the power to restore copyright protection to certain foreign works in the public domain and that the statute did not violate the first amendment .

the government brief claims that § 514 is consistent with the text of the copyright clause that required copyrights to be issued for "limited times" because the term of protection for restored copyrights is limited .

in addition , the government asserts that historically , congress has "granted copyright protection to a substantial range of pre - existing works that had previously been open to public exploitation , citing , for example , the first federal copyright statute enacted by the first congress in 1790 that had conferred copyright protection to "any map , chart , book or books already printed within these united states. .

the government also defends § 514 as consistent with the first amendment and argues that § 514 "should be reviewed under the deferential rational - basis standard that generally applies to copyright clause legislation. .

on this point , the government refutes the tenth circuit's holding ( in its ruling on the initial appeal of this case ) that the statute alters the "traditional contours of copyright protection" and thus deserves heightened first amendment scrutiny: [t]he tenth circuit misread that statement [by the supreme court in eldred ] to mandate a freestanding inquiry into whether particular copyright legislation alters any "traditional contour[]" or "timehonored tradition" of copyright protection .

it also misread the historical record to find that "one of these traditional contours is the principle that once a work enters the public domain , no individual — not even the creator — may copyright it. .

that reading is inconsistent with eldred , irreconcilable with established first amendment doctrine , and unworkable in practice .

the government brief claims that "[b]ecause section 514 is a rational exercise of authority conferred on congress by the copyright clause , and because the restrictions of which petitioners complain are simply inherent and traditional features of copyright protection , 'further first amendment scrutiny is unnecessary.' .

even if the supreme court finds that intermediate scrutiny is warranted for § 514 , however , the government argues that § 514 furthers "at least three" important governmental interests unrelated to the suppression of free speech: ( 1 ) it ensures compliance with international obligations ; ( 2 ) it secures greater protections for american authors abroad ; and ( 3 ) it remedies historical inequalities in the copyright system .

a decision in golan v. holder is expected by the end of the supreme court's october 2011 term .

