in 2008 and 2009 , collapsing world credit markets and a slowing global economy combined to create the weakest market in decades for production and sale of motor vehicles in the united states and other industrial countries .

u.s. light vehicle production fell by more than 34% in 2009 from 2008 levels , but the year - over - year fall - off was more acute for general motors corporation ( old gm ) , whose u.s. production dropped by 48% , and for chrysler llc ( old chrysler ) , whose u.s. production fell by 57% .

a similar pattern was reflected in u.s. light vehicle sales , which fell from just over 16.5 million units in 2007 to 10.4 million units in 2009 .

the production and sales slides were serious business challenges for all automakers , and rippled through the large and interconnected motor vehicle industry supply chain , touching suppliers , auto dealers , and the communities where automaking is a major industry .

old gm and old chrysler were in especially precarious positions .

the immediate crisis that brought these two companies to bankruptcy was a loss of financial liquidity as the banking system's credit sources froze and neither company had enough internal reserves to weather the economic storm .

as a result , they turned to the u.s. government for assistance in november 2008 .

in december 2008 and the early months of 2009 , both automakers and two auto - financing companies received federal financial assistance from the bush and obama administrations .

as discussed later in this report , that funding enabled old gm and old chrysler to begin restructuring their operations , a process that was continued in bankruptcy court .

alone among the world's major automakers , old gm and old chrysler filed for bankruptcy in 2009 and , with oversight from the obama administration as well as the bankruptcy court , restructured their operations in an attempt to become more competitive companies .

new boards of directors were appointed for both new gm and new chrysler , with new gm's board members initially chosen by the u.s. treasury department .

both reorganized companies had sizable ownership stakes held by the u.s. government and the united auto workers ( uaw ) union's retiree healthcare trust .

as auto markets improved in 2010 , so too did new gm's balance sheet and its outlook .

the company paid off its remaining $6.7 billion federal loan and repurchased $2.1 billion in preferred stock held by the u.s. government .

this left the government holding more than 900 million shares of common equity received in return for assistance from the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) .

the treasury has reported that the effective original cost of these shares in new gm was $43.52 per share .

sales of stock made at lower prices result in losses being recorded by the treasury .

new gm's stock was offered in an initial public offering ( ipo ) in november 2010 , with the u.s. government selling more than 412 million shares , thus reducing the government's ownership share to 32% .

no shares were sold for over two years following the ipo .

the u.s. government began selling its remaining 500 million shares of new gm stock in december 2012 , with the announced plan of divesting its remaining shares by early 2014 .

the final sales of gm stock closed ahead of this 2014 deadline , in december 2013 .

all of these sales were made at prices below the government's $43.52 per share average cost .

 ( see " assessing the cost of tarp assistance for gm ," below , for more information. ) .

these sales effectively end federal assistance to gm , although there are some government claims still outstanding in the bankruptcy process of old gm .

general motors corporation was a publicly traded company from 1916 until it filed for bankruptcy in june 2009 .

it faced a capital crisis in 2008 and 2009 because the normal avenues for raising capital were unavailable: auto sales were plummeting ; the company had limited success in selling off assets ; its efforts to cut costs were affected by the long timeline required to determine the efficacy of such steps ; and sources of capital in the open market were frozen by the financial meltdown .

as a consequence , the company's executives tried to arrange u.s. government bridge loans beginning in the fall of 2008 .

as old gm's then - chief executive officer ( ceo ) fritz henderson stated in the company's bankruptcy court filing: by the fall of 2008 , [old gm] was in the midst of a severe liquidity crisis , and its ability to continue operations grew more and more uncertain with each passing day .

the company previously has recognized the need for bold action to modify and transform its operations and balance sheet to create a leaner , more efficient , productive and profitable business ; and it had expended a tremendous amount of resources and effort , on operational , strategic partnering , and financial fronts , to accomplish this task .

unfortunately , because of the continuing and deepening recession , aggravated by the collapse of lehman brothers holdings on september 15 , 2008 , gm was not able to achieve its objective .

as a result of the economic crisis , the company was compelled to seek financial assistance from the federal government .

when capital markets are functioning normally , companies might arrange for debt financing through a major investment bank .

in 2007 , alan mulally , ford motor company's president and ceo , arranged for ford to borrow $23.5 billion to finance restructuring .

private capital was still available at that time , allowing ford to mortgage all of its assets to obtain a large loan .

as old gm's bankruptcy filing indicated , these avenues for raising capital were not available in 2008 and 2009 .

by then , old gm was facing extreme financial stress , for several reasons: decline in the u.s. auto market .

in 2008 and the first half of 2009 , u.s. auto sales were in a freefall , ultimately dropping further than at any time in three decades .

the 2009 combined u.s. sales of old gm and gm fell by 30% ( compared with 2008 sales ) , a much steeper decline than any other automaker , except the combined sales of old chrysler and chrysler .

the decline in sales further dried up financial resources that old gm could have used .

steady loss of u.s. market share .

general motors — which at its peak sold 51% of all autos in the united states — saw its market share slide from over 28% in 2000 to under 20% in 2009 ( see table 1 below ) .

break - even point for car making was too high .

the break - even point is the volume of sales at which net sales ( i.e. , gross sales less discounts , returns , and freight costs ) equal costs .

according to old gm , sales in the u.s. market would have needed to hit a rate of 11.5 million to 12 million vehicle units a year for it to break even .

u.s. sales in 2009 were 10.4 million units .

exceptional labor and retiree health care costs .

the detroit 3 automakers ( old gm , ford , and old chrysler ) negotiated contracts with the uaw over the years that expanded benefits for union workers to a level the companies could not sustain when imported vehicles began to take large shares of the u.s. market .

old gm estimated that its retiree health care and pension costs added $1,500 to the cost of every u.s. - made vehicle and exceeded the cost of the steel used in the vehicles .

at the time of the bankruptcy , old gm had obligations of nearly $30 billion to fully fund retiree health care and pension funds .

corporate culture .

it was alleged at the time of bankruptcy that old gm's corporate executives had been too bureaucratic and out of touch with u.s. car buyers' preferences .

the auto task force at the treasury department , which oversaw restructuring of old gm ( and old chrysler ) , repeatedly said that changing gm's senior executive corps and the internal corporate culture would be one of the most important steps in old gm's transformation to a more competitive company .

the obama administration's firing of old gm's then - chairman and ceo , rick wagoner , in 2009 , and its appointment of new board members and a new chairman and ceo , were intended , in part , to emphasize to all stakeholders the importance of changing the business model .

higher gasoline prices .

in 2008 , gasoline prices rose to over $4 a gallon in many parts of the united states , adversely affecting demand for large vehicles with low fuel efficiency .

these vehicles , such as pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles , had been critical to old gm's profitability .

the initial u.s. government loans to assist the u.s. motor vehicle and motor vehicle financing industries were made by the george w. bush administration in december 2008 and january 2009 .

at that time , $24.8 billion in assistance was provided to four companies , the first of what would eventually total nearly $80 billion in assistance through the troubled asset relief program .

tarp was authorized by the emergency economic stabilization act ( eesa ) , enacted in the fall of 2008 to address the ongoing financial crisis .

this statute specifically authorized the secretary of the treasury to purchase troubled assets from "financial firms," the definition of which did not mention manufacturing companies .

according to the treasury , the overriding objective of eesa was to restore liquidity and stability to the financial system of the united states in a manner which maximizes overall returns to the taxpayers .

consistent with the statutory requirement , treasury's four portfolio management guiding principles for the tarp are: ( i ) protect taxpayer investments and maximize overall investment returns within competing constraints ; ( ii ) promote stability for and prevent disruption of financial markets and the economy ; ( iii ) bolster market confidence to increase private capital investment ; and ( iv ) dispose of investments as soon as practicable , in a timely and orderly manner that minimizes financial market and economic impact .

the authorities within tarp were very broad .

when congress did not pass specific auto industry loan legislation , the bush administration turned to tarp for funding , arguing that failure to provide assistance to the auto industry would make the recession much worse and would impose other costs on federal taxpayers , such as providing unemployment benefits for displaced workers .

after it took office , in 2009 , the obama administration built on this precedent , and both chrysler and gm received additional tarp loans .

gmac / ally financial received additional capital infusions , enabling the company to survive the downturn in the auto market as well as large losses on its mortgage operations .

chrysler financial , in contrast , required no additional aid and relatively quickly repaid the tarp loan it received .

the assistance for the auto industry was not without controversy , and questions were raised about the legal basis for the assistance and the manner in which it was carried out .

table 2 summarizes the tarp assistance given to the u.s. motor vehicle manufacturing and financing industries .

in december 2008 , old gm received $13.4 billion from the u.s. treasury , the first of several loans made through tarp .

old gm received additional loans from tarp of $2 billion in april and $4 billion in may 2009 .

these loans kept old gm's operations alive as it went through a drastic restructuring overseen by the auto task force .

 ( a complete listing of gm's tarp loans and related payments to the government can be found in the appendix . ) .

old gm's viability plan of february 2009 , which was a u.s. treasury requirement to obtain additional loans after the initial loan of december 2008 , laid out a plan of recovery based on changes in operations , labor costs , and other factors .

president obama rejected that plan at the end of march 2009 , saying it was insufficient for a total recovery of the company .

the administration gave old gm two months , until june 1 , to devise a more thorough restructuring and thereby qualify for more u.s. government aid .

throughout the spring of 2009 , old gm worked with various stakeholders , including the uaw , bondholders , creditors , dealers , and suppliers , to devise a new restructuring plan that would be approved by the auto task force and avert bankruptcy .

while the company succeeded in reaching tentative agreements with most stakeholders , a group of creditors would not agree to the terms offered , thus prompting gm to file for bankruptcy on june 1 , 2009 .

during the bankruptcy proceedings , the government provided a final installment from tarp: a $30 billion loan to facilitate the transformation to a new , smaller company , bringing total u.s. government loans related to gm to more than $50 billion .

while much of the $30 billion was used by gm during the restructuring process , a majority of it was not used , and $16.4 billion remained in an escrow account on september 30 , 2009 .

one continuing issue from the bankruptcy that has drawn particular congressional interest is the treatment of some retirees of delphi corporation , which had been a gm subsidiary until 1999 , as old gm had certain liabilities related to delphi's pension plans .

the house committee on oversight and government reform held two hearings on the gm assistance and delphi pension issues during the 112 th congress .

in addition , legislation entitled the delphi pensions restoration act of 2012 was introduced in both the house ( h.r .

6404 ) and the senate ( s. 3544 ) .

to date in the 113 th congress , the house committee on oversight and government reform has held two additional subcommittee hearings focusing on delphi pension issues .

gm also benefited financially during and after the bankruptcy process from previous policy rulings by the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

under normal circumstances , a corporation undergoing bankruptcy is not able to carry forward previous tax losses , since the bankruptcy process is considered a change in the control of the company .

government holdings through tarp , however , generally have not been treated by the irs as causing such a change in control .

because of this , new gm was able to carry forward $45 billion in losses and other costs incurred by old gm , allowing it to avoid paying taxes on future profits for up to 20 years .

included in this figure are net operating losses of approximately $16 billion .

these tax savings are not counted as part of tarp support .

in theory , these tax rulings should have raised the value of the shares held by the treasury as well as those held by other common shareholders .

a new company was established in july 2009 , after just 40 days in federal bankruptcy proceedings .

new gm began with smaller u.s. operations than its predecessor company and a major presence overseas .

gm operates as five divisions: gm north america ( gmna ) , gm europe ( gme ) , gm south america ( gmsa ) , gm financial , and gm international operations ( gmio ) .

in 2012 , over 47% of gm's vehicle sales were outside north america and europe , primarily in developing countries in asia .

in china alone , in the first nine months of 2013 , gm's joint ventures sold more than 2.3 million vehicles , approximately 32% of all its worldwide sales .

table 3 shows gm's sales and earnings worldwide from 2010 through 2012 .

it is noteworthy that gm's north american sales are more lucrative , as the larger cars , pickup trucks , and suvs widely sold in north america carry higher profit margins than the smaller vehicles popular elsewhere in the world .

of the $7.9 billion earned in 2012 , $7.0 billion was earned in north america .

most other divisions lost money or broke even ; gm's gmio division earned $2.2 billion .

according to gm , since 2009 , it has announced investments of $10.1 billion in its u.s. facilities , creating or retaining more than 26,500 jobs .

gm's annual reports show its worldwide employment in table 4 , by major corporate divisions .

the new gm of 2009 differed in a number of ways from the old gm: employment was cut .

old gm had 91,000 u.s. employees in 2008 ; new gm had 75,000 immediately after bankruptcy .

its worldwide employment fell from 243,500 to 209,000 during the same time period .

plants were closed .

old gm announced that , of the 47 u.s. plants it operated in 2008 , 13 would close by 2010 .

the closed plants and machinery remained with old gm .

brands were shed .

the pontiac , saturn , and hummer brands were terminated , and saab was sold to a dutch company .

among its remaining brands , gm's u.s. market share fell from 22% in 2008 to 19.8% in 2009 and further declined to 19.1% in 2010 .

in 2011 , gm's market share rose to 19.7% but dropped to 17.9% in 2012 and 2013 .

in addition , its sales in china rose by nearly 30% in 2010 , exceeding u.s. sales for the first time .

health care costs for retired u.s. union workers were transferred to the uaw .

old gm reached agreement with the uaw in 2007 to transfer the financial responsibility for u.s. hourly workers' retiree health care to the union's veba ( voluntary employee beneficiary association ) , thus removing $30 billion in obligations .

the uaw signed similar agreements with ford and old chrysler .

the detroit 3 agreed to fund the vebas with cash or stock .

the union made additional concessions concerning retiree health care in 2009 negotiations .

the gm restructuring agreement gave the veba a significant ownership stake in gm because the company did not have the financial resources to provide cash .

many expensive liabilities were jettisoned .

left with old gm were environmental liabilities estimated at $350 million for polluted properties , including superfund sites ; certain tort liability claims , including those for some product defects and asbestos ; and contracts with suppliers with which new gm would not be doing business .

the u.s. government was the majority owner of the company that emerged from the bankruptcy process , as the majority of the tarp loans made to gm were converted into an initial 60.8% government ownership stake in new gm .

in addition , $6.7 billion of the tarp loans remained outstanding after the bankruptcy and the u.s. government received $2.1 billion in preferred stock .

following positive financial results in the quarters after emerging from bankruptcy , new gm used cash in the escrow account that held its tarp borrowings to pay off the $6.7 billion in outstanding loans by april 2010 .

the $2.1 billion in preferred stock was repurchased by new gm in december 2010 , following the company's ipo .

in addition to its ownership of gm , the u.s. government acquired large common ownership stakes in chrysler , gmac / ally financial , citigroup , and aig through tarp funds and other assistance during the financial crisis .

it has sold its stakes in citigroup , chrysler , gm and aig , retaining only the large common shareholdings in ally financial .

table 5 details the government ownership stakes in these companies .

exercising managerial control was not a stated goal of acquiring shareholdings in these companies .

instead , the stated purpose was to compensate taxpayers for the assistance given the companies while not saddling the companies with large liabilities that could hinder recovery .

the obama administration laid out four core principles to guide the management of the government's ownership stakes: the government has no desire to own equity any longer than necessary , and will seek to dispose of its ownership interests as soon as practicable .

in exceptional cases where the government feels it is necessary to respond to a company's request for substantial assistance , the government will reserve the right to set up - front conditions to protect taxpayers , promote financial stability , and encourage growth .

after any up - front conditions are in place , the government will manage its ownership stake in a hands - off , commercial manner .

as a common shareholder , the government will only vote on core governance issues , including the selection of a company's board of directors and major corporate events or transactions .

disposing of large ownership stakes in companies can be done in a variety of manners , including large - scale public offerings of shares , negotiated sales of large blocks of shares to other entities , and gradual share sales in the stock market .

all of these sales methods have been used by the government in disposing of holdings of the companies discussed here .

following its emergence from bankruptcy , new gm was not publicly traded , thereby precluding a gradual sale of stock into the stock market , as was done in the case of the u.s. government's holdings in citigroup .

the size of the company and of the government's stake in new gm made a negotiated private sale to another entity unlikely , and any private sale would have been subject to questions about whether the government received a fair price .

thus , the u.s. government chose to participate in an initial public offering in which it and other shareholders could sell significant amounts of their gm stock .

in december 2012 , the u.s. government also sold 200 million shares directly to gm at a 7.9% premium over the market price at the time .

it sold the remaining shares in stages , ending with a final sale on december 9 , 2013 .

figure 1 shows the ownership structure of gm in 2009 when the new company emerged from bankruptcy and its structure after the treasury sold the last of its stock in december 2013 .

as detailed in the appendix , the u.s. government through tarp aided the combined old gm and new gm with approximately $50.2 billion in loans in 2008-2009 .

after the bankruptcy process in 2009 , the government held the following assets: ( 1 ) 60.8% of the equity in new gm , ( 2 ) $7.4 billion in loans aiding new gm , ( 3 ) $2.1 billion in preferred stock , and ( 4 ) nearly $1 billion in claims on the old gm in the bankruptcy process .

the government recouped the following from the assistance: $29.3 billion from equity sales ; $7.4 billion in loan repayments ; $2.1 billion in preferred stock repurchases ; $0.2 billion in bankruptcy recoveries ; and $0.7 billion in net dividends , interest and other income .

these , like all proceeds from tarp , are specified by the tarp statute to "be paid into the general fund of the treasury for reduction of the public debt. .

the total recoupment from the gm assistance sums to approximately $39.7 billion .

comparing this amount to the $50.2 billion in loans results in an approximately $10.5 billion gap between the amount outlaid and the amount recouped .

the $10.5 billion shortfall between outlays and recoupment , however , is not the sole method economists might use to establish whether the government gained or lost on the assistance .

in assessing the extent to which the government has recovered its investment , economists might also include a number of other factors , such as the cost to the government to borrow the funds that it then provided to gm , a premium to compensate the government for the riskiness of the loans , and the cost to the government of managing the assistance given .

the budgetary scores produced by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and the office of management of budget ( omb ) have taken some of these additional factors into account .

the tarp statute required that tarp assistance be scored in the government budget in a similar manner to loans and loan guarantees under the federal credit reform act .

specifically , the expected present value of actions under tarp is to be estimated using risk - adjusted market interest rates and reflected on the federal budget at the time of the estimate .

the estimates produced according to these formulas , however , have only been reported in aggregate .

for example , cbo estimated in may 2013 that the budgetary cost of tarp assistance for the entire auto industry would be $17 billion , and the treasury in coordination with omb estimated lifetime cost as of september 30 , 2013 , to be $14.7 billion .

neither of these analyses , however , reports separately the individual gains or losses on chrysler , gm , and gmac / ally financial .

no complete cost estimate has been performed since the final sale of gm stock .

