current u.s. policy towards burma ( myanmar ) can be characterized as the balancing of bilateral engagement and an assortment of political and economic sanctions — an approach sometimes referred to as "pragmatic engagement. .

in addition , the obama administration is attempting to convince other nations to adopt a similar policy towards burma .

the stated intent of u.s. policy is to persuade and / or pressure burma's military junta , the state peace and development council ( spdc ) , to release all political prisoners from detention and transfer power to a representative , democratically elected civilian government that will respect the human rights of the people of burma , including its ethnic minorities .

recent political developments in burma may be harbingers of change with implications for u.s. policy .

the spdc held national parliamentary elections on november 7 , 2010 , after a relatively short and controversial campaign period in which opposition parties claimed they faced harassment , intimidations , and limited access to the media .

on the day of the election , media outside of burma reported allegations of vote - rigging and election fraud , including the last - minute appearance of large numbers of "advance votes. .

six days after the election , aung san suu kyi , the preeminent leader of burma's democracy movement , was released from house arrest .

despite the controversies surrounding the campaign and the election , the official election results released on december 7 , 2010 , announced that the spdc - backed union solidarity and development party ( usdp ) had won over three - quarters of the parliamentary seats .

the new bicameral parliament convened for the first time on january 31 , 2011 , in the new capital city of nay pyi taw .

its main tasks were the selection of a new president and two vice presidents , and the confirmation of the new government ministers .

most of the new government appointments went to former spdc members or military officers .

on march 30 , 2011 , senior general than shwe formally dissolved the spdc and former general , prime minister , and spdc first secretary thein sein became burma's new president .

the initial responses of the 112 th congress and the obama administration to the political developments in burma have been generally critical .

in a press release issued the day of burma's parliamentary election , secretary of state hillary clinton stated that the united states was "deeply disappointed" by the elections , noting that "[t]he electoral process was severely flawed , precluded an inclusive , level playing field , and repressed fundamental freedoms .

as a result , the elections were neither free nor fair. .

on november 18 , 2010 , the house of representatives passed h.res .

1677 , denouncing "the one - sided , undemocratic , and illegitimate actions of the state peace and development council ( spdc ) that seek to legitimize military rule through a flawed election process. .

the international response to the political developments in burma has been mixed .

australia , canada , and the european union were also critical of the conduct of the november election , and have kept their own sanctions on burma largely intact .

the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) and china , by contrast , welcomed the election results and the installment of a new government , and subsequently called for the removal of all sanctions on burma .

the convening of burma's new parliament and the official transfer of power to president sein and his ministers has precipitated a debate over the effectiveness of the current u.s. policy and possible strategies to foster political change in burma .

one of the pivotal issues in this debate is the degree to which recent political events represent either a shift of power from the military to a largely civilian government , or an elaborate ruse by which the spdc remains in control of the country .

a second major issue is whether or not u.s. policy can significantly impact political developments in burma , and if so , what should be the main components of that policy .

a third issue is which of the various u.s. goals should be given priority in the short run , and which goals are better viewed as long - run objectives .

for the last 20 years , congress has played a major role in formulating u.s. policy towards burma , particularly in the imposition of sanctions .

the 112 th congress may decide to take legislative action with respect to u.s policy towards burma , as past congresses did .

the 110 th congress , responding to the violent suppression of a popular protest in burma in 2007 , tightened sanctions on burma by passing the tom lantos block burmese jade ( junta's anti - democratic efforts ) act of 2008 ( 2008 jade act ) ( p.l .

110-286 ) .

the 108 th congress passed the burmese freedom and democracy act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-61 ) following a crackdown on opposition parties , which included the arrest and detention of aung san suu kyi .

the 101 st , 103 rd , and 104 th congresses passed similar sanction - tightening measures , generally after anti - democratic and / or repressive actions by the spdc .

a number of scholars have questioned why the united states has had such a sustained interest in burma .

as described in another crs report , u.s. relations with burma remained comparatively normal following the military coup in 1962 ; punitive sanctions were first imposed following the brutal suppression of a peaceful and popular protest movement in 1988 .

over the next 20 years , the united states gradually adopted more sanctions and increased the pressure on burma's ruling military in an effort to end the repression and promote democracy .

there is little question about the military junta's legacy of human rights violations and its violent suppression of the people of burma .

however , burma is not the only nation in asia where the government has been accused of serious human rights violations .

yet , as one noted burma scholar recently pointed out , current u.s. sanctions on burma are in some ways stricter than those imposed on the people's democratic republic of korea ( north korea ) .

burma also appears to be of little geopolitical or global economic importance for the united states .

its location between china and india may make burma important to those two contending regional powers , but the united states has no apparent strategic interest in burma .

burma's known natural gas and oil fields are attractive to energy companies around the world , but are neither sufficient or necessary for the united states to meet its foreseeable energy demand .

despite burma's apparent lack of importance and uniqueness , the united states for over two decades has diligently pursued a policy designed to end military repression and promote democracy — with arguably little to show for the effort .

as a result , a broad and wide - ranging discussion on u.s. policy towards burma has emerged , with possible implications for u.s. policies towards other nations .

some observers have argued that the u.s. policy towards burma has proven that sanctions never work and that sanctions on burma — and by extension , any other nation — should be lifted .

other analysts maintain that the spdc's behavior over the last 20 years demonstrates that burma's military leaders are not open to reason and that engagement in any form is destined to fail .

some commentators also decry u.s. efforts to coordinate policies with other countries toward burma , noting that other nations have other priorities and readily realize the limits on how far the united states is willing to press its case regarding burma .

some commentators see less grandiose lessons in the history of u.s. policy towards burma , suggesting the problems lie in the conduct of the policy and not that the policy is fundamentally flawed .

to these observers , the problems with u.s. sanctions on burma are that the sanctions are not strict enough , not properly targeted , and / or not adequately enforced .

similarly , these observers argue the lack of results from direct dialogue stems from insufficient time , unclear intent , and / or inappropriate priorities in the talks .

past efforts to coordinate burma policies with other nations have fallen short of their desired goals , according to some analysts , because the united states was not flexible enough to allow other nations to adopt a different approach to achieve the same overall objectives .

a final group of writers on u.s. policy focus more on analyzing how events of the past few years — particularly the establishment of a new parliament and the installation of a new president — may have changed the political dynamic inside burma , and the implications for u.s. policy .

to some , the changes inside burma are purely cosmetic , with the military still firmly in control .

according to these analysts , the united states should not reward the spdc for its charade , and in the opinion of some , should increase the pressure on burma's military leadership .

to others , the changes inside burma are flawed , but real , and with the proper support and encouragement , could gradually lead to an end of flagrant violations of human rights and the eventual restoration of democracy .

these commentators suggest that the united states consider selectively removing sanctions and increasing channels of bilateral interaction in order to bolster the elements of change inside burma that will promote democracy .

to help understand the interplay of these distinct , but interrelated policy discussions , this report reviews current u.s. policy towards burma , as well as recent developments in the country .

the report then examines the implications for future u.s. policy and considers what actions , if any , the 112 th congress may take with respect to u.s. policy towards burma .

in september 2009 , the obama administration announced a change in u.s. policy towards burma after seven months of review , discussion , and consultation .

the existing sanctions regime remained in place , but new elements of u.s. policy were added — the willingness to engage in direct dialogue with the spdc on how to promote democracy and human rights in burma , and to cooperate to a greater extent with the spdc on international security issues , such as nuclear nonproliferation and counternarcotics efforts .

outside of the new willingness to engage in direct dialogue , the obama policy has continued the policies of the two preceding administrations with the same goals — namely , to support "a unified , peaceful , prosperous , and democratic burma that respects the human rights of its citizens. .

in order to achieve these goals , the obama administration pressed burma's military leaders to release all its political prisoners , end all its conflicts with ethnic minorities , cease its human rights violations , and initiate "a credible internal political dialogue with the democratic opposition and ethnic minority leaders on elements of reconciliation and reform. .

the year 2010 proved to be an eventful year for burma , with the country struck by another major cyclone and racked by periodic conflicts between the burmese military , known as the tatmadaw ( "royal force" ) , and various insurgent groups in eastern burma ( see " the ethnic - based militias " below ) .

however , what may prove to be the most politically significant events for the year both took place in november — the national elections to select the nation's first civilian parliament in 20 years , and the release of aung san suu kyi .

the elections , held on november 7 , were portrayed by the spdc as the completion of the fifth step in its seven - step process for the creation of a "disciplined democracy" in burma .

however , to the united states and many other nations the elections were neither free nor fair , and denoted little progress in the return to civilian rule burma .

by contrast , the release of aung san suu kyi was greeted by the international community as a possibly pivotal event that might lead to the resumption of talks between the spdc and the various opposition groups in burma about possible national reconciliation .

the transition to the new government began early in 2011 , with the new union parliament meeting for the first time on january 31 , 2011 .

prior to the parliament's first session , the spdc established relatively restrictive rules and procedures for the union parliament .

the main tasks for the union parliament's first session was the selection of burma's president and two vice presidents , the selection of speakers for both houses of parliament , and the confirmation of ministerial nominations — undertakings that the parliament successfully completed before adjourning on march 30 , 2011 .

also on march 30 , senior general than shwe formally dissolved the spdc , officially transferred power to the new government , and appointed general min aung hlaing as his successor as commander - in - chief of the burmese military .

for decades , burma's military leaders used political and economic oppression to maintain control over the country .

on several occasions , the spdc or its predecessors violently put down popular protests in order to remain in power .

during most of its reign in burma , the spdc used tight control over the political and economic activities of burmese citizens to suppress opposition and extract a privileged socio - economic status for the tatmadaw .

according to several burma analysts , the spdc and the tatmadaw treat the country as if they are an army of occupation .

with the arrival of the new union government and the official departure of the spdc , it is uncertain if there will be a significant change in the human rights situation in burma .

the early indications are mixed , with some signs of a loosening of government control and other signs of a tightening of authoritarian rule .

the actions of the tatamadaw , in particular , since the first meeting of the union parliament have been especially troubling , suggesting that the military intends to continue its past disregard for human rights .

burma's history of serious human rights violations has led to calls for the creation of a u.n. commission of inquiry ( coi ) .

in his september 2010 report to the u.n. secretary general , u.n. special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in myanmar tomás ojea quintana repeatedly indicated his support for the establishment of a coi under the auspices of the u.n. general assembly , the u.n. security council , or the u.n. human rights council ( unhrc ) .

on june 17 , 2011 , u.s .

ambassador to the unhrc eileen chamberlain donahoe reiterated that the united states supports the creation of a coi .

in addition to the united states , 15 other nations have publicly endorsed the creation of a coi .

the coi has not been endorsed by the other asean member nations , china , india , or japan .

the predominately ethnic burman spdc has long discriminated against many of the nation's over 100 ethnic minorities .

in some of the more serious cases , the spdc and the tatmadaw have been accused of committing grievous human rights abuses against certain burmese ethnic minorities .

the reasons for the discrimination and maltreatment are complex and varied .

some ethnic minorities claim that a major cause of the discrimination is religious persecution .

in other cases , the maltreatment appears to be primarily based on ethnicity .

an important source of tension between the burmese military and some of the ethnic minorities of eastern and northern burma is the continued presence of ethnic - based militias .

over the last 60 years , the burmese military and these militias have fought , frequently resulting in the internal displacement of the local civilian population and / or the flight of civilians across international borders .

as a consequence , hundreds of thousands of burmese refugees are scattered across southeast asia , many in camps located in bangladesh and thailand .

a flare - up of fighting between the tatmadaw and the militias occurred in the first half of 2011 , causing another round of refugees to flee the conflict areas .

the available economic statistics for burma are widely regarded as unreliable and inaccurate ( see text box ) .

the central statistical organization ( cso ) in the ministry of national planning and economic development lacks the technical expertise and resources to obtain accurate economic data .

in addition , burma has an extensive "underground economy," in which many burmese citizens augment their standard of living through unrecorded and unreported work and commerce .

also , the spdc has intentionally kept portions of the state - run economy secret — most notably , the real value of the proceeds from natural gas and oil — to evade international sanctions and domestic and international scrutiny .

despite the lack of reliable data , economists who monitor burma generally agree that it is among the poorest countries in the world and is the poorest country in southeast asia .

the united nations development programme ( undp ) ranks burma 132 nd on its human development index .

its people suffer from widespread poverty , particularly its rural population .

according to the food and agriculture organization ( fao ) , 19% of the population is undernourished and 32% of its children are malnourished .

the most recent undp household survey revealed a reduction in the percentage of households living in poverty from 32% in fy2005 to 26% in fy2010 .

however , some burma observers are reportedly skeptical about the undp survey results , pointing to the lack of reliable census data upon which to base the sample survey .

the general consensus on the main reason why burma's economic situation is so bad is gross mismanagement by the spdc .

burma's economic system has been described as a "kleptocracy" in which the country's most profitable and valuable industries and businesses are owned or controlled by spdc members , their families , or their supporters .

in 2010 , the spdc proceeded with the "privatization" of many government - owned assets that some critics claim mostly involved the transfer of property to the spdc leaders , their families , and their most loyal supporters .

just prior to its formal dissolution , the spdc transferred ownership of rubber plantations , jade mines , and gold mines to junta leader than shwe and members of his family .

burma is considered one of the world's most corrupt countries .

in its 2010 corruption perception index ( cpi ) , transparency international ranked burma 176 th in the world — tied with afghanistan and just above the most corrupt country in the world , somalia .

corruption reportedly is common at all levels of society .

in particular , some regional military commanders allegedly receive payments from the legal ( eg , timber , jade , and ruby mining ) and illegal ( eg , opium and methamphetamines ) businesses operating in the territories under their command .

according to one report , president thein sein's priority agricultural development program has already been sidetracked into a bribery and extortion racket by local authorities and bankers .

to a certain extent , the high level of poverty and corruption in burma helped the spdc maintain power .

with few economic opportunities available to them , young men in rural areas often sought to enlist in the tatmadaw , whose members and their families were provided better housing , food allowance , medical care , and other forms of support .

the additional income that military officers and senior civil servants obtained by graft and extortion helped maintain loyalty to the spdc .

however , the "privatization" of government - assets and the appointment of state and regional chief ministers may have reduced these incentives to support burma's military .

this may partially explain the spdc's decision to promulgate in november 2010 a new law mandating compulsory military service ( see " changes in the burmese military " ) .

in addition to the long - term problem of widespread poverty , the union government faces two major short - term economic challenges — increasing economic growth and decreasing inflation .

unofficial estimates of burma's economic growth — such as the ones done by the imf — indicate that the economy is expanding , but at a rate slower than other southeast asian nations , and inadequate to significantly improve the economic situation of the burmese people .

their meager standard of living has been eroded by comparatively high inflation ( over 20% ) , and particularly by rising food prices .

burma's economy grew modestly in fiscal years 2009 and 2010 , according to the asian development bank ( adb ) , because of agriculture's recovery from the effects of cyclone nargis and the government's heavy construction investment in the new capital , nay pyi taw , and the nation's roads .

another significant factor in burma's stronger growth performance was southeast asia's recovery from the effects of the global financial crisis of 2007-2008 .

greater economic growth also helped reduce inflationary pressures in the economy .

the adb estimated inflation in fiscal years 2009 and 2010 at 8.2% and 7.3% , respectively .

burma's economy benefitted from exceptionally high inward foreign direct investment ( fdi ) in fy2011 .

burma's cso reported total inward fdi of nearly $20 billion for fy2011 , compared to $302 million the year before .

according to cso , china was the main source of investment ( $8.2 billion ) , followed by hong kong ( $5.4 billion ) and thailand ( $2.9 billion ) .

most of the reported fdi went to oil , natural gas , electrical power , or mining projects ; smaller amounts went to agricultural or manufacturing investments .

foreign observers caution that the cso's inward fdi figure probably reflects pledged — not actual — investments , and that the actual annual figure is probably significantly lower than $20 billion .

some analysts assert that the recent rise in inward fdi has muted the effectiveness of u.s. economic sanctions .

other analysts suspect that certain investment projects in burma have contributed to the recent conflict between the tatamadaw and the ethnic - based militias ( see "china's hydroelectric projects in burma" ) .

in addition , the recent military conflicts in burma reportedly have led to a stoppage of construction work on some investment projects , and may be discouraging new investments .

a future source of possible economic growth for burma is the asean free trade agreement ( afta ) , which will complete its final stage of implementation in 2015 .

tariffs on most goods were eliminated in 2010 for the six original asean member nations ( brunei , indonesia , malaysia , the philippines , singapore , and thailand ) and are to be eliminated for the final four asean member nations ( burma , cambodia , laos , and vietnam ) in 2015 .

while there is some concern that burma is unprepared to adjust to tariff removal in 2015 , its economy may benefit from increased trade and greater inward fdi .

in his inaugural address to the union parliament on march 30 , 2011 , president thein sein advocated his vision for the future development of burma's economy .

after acknowledging that burma remains a predominantly agricultural country , he said , "[w]e must turn to national industrialization to transform [the country] into a developed , rich one with a lot of employment opportunities and high per capita income. .

to achieve this goal , president thein sein pledged to "practice the market economy as the economic policy.…" however , his interpretation of a market economy is one "in which the government takes control over the market to a certain degree. .

president thein sein's economic priorities are agriculture , industrialization , infrastructure , and education .

the new government is to ensure "reasonable prices for agricultural produce" and provide microfinancing to burma's rural population .

president thein sein hopes to promote industrialization by attracting inward fdi , in part by establishing special economic zones ( sezs ) .

the sez in dawei township ( near the border with thailand ) has received a high level of international attention , partly because of its large size ( estimated investment of $14 billion ) and the involvement of china and thailand in its construction .

president thein sein also intends to continue to invest heavily in infrastructure .

the spdc - promulgated national budget for fy2012 includes massive increases in government expenditures on industry , energy , construction , transportation , and telecommunications .

critics of the president's economic proposals have questioned his priorities and his policies .

some burmese economists ( such as u myint ) would like to see a greater focus on poverty reduction and more attention to good governance , greater government accountability , and the elimination of government corruption .

others would like burma to adjust its artificially overvalued official exchange rate , which is seen as a major barrier to inward fdi .

still other analysts suggest the new government needs to do more to protect workers' rights , citing studies by earthrights international and others that spdc , the tatmadaw , and foreign investors have conspired to evade u.s. sanctions and violate the rights of burmese workers .

burma's relations with the democratic people's republic of korea ( north korea ) have become a growing source of apprehension for the united states and the global community .

much of the rising anxiety has focused on north korea's export of military equipment , supplies , and technology to burma , including reports of trade in technology and equipment for the construction of nuclear weapons .

possibly equally disconcerting has been evidence of north korea supplying burma's military with missiles and missile technology that would pose a threat to much of southeast asia .

allegations that the tatmadaw have used chemical weapons in their assaults on the various ethnic - based militias in burma have evoked the specter of a burmese military that possesses chemical weapons and missiles with which to deliver them across the region .

the continued bilateral trade in military equipment and technology would appear to violate u.n. security council resolution 1874 .

the military ties between burma and north korea are viewed by some analysts as a mounting threat to regional security .

relations between burma and north korea have a rocky history .

following burma's independence from british colonial rule , the democratically elected government of u nu supported the u.n. security council resolution declaring north korea the aggressor in the korean war .

however , the u nu government refrained from recognizing either north korea or south korea as the de jure government in korea , viewing the ongoing conflict as an unresolved civil war .

in practice , burma continued to have economic and cultural exchanges with both north and south korea .

following the military coup that overthrew burma's civilian government , the ruling junta led by general ne win continued to maintain relations with both north and south korea , but showed a bias in support of north korea .

during this period , trade between burma and north korea apparently had minimal military content ; most of the bilateral trade consisted of industrial goods from north korea being exchanged for food and raw materials from burma .

relations between burma and north korea were effectively severed on october 9 , 1983 , when north korean agents detonated a large bomb in rangoon , killing 21 people in an apparent assassination attempt on south korea's president chun doo hwan .

on november 4 , 1983 , burma ordered the closure of north korea's embassy in rangoon and expelled north korea's diplomatic corps from the country .

official contact between the two countries was gradually reestablished starting in 1996 , possibly driven by the tatmadaw's interest in acquiring north korean military equipment .

burma's military had been relying heavily on military supplies from china , but was interested in the north korean equipment , which was similar in design and cheaper than from china .

in addition , north korea was willing to conduct barter trade , which was attractive to the hard currency strapped burmese junta .

over the ensuing decade , the flow of military equipment from north korea to burma allegedly expanded to include ammunition , field guns , surface - to - surface and surface - to - air missiles , and short - range ballistic missiles and related technology .

indications that burma may be pursuing a nuclear weapons program , possibly with the assistance of north korea , began to emerge around 2001 .

in february 2001 , the military junta revitalized burma's long dormant nuclear energy program and began discussions with russia for the construction of a 10 megawatt nuclear reactor in burma for medical and research use .

the deal also included plans for nuclear training for burmese engineers and military personnel in russia .

after the reactor deal with russia fell apart , burma apparently began discussions with north korea , which had obtained nuclear reactors and technology from pakistan and russia .

the possibility of a deal with russia resurfaced in 2007 , but soon collapsed again .

by that time , an estimated 1,000-2,000 burmese nationals had received some nuclear training in russia .

following the second failed deal with russia , reports of burma holding talks with north korea reemerged .

some of the nuclear - trained burmese military officers left burma and reported to foreign governments and the international media that they had been working on various aspects of a fledgling nuclear program in burma that was being provided with technical assistance from north korea .

since then , reports of secret shipments from north korea and other allegations by ex - burmese military personnel of a clandestine nuclear weapons program in burma have appeared in the press .

in may 2010 , the democratic voice of burma ( dvb ) released the report "nuclear related activities in burma," by robert e. kelley ( an ex - international atomic energy agency inspector ) and ali fowle ( an editor for dvb ) , providing evidence about burma's nuclear program , its cooperation with north korea and other nations , and the potential risk of burma developing nuclear weapons .

the authors concluded that burma currently has an undisclosed nuclear program , operating under military control , possibly with the intent to enrich uranium to construct a nuclear weapon .

however , in public presentations about the report , kelley has indicated that given the program's current level of technology and administration , the risk that burma will construct a nuclear weapon in the near future is very small .

other sources — such as professor desmond ball and journalist bertil lintner — also reported extensively in 2010 about the evidence that burma had a nuclear weapons program and was receiving assistance from north korea .

many experts in nuclear weaponry remain skeptical of the reported evidence of burma's nuclear weapons program and the involvement of north korea .

kelley wrote in an article in foreign affairs in may 2011: based on extensive work on this issue , i believe burma - north korea cooperation in the nuclear field remains a hypothesis , not an established fact .

cooperation between the two in conventional arms production has been widely reported by reliable researchers for years .

there is some evidence to suggest burmese interest in ballistic missiles , but none to suggest they have mastered the production of all the components for such weapons or that they have acquired them from north korea.… a burmese nuclear program in general , whether for weapons or for other activities , while still only conjecture , is a cause for concern given regular defector reporting .

during a television interview in july 2009 , secretary clinton stated that the obama administration is concerned about the possible transfer of nuclear technology from north korea to burma .

the u.s. concern apparently extends to other forms of weapons technology .

on may 26 , 2011 , the destroyer uss mccampbell intercepted a belize cargo ship allegedly in transit from north korea to burma under suspicion that the ship was carrying weapons technology in violation of u.n. security council resolution 1874 .

repeated requests from the uss mccampbell to board and inspect the ship were denied , and the ship eventually returned to north korea .

political events in burma in 2010 and 2011 have renewed discussions about the nature and effectiveness of u.s. policy towards the country .

both the u.s. sanctions regime and u.s. engagement policy have been subjected to scrutiny and criticism by congress , officials with the obama administration , and burma experts .

in part , the discussion has focused on the suitability of continuing the existing sanctions given the installation of a new government in burma .

the debate has also focused on the effectiveness of the existing sanctions and engagement in fostering the desired changes in burma .

what have not been generally challenged are the stated goals and objectives of u.s. policy — the establishment of a representative , democratically elected civilian government that will respect the human rights of the people of burma , including its ethnic minorities , and the release of all political prisoners .

over the last 20 years , congress has repeatedly taken the initiative in the formulation of u.s. policy towards burma , usually after the spdc and the burmese military have violently suppressed the burmese people .

section 138 of the customs and trade act of 1990 ( section 138 ) ( p.l .

101-382 ) , which authorized the president to impose sanctions on burma , was passed in response to the burmese military's brutal suppression of the 8888 uprising and the spdc's failure to respect the results of burma's 1990 parliamentary elections .

the burmese freedom and democracy act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-61 ) , which imposed additional sanctions on burma , was approved by congress in response to the arrest and detention of aung san suu kyi and many other opposition leaders .

similarly , the 2008 jade act ( p.l .

110-286 ) , which contains additional sanctions , was passed following the violent crackdown of the so - called "saffron revolution" in the autumn of 2007 .

the 112 th congress may choose to take an active role in the conduct of u.s. policy towards burma in several distinct ways .

first , congress has a role in the oversight of u.s. policy , including sanctions enforcement and engagement with burmese officials .

second , congress may decide to alter u.s. policy by passing new legislation after assessing the current situation to ascertain what policy changes are necessary .

third , congress may also choose to publicize issues related to burma by holding hearings or passing non - binding resolutions .

fourth , individual members of congress may serve as a separate channel of communication with burmese officials and interest groups .

u.s. sanctions laws on burma provide for an ongoing role for the 112 th congress in the maintenance and oversight of the existing sanctions regime .

section 9 ( b ) of the 2003 burmese freedom and democracy act ( bfda ) requires that congress pass a "renewal resolution" if it wishes to continue the general import restrictions imposed by section 3 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the law .

two versions of the required joint resolution have been introduced during the 112 th congress – h.j .

res .

66 and s.j .

res .

17 .

on july 20 , 2011 , the house of representatives passed h.j .

res .

66 by voice vote ; the senate has not taken action on either resolution .

the sanction laws also require that certain agencies in the executive branch provide periodic reports to selected congressional committees on the enforcement and effectiveness of the existing sanctions .

a list of the mandated reports is provided in appendix b of this report .

these reports may provide the 112 th congress with useful information to provide proper oversight of the existing sanctions on burma and to assess the need to modify or alter u.s. policy towards burma .

in addition to these reports , the 112 th congress may request special briefings or hold hearings on specific elements of u.s. policy to evaluate the rigor of enforcement or the impact of the sanctions on the union government , the people of burma , and / or the united states .

the 112 th congress also could modify the existing sanctions regime and / or stipulate conditions for the continuation of the obama administration's strategy of "pragmatic engagement. .

this could require that the 112 th congress conduct a comprehensive assessment of the current situation in burma to determine what types of changes may advance the overall goals and objectives of u.s. policy .

such an assessment might involve one or more of the mechanisms mentioned above in reviewing the enforcement of the existing policy .

the partial removal of existing sanctions would require the passage of new legislation , unless the president invokes existing authority under the current laws to modify the sanctions .

the obama administration has already held talks with representatives of the union government in which the status of current sanctions were discussed .

in addition to the existing sanctions , burmese officials also expressed interest in two other possible changes in u.s. policy .

first , the union government would like the united states to formally change the name of the country to myanmar .

second , the union government would like the united states to relax the travel restrictions on burma's delegation to the united nations .

alternatively , the 112 th congress may decide to impose new or stricter sanctions .

among the various additional sanctions that have been previously considered by congress or suggested by interested parties are: the imposition of a total ban on merchandise trade with burma – the current sanctions prohibit the importation of goods of burmese origin , but allow the export of goods to burma , so long as the recipient is not subject other sanction provisions .

the broadening of the ban on imports from burma – the current sanctions ban the importation of goods of burmese origin and goods containing rubies , jade , or jadeite that was extracted or mined in burma .

the import ban could be broadened to cover all direct or indirect trade with burma in goods , services , or technology ( including third country products ) .

alternatively , the list of banned materials from burma could be expanded .

for example , congress previously considered a ban on the importation of goods containing teak from burma .

an arms embargo – the united states could advocate an international embargo on the trade of military equipment and technology with burma .

prohibit all investments in burma by u.s. persons – the current sanctions exempts investments that were in place as of may 20 , 1997 .

congress could require the divestment of the previously exempted investments .

such a sanction has been discussed in the past .

some commentators have also suggested ways by which the u.s. government could apply more pressure on other nations to adopt a policy towards burma more similar to that of the united states .

among their suggestions are: make section 5 ( c ) of the jade act mandatory – section 5 ( c ) of the jade act grants the secretary of the treasury the authority , at his discretion , to "prohibit or impose conditions on the opening or maintaining in the united states of a correspondent account or payable - through account" by a bank or financial institution if the account may be used to provide financial services to a sanctioned burmese person or by a financial institution holding assets of a sanctioned burmese person .

congress could pass legislation requiring that the secretary of the treasury close all such accounts .

prohibit the awarding of u.s. government contracts to companies doing business in or with burma , and / or sanctioned burmese persons – a ban of this sort would have to be made consistent with existing international trade agreements , such as those associated with the world trade organization .

remove trade preferences to nations trading with or providing financial services to burma or sanctioned burmese nationals – the united states could make eligibility for special trade preferences contingent on the nation adopting specific sanctions on trade relations with burma .

this has been previously considered by congress .

another policy option would be to express support or opposition to the creation of a commission of inquiry ( coi ) .

for example , s. con .

res .

12 contains a provision supporting "an international investigation into allegations of international crimes against civilians in burma , including ethnic minorities. .

before taking action to alter or adjust current u.s. policy , a number of factors may come into play .

first , burma has a comparatively new government and has yet to resolve many basic patterns in its governance , including the balance of power between the union parliament and the union government , or the proper relationship between the union government and the 14 regional and state governments .

second , special representative mitchell may want more time to reformulate and adjust the conduct of u.s. policy towards burma , and be given the opportunity to present to congress his proposals on what adjustments might be needed .

third , the continuing conflicts between the tatmadaw and the ethnic - based militias appear to be comparatively fluid and may have a significant impact on the current situation in burma .

fourth , while aung san suu kyi's first trip outside of rangoon passed without incident , it is unclear how she and the nld will be treated in the coming months and whether the political situation has significantly changed since the 2010 elections and the dissolution of the spdc .

appendix a. map of burma ( including regions , states , and major cities ) appendix b .

reports required under u.s. burma sanctions laws the table below provides a list of reports or information to be made available to the public required by the three laws , including information on: which agency was to provide the information ; to whom the information was to be provided ; how often the reports were to be distributed ; what deadlines were specified , and how the reports were to be provided .

appendix c. parliamentary election results by political party the following table provides a breakdown of burma's november 2010 election results by political party for each chamber of the national parliament — the upper house and the lower house — as well as the 14 state or regional parliaments ( as a group ) .

of the 37 parties that participated in the elections , 22 parties had winning candidates .

parties are listed by the number of total seats won in the elections .

appendix d. burma's ministers and their portfolios the following table lists the current ministers of burma's union government , their portfolios , and their last position prior to their appointment as minister .

appendix e. burma's ethnic - based militias the following is a list of burma's active ethnic - based militias , according to their status .

non - ceasefire groups arakan liberation party china national front hongsawatoi restoration party karen national union ( knu ) karenni national progressive party lahu democratic front national socialist council nagaland ( khaplang faction ) national unity party of arakan palaung state liberation front pao national liberation organization rohingya solidarity organization shan state army - south wa national organization ceasefire groups that rejected border guard force status democratic karen buddhist army ( 5 th brigade ) kachin independence organization ( kio ) kayan new land party knu / knla peace council national democratic alliance army ( eastern shan state ) new mon state party shan state army - north ( shan state progress party ) 151 united wa state army ceasefire groups that accepted border guard force status ( with new designation ) democratic karen buddhist army – bgf 1011-22 karen peace force ( ex - knu 16 th battalion ) – bgf 1023 karenni nationalities peoples liberation front – bgf 1004-5 myanmar national democratic alliance army - kokang – bgf 1006 new democratic army - kachin – bgf 1001-3 ceasefire groups that were transformed into local militia ( pyithusit ) kachin defense army ( kio splinter group ) lasang awng wa peace group ( kio splinter group ) mon peace defense group ( nmsp splinter group ) mong tai army homein ( homong ) region pao national organization palaung state liberation party rawang militia ( ex - rebellion resistance force ) shan state army - north ( 3 rd and 7 th brigades ) .

