the president signed the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) on august 2 , 2011 .

the new law contains multiple interrelated components , several of which establish procedures that will affect the consideration of subsequent legislation .

this report begins with a brief overview of the essential features of the budget control act , taking a broad view of the connections between its different components and introducing readers to some fundamental concepts and terminology .

the subsequent sections of this report provide more detailed information on each component of the bca , with the goal of providing information to assist members and staff as they apply these new procedures .

 ( the appendices contain tools for those quickly seeking specific information: a list of short answers to "frequently asked questions" and tables identifying the various dates for action in relation to the bill to be proposed by the joint select committee on deficit reduction and the resolutions disapproving the debt limit increase. ) .

the explanations of the procedures established in the bca are based on a reading of the new law and an understanding of how similar procedures operated in the past .

some elements of the budget control act of 2011 , like all laws , will be subject to interpretation .

ultimately it is the house and senate that will decide on the specific operation of the legislative procedures .

for advice on the implementation of these procedures , congressional members and staff will be best advised to consult with the parliamentarian of their chamber .

if an automatic spending reduction process is triggered , its actual execution will depend in large part on the interpretations and actions of the office of management and budget ( omb ) , which might also need to be consulted regarding specific elements of that process .

section 101 of the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ) amends section 251 of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca ; title ii of p.l .

99-177 , 2 u.s.c .

900-922 ) to establish 10-year adjustable statutory limits ( or caps ) on discretionary spending , enforced primarily through a sequestration process .

discretionary spending is provided and controlled through the annual appropriations process .

statutory limits on discretionary spending were previously created by the budget enforcement act of 1990 ( title xiii of p.l .

101-508 ) , which also amended the bbedca , and twice were extended , in 1993 and 1997 , but expired at the end of fy2002 .

section 104 of the bca repeals the expiration date in the bbedca , and thereby restores many features of the previous statutory discretionary limits , including the sequestration enforcement process .

the new statutory limits cap the amount of new budget authority for each fiscal year covering fy2012-fy2021 ( see table 1 ) .

for fy2012 and fy2013 , the spending limits are divided into two separate categories: security and nonsecurity .

the security category includes discretionary spending for the departments of defense , homeland security , and veterans affairs , the national nuclear security administration , the intelligence community management account , and all accounts in the international affairs budget function ( budget function 150 ) .

the nonsecurity category includes discretionary spending in all other budget accounts .

for fy2014-fy2021 , the limits cap spending in a single category ( specified as the discretionary category ) , which includes all discretionary spending in all budget accounts .

section 105 ( a ) ( 3 ) of the bca amends the congressional budget act to establish certain procedural rules relating to the treatment of , and consideration of legislation containing , provisions designated as an emergency requirement .

in general , the rules allow the house to exempt from congressional budget constraints provisions designated as emergency requirements pursuant to the bbedca , as amended by the bca .

they also provide opportunities for members to strike such designations and offer proposals to offset the budgetary effects of a designated provision .

first , any new discretionary appropriations designated as an emergency requirement pursuant to section 251 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( a ) of the bbedca will not be counted for purposes of titles iii and iv of the budget act .

as explained above ( see " adjustments " section ) , under section 251 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( a ) of the bbedca , the statutory discretionary spending limits may be adjusted to accommodate appropriations designated , on an account - by - account basis , as emergency requirements .

the rules change effectively allows the house to exempt such spending from certain spending constraints , such as the appropriations subcommittee allocations under section 302 ( b ) of the budget act .

second , new section 314 ( d ) ( 2 ) ( b ) of the budget act provides that the budgetary effects of a motion to strike a designation ( presumably an emergency designation ) shall not be counted for purposes of titles iii and iv of the budget act and the house standing rules .

the rule would allow a member to offer an amendment to strike the designation without being subject to a point of order .

without this rule , a motion to strike an emergency designation contained in an appropriations act , for example , would likely be subject to a point of order under section 302 ( f ) of the budget act because striking the designation would cause the applicable new budget authority to be counted and therefore likely cause the appropriations bill to exceed its section 302 ( b ) allocation .

finally , new section 314 ( d ) ( 2 ) ( c ) of the budget act provides that an amendment proposing to strike an emergency designation and also to reduce "each amount appropriated or otherwise made available" shall be in order at any time during the reading of a bill for amendment .

the purpose of such an amendment would presumably be to make across - the - board reductions in spending already subject to the applicable spending cap sufficient to accommodate the appropriation newly being subjected to the spending constraint .

without this rule , such an amendment , making across - the - board reductions throughout the bill , generally would not be in order for at least three reasons: ( 1 ) it proposes to amend a paragraph or section in a bill not yet read for amendment ; ( 2 ) it proposes to amend a paragraph or section already read for amendment ; and ( 3 ) it proposes to amend the bill in more than one place .

under the rule , nevertheless , such an amendment presumably would be subject to a demand for a division of the question ( thereby forcing separate votes on striking the designation and reducing the appropriated amounts ) .

section 106 of the budget control act establishes certain procedural provisions for the purpose of budget enforcement for fy2012 and fy2013 that apply in the senate only , which expire , with respect to each of these fiscal years , if congress adopts a budget resolution for that year .

the provisions would establish budget levels enforceable in the senate , including constraints on spending provided in appropriations acts for fy2012 and fy2013 , if the house and senate are not able to agree on a budget resolution for the respective fiscal year .

specifically , these procedural provisions of the bca require the chair of the senate budget committee ( sbc ) to file a statement of levels of various budgetary amounts that would ordinarily be established by the budget resolution for fy2012 , including committee spending allocations , aggregate spending and revenue levels , and social security revenue and outlay levels , covering the period fy2011-fy2021 .

the budget levels filed must be consistent with the statutory discretionary spending limits , established by section 101 of the bca , and with cbo's march 2011 baseline levels ( adjusted to account for the budgetary effects of the bca , as well as of any other legislation enacted prior to the bca ) .

under the provisions of section 106 of the bca , these levels are to have the same force and effect as if they were included and associated with a budget resolution for fy2012 adopted by congress .

the sbc chair would also be required to file such budget levels covering the period fy2012-fy2022 , by april 15 , 2012 , consistent with the same baseline parameters , and such levels would have the same force and effect as if they were included and associated with a budget resolution for fy2013 adopted by congress .

finally , the sbc chair is required to reduce the balances on the senate pay - as - you - go ( paygo ) ledger to zero .

the senate paygo rule generally requires that any legislation projected to increase direct spending or reduce revenues must also include equivalent amounts of direct spending cuts , revenue increases , or a combination of the two , so that the legislation does not increase the on - budget deficit over a six - year period and an 11-year period .

the paygo ledger records any projected deficit reduction resulting from legislation ( except reconciliation legislation ) enacted since the beginning of the calendar year and not accounted for in the baseline , as defined by the rule .

therefore , reducing the balance to zero would prevent such balances ( in particular , those resulting from the deficit reduction included in the bca ) from being used to offset increases in the deficit resulting from legislation subsequently considered in the senate .

title iv of the budget control act establishes a joint select committee on deficit reduction , composed of an equal number of senators and members of the house , and instructs it to develop a proposal that would reduce the deficit by at least $1.5 trillion over fy2012 to fy2021 .

the bca provides no other guidelines regarding the policy content of the proposal .

the proposal , if reported by a majority of the joint committee by november 23 , 2011 , could be considered by each chamber under special procedures that prevent amendment and limit debate .

the expedited procedures represent a significant divergence from regular senate procedures , under which it can generally become necessary to obtain agreement among at least three - fifths of the senate ( normally 60 senators ) in order to bring debate to a close and the chamber to a vote on a matter .

the expedited procedures in each chamber will only apply to a joint committee bill passed on or before december 23 , 2011 .

if a joint committee bill reducing the deficit by at least $1.2 trillion is not signed into law by january 15 , 2012 , then the process of automatic spending reduction created by the bca will begin to occur in january of 2013 .

the bca identifies several other specific actions the joint committee and congress are expected to take by certain dates ( appendix b , table b - 1 ) .

in some cases , the bca establishes direct , procedural consequences if an action is not completed by a stated time .

in other cases , there is no immediate procedural result if an action is not taken , or if it is not taken by a stated deadline .

ultimately , if the joint committee bill does not become law , then the consequence is the automatic spending reduction process explained in the following section of this report .

section 302 of the budget control act of 2011 establishes an automatic process to reduce spending , beginning in 2013 , unless a joint committee bill reducing the deficit by at least $1.2 trillion over the period covering fy2012-fy2021 is enacted by january 15 , 2012 .

the process presumably is intended to encourage agreement on such deficit reduction , either by enacting the joint committee proposal by the deadline at the end of 2011 , or possibly by enacting other legislation ( through existing congressional procedures ) by the beginning of 2013 , when the automatic process would begin to make reductions .

in effect , if congress and the president do not act to reduce the deficit by $1.2 billion through the enactment of legislation , then spending reductions are automatically made , unless congress and the president agree by statute to repeal or modify the automatic process .

the spending reduction process is triggered automatically if legislation introduced by the joint committee is not enacted , or if it is enacted , but it does not reduce the deficit by at least $1.2 trillion over the period covering fy2012-fy2021 .

therefore , if a joint committee bill is enacted , but it reduces the deficit by only $900 billion , for example , the automatic process would still be triggered to make up the remainder .

if triggered , the automatic spending reduction process entails four key steps: the statutory discretionary spending limits for fy2013-fy2021 are revised , by redefining the security and nonsecurity categories and by extending such categories through fy2021 ; the amount of spending reduction required for each year is calculated and divided equally between two categories — defense and nondefense ; the annual amount of spending reductions required each year in each of these categories is further divided proportionally between discretionary appropriations and direct spending programs ( excluding certain programs and activities ) within each category ; and the spending reductions required in each year ( fy2013-fy2021 ) are achieved through a combination of sequestration and the downward adjustment of the revised discretionary spending limits .

each of these steps is described in detail below , to explain how the spending reductions would be achieved in the event the automatic process is triggered .

the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) also makes changes to two of the federal student aid programs authorized under title iv of the higher education act of 1965 , as amended ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 ) : the william d. ford federal direct loan ( dl ) program and the federal pell grant program .

the william d. ford federal direct loan ( dl ) program is the primary federal student loan program administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) .

the program makes available loans to undergraduate and graduate students and the parents of dependent undergraduate students to help them finance their postsecondary education costs .

several types of loans are offered through the dl program: subsidized stafford loans and unsubsidized stafford loans for undergraduate , graduate , and professional students ; plus loans for graduate students and the parents of dependent undergraduate students ; and consolidation loans through which borrowers may combine their loans into a single loan .

the primary difference between subsidized and unsubsidized stafford loans is that with unsubsidized stafford loans borrowers are responsible for paying the interest that accrues while they are in school , and during grace and deferment periods , whereas with subsidized stafford loans the interest that accrues during these periods is paid by the government .

dl program subsidy costs are mostly funded with mandatory appropriations , and administrative costs are mostly funded with discretionary appropriations .

the bca eliminates the availability of subsidized stafford loans to graduate and professional students for periods of instruction beginning on or after july 1 , 2012 , which corresponds to the beginning of award year 2012-13 .

after that date , graduate and professional students will be able to substitute amounts they previously would have been able to borrow using subsidized stafford loans with unsubsidized stafford loans .

according to ed , during award year 2010-11 , 1.47 million graduate and professional students borrowed $10.8 billion in subsidized stafford loans ; 1.34 million graduate and professional students borrowed $15.1 billion in unsubsidized stafford loans ; and 0.34 million graduate and professional students borrowed $6.4 billion in plus loans .

also , effective for dl program loans first disbursed on or after july 1 , 2012 , the bca eliminates the authority of the secretary of education to offer one of two repayment incentives to borrowers of dl program loans .

at present , two types of repayment incentives are offered: borrowers of stafford loans currently receive a 0.5% up - front interest rebate that partially offsets a 1% origination fee ; and borrowers of plus loans receive an up - front interest rebate of 1.5% that partially offsets a 4% origination fee .

if a borrower who receives an up - front interest rebate fails to make the first 12 monthly loan payments on time , the rebated amount is added back to the borrower's loan principal , increasing the loan amount that must be repaid .

the bca eliminates authority for the secretary to offer this benefit .

borrowers who repay dl program loans using automatic electronic debit currently receive a 0.25 percentage point reduction in their interest rate .

the bca retains authority for the secretary to offer this benefit .

cbo estimates the changes in the dl program would reduce direct spending by $9.6 billion over the fy2012-fy2016 period and by $21.6 billion over the fy2012-fy2021 period .

approximately $17 billion of these savings would be directed to the pell grant program for future use , while $4.6 billion would go towards deficit reduction .

the federal pell grant program is the single largest source of federal grant aid supporting postsecondary education students .

the program provided over $34.7 billion to approximately 9.5 million undergraduate students in fy2010 .

the pell grant program is currently funded with three types of spending: annual discretionary appropriations bills that provide most of the funding for the program and typically specify the base discretionary maximum grant level for the program in a given award year ; mandatory appropriations provided in "such sums as necessary" for the purposes of funding annual increases to the base discretionary maximum grant level each year , as specified in the hea , under existing statutory parameters ; and additional specific amounts in mandatory appropriations provided in previous legislation that are available for general use for a specific time period and may be used to pay for obligations associated with provisions that primarily affect discretionary spending in the program .

the bca provides additional mandatory funding for the pell grant program for general use in fy2012 and fy2013 , as depicted in the last category above .

the bca provides an additional $10 billion in mandatory funding for fy2012 , and an additional $7 billion in mandatory funding for fy2013 , for a total of an additional $17 billion .

these additional appropriations would reduce the amount of discretionary appropriations required in fy2012 and fy2013 .

despite the availability of the additional funds provided in the bca , congress would need to provide an additional $1.3 billion over the fy2011 discretionary funding amount to maintain the current award levels and eligibility parameters in fy2012 .

congress could also consider revising the program's award rules , eligibility parameters , and aid levels in order to reduce costs in the program , and therefore , reduce the amount of additional appropriations needed in fy2012 .

other than providing additional mandatory funding, the bca does not make any other changes to the pell grant program .

appendix a .

frequently asked questions about the budget control act how will the spending caps affect a specific program ( or department or agency ) ? .

the effect of the limits placed on discretionary spending by the bca on specific government programs , departments or agencies will be determined later through the regular appropriations process .

the spending limits of the bca are established for two broad categories for fy2012 and fy2013 ( "security" and "nonsecurity" ) and for one overall discretionary category for fy2014 through fy2021 .

congress and the president will decide how to allocate spending within these constraints .

the bca authorized an immediate increase of the federal debt ceiling .

are subsequent increases contingent upon congress taking any other action ? .

no .

the bca authorized an increase of the debt ceiling up to at least $2.1 trillion .

if congress does not take any other action , the increase up to $2.1 trillion will occur .

raising the debt ceiling to a higher level , up to a maximum of $2.4 trillion , is contingent on other action , namely the enactment of a joint committee bill that reduces the deficit by more than $1.2 trillion or the passage in both chambers of a balanced budget constitutional amendment .

furthermore , congress can prevent subsequent stages of debt limit increases authorized by the bca by enacting a "joint resolution of disapproval," a process expected to require support of two - thirds of each chamber to override a likely veto by the president .

are there any content requirements for the joint committee bill to be considered under the expedited procedures ? .

to qualify as a joint committee bill under the definition in the bca , the legislative language recommended by the committee must include a statement of the deficit reduction achieved over the period of fy2012 to fy2021 .

otherwise , the only other requirements the text must meet to be considered under the special procedures are ( 1 ) be recommended by a majority of joint committee members through a vote conducted on or before november 23 , 2011 ; ( 2 ) be introduced by the house speaker ( or designee ) the first legislative day after it is transmitted from the joint committee or be introduced by the senate majority leader ( or designee ) the first day of session after it is transmitted from the joint committee ; and ( 3 ) be passed by both chambers by december 23 , 2011 .

can the joint committee bill contain provisions affecting revenue ? .

yes .

the bca does not contain any specific restrictions on the policy content of the joint committee bill .

in order to comply with the constitutional requirement that all bills affecting revenue originate in the house of representatives , section 402 ( e ) ( 2 ) of the bca ensures that the bill sent to the president for his signature will be the "h.r. .

version of the joint committee bill , not the "s." version .

what happens if the joint committee bill does not become law ? .

if a joint committee bill reducing the deficit by at least $1.2 trillion over the period covering fy2012-fy2021 is not enacted by january 15 , 2012 , an automatic process to reduce spending will begin january 2 , 2013 .

the spending reductions are achieved for direct spending through sequestration each year ( fy2013 to fy2021 ) .

for discretionary spending , the reductions are achieved through sequestration the first year ( fy2013 ) .

for the other fiscal years ( fy2014-fy2021 ) , the discretionary spending reductions are achieved through a downward adjustment of statutory limits on discretionary spending divided into two new categories that reflect defense and nondefense spending .

importantly , some programs , including both social security and medicaid , are exempt from sequestration , and any sequestration of medicare spending is capped at 2% .

if the automatic spending reduction process occurs because a joint committee bill does not become law , how much will spending be cut ? .

the amounts of spending reductions required each year cannot yet be known .

it depends in part on the extent , if any , by which the reductions in the joint committee bill fall short of the $1.2 trillion goal and in part on spending estimates to be calculated in the future by the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

furthermore , beginning in fy2014 , part of the spending reductions will be achieved through a downward adjustment of the statutory limits on discretionary spending , not by automatic across - the - board spending cuts .

for discretionary spending , it will therefore be congress and the president who later determine the manner in which reductions are made to each account through the annual appropriations process each year .

what programs and activities are exempt from the sequestration process that will occur if a joint committee bill does not become law ? .

the list of exempt programs and activities can be found in section 255 of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act , as amended ( 2 u.s.c .

905 ) .

the exempt programs include social security , medicaid , and federal retirement and disability programs , among many others .

what happens if a balanced budget constitutional amendment is not sent to the states ? .

the bca does not establish a procedural consequence if the house and senate do not both pass a balanced budget constitutional amendment by the required two - thirds in each chamber .

if the chambers do approve such a constitutional amendment , however , the bca provides that the debt ceiling could be increased by $1.5 trillion , instead of by $1.2 trillion .

do both chambers have to vote on a balanced budget amendment ? .

section 201 of the budget control act states that the chambers "shall vote on passage of" a balanced budget amendment to the constitution between september 30 and december 31 , 2011 .

in the senate , to get to a direct passage vote on a constitutional amendment , it might be necessary to secure support from 60 senators to begin consideration of such a proposal .

the bca does not impose any procedural consequence if a chamber fails to vote on a balanced budget amendment .

factors besides procedure , however , might be expected to influence the decision to hold a vote .

without successful final passage votes on the same measure in both chambers , the bca does preclude one avenue by which the debt limit may be increased by $1.5 trillion ( instead of by $1.2 trillion ) .

my question is not on this list .

do i have to read this whole report to get answers ? .

no .

you can ask your specific questions to the authors of this report or one of several other crs analysts whose contact information is provided below: key policy staff appendix b. timelines for actions in expedited procedure .

