budgetary pressures at all levels of government have increased concern about using resources for transportation projects as effectively as possible .

the speed with which transportation projects are delivered , and the role the federal government plays in the project delivery process , have received particular attention .

it is often claimed that the environmental review process required by the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa , 42 u.s.c .

§4321 et seq. ) .

and other federal environmental laws and regulations are major causes of delay in moving highway and transit projects from conception to completion .

to more fully understand sources of delay in major highway and transit projects , this report examines the process from beginning to end , including environmental review , and looks at the available evidence on timelines in project delivery .

unfortunately , the evidence is scant and anecdotal , relying for the most part on the memories and opinions of transportation professionals involved in planning , designing , and constructing highway and transit facilities .

what the evidence appears to show is that while major highway and transit facilities do take a long time to plan and build , typically on the order of 10 to 15 years , much of the delay is unrelated to federally mandated environmental review .

developing a community consensus on what to do , securing the funding , and dealing with affected residents and businesses , including utility companies and railroads , all appear to be significant causes of delay .

while congress has options that may accelerate project delivery , it may be necessary to temper expectations for dramatically shortening timelines on expensive , complex , and often contentious projects .

the report begins with an overview of the project delivery process for highway and transit projects .

this is followed by an examination of the evidence on the reasons for project delay , and a discussion of environmental streamlining efforts in past surface transportation reauthorization legislation .

the final section identifies new legislative options for congress to speed project delivery .

highway and transit projects range widely in purpose , scope , location , size , and cost .

although all types of projects can suffer delays , concerns about long delivery times are mostly focused on big highway , bridge , and transit projects .

this includes major new highways and bridges , major expansions of existing highway facilities , and major public transit projects ( often referred to as "new starts" along with the federal transit program of the same name ) .

because of the high costs involved in these types of projects , the federal government typically provides a share of the funding .

in the case of major highway and bridge projects , state departments of transportation ( state dots ) receive funding from a number of different federal - aid highway programs .

in the case of new starts transit projects , transit agencies and other local government project sponsors receive federal funding from the new starts program , but may also use smaller amounts of other federal highway and transit program funding .

along with federal funding come requirements established in federal law and regulation .

there have been several past legislative efforts intended to accelerate the environmental review of surface transportation projects .

those efforts became commonly referred to as "environmental streamlining" in the debate surrounding the passage of the transportation equity act for the 21 st century ( tea - 21 ; p.l .

105-178 ) .

although the term "streamlining" was used in tea - 21 , it was not defined in the statute nor in regulation .

dot broadly defined streamlining as the timely delivery of federally - funded transportation projects while protecting and enhancing the environment .

section 1309 of tea - 21 included streamlining provisions that directed dot to establish a "coordinated environmental review process" that encouraged early identification of federal agencies outside dot that may have jurisdiction over a project and to cooperatively determine timeframes for compliance with any identified environmental requirements .

tea - 21 also authorized dot to approve state dot requests to reimburse federal resource agencies for expenses associated with meeting expedited time frames .

tea - 21's streamlining provisions largely included procedures that could be implemented voluntarily by states or codified requirements that were already included in dot's nepa regulations .

tea - 21 also included requirements that certain environmental factors of a project be considered during project planning .

in safetea , unlike tea - 21 , the term "streamlining" is not used .

however , safetea includes provisions similarly intended to expedite compliance with certain environmental requirements , particularly nepa and section 4 ( f ) requirements .

like tea - 21 , many of the provisions in safetea codify existing regulatory requirements , such as: specifically designating dot as the "lead agency" for surface transportation projects ; specifying the role of the lead and cooperating agencies ; and allowing deadlines for decision - making to be set .

safetea also includes a host of provisions that changed statutory or regulatory requirements applicable to the transportation planning process and the environmental review process .

section 6001 of safetea ( "transportation planning" ) required that the development of long - range transportation plans include such elements as: consultations with relevant resource agencies ; discussion of potential environmental mitigation activities ; participation plans that identify a process for stakeholder involvement ; and visualization of proposed transportation strategies where practicable .

in 2007 , dot promulgated regulations implementing safetea's planning requirements .

it has also developed guidance on the efficient development of environmental and planning linkages .

the most significant change to the environmental review process was the establishment of new project development procedures under section 6002 ( "efficient environmental reviews for project decision - making" ) .

the new process repealed tea - 21's streamlining provisions and established a new environmental review process for highways , transit , and multi - modal projects .

the new process , mandatory for all projects requiring an eis , requires project sponsors to initiate the environmental review process by notifying dot of the type of work , termini , length , general location of the proposed project , and a statement of any anticipated federal approvals ; establishes a new entity required to participate in the nepa process , referred to as a "participating agency," which includes any federal , state , tribal , regional , and local government agencies that may have an interest in the project ; requires the lead agency to establish a schedule for coordinating public and agency participation in the environmental review process ; establishes a 180-day statute of limitation on judicial claims on final agency actions related to environmental requirements ( the previous limit had been six years , under provisions of the administrative procedures act ) ; and authorizes the use of federal transportation funds to help agencies required to expedite the environmental review process ( similar to provisions in tea - 21 ) .

in 2006 , dot produced guidance intended to assist state dots in implementing safetea's new environmental review process .

there were several other significant environmental - related provisions of safetea .

first , under section 6004 ( "state assumption of responsibility for categorical exclusions" ) dot was allowed to assign and states were allowed to assume dot's responsibility for determining whether certain designated activities are categorical exclusions .

to assume dot authority , section 6004 requires states to enter into a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) setting forth the responsibilities to be assigned to that state .

subsequently , dot established a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) template and guidance to implement section 6004 .

to date , california , utah , and alaska have entered into mous with fhwa .

second , section 6005 ( "surface transportation project delivery pilot program" ) required the establishment of a pilot program to allow oklahoma , california , texas , ohio , and alaska to assume certain federal environmental review responsibilities ( in addition to ce determinations ) .

only california agreed to participate in the pilot program .

other states declined , primarily due to state legislature concerns regarding the potential liability associated with assuming federal responsibility under nepa .

third , section 6009 ( "parks , recreation areas , wildlife and waterfowl refuges , and historic sites" ) amended section 4 ( f ) requirements to allow for the use of section 4 ( f ) resources if that use can be proven to have only de minimis impacts to the resource .

the law previously prohibited the use of a section 4 ( f ) resource for a transportation project unless there is "no prudent and feasible" alternative to do otherwise , and the project includes all possible planning to minimize harm to the resource .

many proposals have been advanced to accelerate delivery of highway and transit projects .

some of these entail broad changes in federal surface transportation or environmental laws .

others are far more technical in nature , and are intended to address narrow issues that can cause project delay .

possibly the broadest option under discussion as congress considers the reauthorization of federal surface transportation programs would abolish many of the programs and thereby eliminate many of the associated federal requirements .

states would then be responsible for funding their own transportation projects and determining how to carry them out .

this proposal is typically referred to as "devolution" or "turn - back. .

although most federal programs would end , proponents of devolution often suggest that certain programs be retained at the federal level , notably those dedicated to the interstate highway system .

because many large highway projects involve the interstates , devolution in this manner might not address delays in the most complex , highly visible projects .

a different approach to providing states with more authority might be through delegating a wide range of federal oversight responsibilities to the states .

this has been approved on a limited pilot basis with regard to nepa .

one suggestion is for delegation to be approved in exchange for a state instituting a performance - based management program , again on a pilot basis to start .

instead of requiring aspects of project development be carried out in a certain way , the federal government might allow states to proceed according to their own laws and regulations but then hold them accountable for the outcomes based on certain agreed measures .

another broad option would be the creation of an office within the department of transportation responsible for accelerating project delivery .

such an approach was proposed in the surface transportation assistance act ( staa ) of 2009 , the only reauthorization bill considered in the 111 th congress .

staa would have required that offices of expedited project delivery be created in both fhwa and fta , each with a director appointed by the secretary of transportation .

the major role of these offices would have been to facilitate the timely completion of projects being funded by fhwa and fta , with special attention to large and potentially complicated projects .

in the case of fhwa these were defined as "significant" projects , those costing $500 million or more .

for fta the emphasis was on "new starts" projects .

although staa provided special attention to large projects , the offices nonetheless would have been charged with providing oversight for all fhwa - and fta - funded projects .

the offices were expected to fulfill their mission by taking a "leadership" role in the project delivery process .

this was to be done by identifying problems ( especially those associated with environmental review issues ) and working with project managers to find solutions .

the offices would have been required to provide annual reports to congress on the project delivery process and make recommendations as to how it might be improved .

the offices were not given any specific authority to force action by any party or to penalize any party for not following through on its recommendations , raising questions about their ability to actually expedite project delivery .

creating these offices within dot would also likely mean dedicating staff and funding to fulfill this new mission .

staa , however , did not propose set - aside funding for these offices , but would have funded them through the respective fhwa and fta administrative budgets .

hence , it is unclear from the bill as drafted how much these new functions were expected to cost and whether the agencies would be required to reallocate funding from existing administrative activities .

another broad approach for speeding up project delivery is to provide more authority and incentives for partnerships between federal agencies and grant recipients .

this might involve establishing in law a requirement for a partnering plan , funding an awards program for outstanding collaboration , or creation of a special research and technical training center devoted to transportation project delivery .

unlike stewardship and oversight agreements that exist between fhwa and a state dot , a partnering plan would include , depending on local circumstances , more partners such as other state and local agencies , including resource agencies .

another possibility along these lines is to create partnering grants to help federal agencies and grant recipients implement innovative contracting techniques .

some have even suggested setting up a program to reward states and metropolitan areas for on - time project delivery while maintaining standards for review , public involvement , and other elements of the process .

its proponents argue that this would encourage "strong partnerships and coordination among stakeholders. .

apart from the extra funding that would be needed , another issue with such an approach would be how to measure whether or not a project is on time , given the great diversity of projects and local circumstances .

exempting projects from federal requirements if the amount of federal funding is relatively small is an option that might shorten delivery times for smaller projects .

aashto argues that this could be done on projects in which less than $1 million in federal funds is involved , or if federal funds are less than a certain percentage of total project costs .

projects would then be administered under state regulations .

one suggestion is to amend titles 23 and 49 u.s.c .

to allow funding recipients to certify compliance with federal requirements and to proceed without further approval if federal funds are one - third or less of project costs .

another option that might improve project delivery broadly would be to bolster the internal resources of agencies involved in the project delivery process .

for instance , greater federal funding assistance could be provided to state dots for technology and data such as geographic information systems to track transportation infrastructure , underground utilities , and natural resources .

one legislative option that might be considered in surface transportation reauthorization is expanding the delegation of dot's authority under nepa to states .

such a step might make permanent safetea's pilot program ( §6005 ) and expand it to allow delegation of nepa authority to any state that consents to accept that authority ( see , for example , h.r .

2160 , 112 th congress ) .

after the establishment of programs that would allow states to assume certain federal authority under nepa ( under both §§6004 and 6005 of safetea ) , two primary factors were identified that may discourage states from assuming that authority .

first , pursuant to safetea , as a condition of assuming federal authority , congress required a state to waive its right to sovereign immunity against actions brought by its citizens in federal court and consent to the jurisdiction of federal courts .

that is , the state would become solely liable for complying with and carrying out the federal authority that it consents to assume .

state legislatures have not wanted to take on this federal liability .

one suggestion made by some stakeholders is that a process be established where states may take some authority for nepa documentation approval , but liability remain with dot .

it is unclear how legislation could provide states with more autonomy in implementing their nepa requirements , while minimizing dot's liability for actions over which it has little control .

second , some stakeholders have expressed concern regarding regulations established by dot in response to safetea's directives that have to do with rights - of - way ( row ) acquisitions in states that choose to assume federal authority under nepa .

as discussed earlier , one of nepa's primary requirements is that federal agencies consider the impacts of their actions before proceeding with them .

the nepa process cannot simply document a decision that was already made .

thus , federal funds cannot be used for row acquisitions ( an action that would indicate a final decision ) before the nepa process is complete .

currently , states may make row acquisitions using state funds , but risk losing future federal funding for that purchase if the project ultimately involves an alternative that does not use that property ( thereby placing state funds "at risk" ) .

by assuming dot's authority , a state would assume federal agency - level responsibility to comply with nepa .

dot has found that would mean , in the state's capacity as a federal agency , the state would be precluded from making row acquisitions .

another legislative option relates to a desire for more "prompt action" from agencies outside dot when those agencies are required to provide permits , approvals , analyses , or consultation .

methods to encourage prompt action , usually in the form of establishing deadlines on outside agencies , were debated during the development of tea - 21 and safetea .

under safetea's new environmental review requirements , dot has developed a plan to coordinate outside agency participation in the environmental review process .

however , dot has limited ability to establish or enforce deadlines on other agencies , and surface transportation reauthorization is not likely to be the vehicle for such changes .

outside agencies participating in the nepa process are doing so because they have jurisdiction by law , such as the clean air act or endangered species act .

dot has no authority over the implementation of those laws .

further , the laws applicable to a project , and the corresponding state , tribal , or federal agencies charged with implementing those laws , will vary from project to project .

the ability of dot to establish binding deadlines on a potentially wide ranging group of agencies would be challenging .

considering these limits to dot's authority , a potential option in reauthorization would be to continue the process established under safetea that allows dot to approve state dot requests to provide federal - aid highway or federal transit funds to state , tribal , or federal , agencies that support activities that contribute to expediting and improving the planning and delivery of transportation projects in that state .

safetea did not provide any additional funding for this purpose .

consequently , a state proposing to use this authority must take the funds out of its normal allocation of federal transportation funds .

safetea required greater consideration of environmental issues in the statewide and metropolitan planning processes .

moreover , some states have integrated transportation planning to a much greater extent with other planning efforts such as land use and natural resource preservation .

despite these changes , however , some believe they have not made much difference in speeding project delivery because of the uncertainty of applying these efforts in the nepa process .

one option in reauthorization for overcoming this problem is to create an integrated planning pilot project , under the special experiment program authority that currently exists for fhwa .

perhaps beyond this is the idea for pursuing a programmatic approach to oversight , rather than one based on project by project review .

in addition to the efforts to streamline environmental review , there have been other past legislative changes and administrative actions dealing with the delays of the highway project delivery process .

these include the encouragement by dot of environmental - planning linkages ( epl ) and the creation of its "every day counts" ( edc ) initiative , as well as the encouragement of innovative methods in contracting .

the edc initiative aims to identify areas of concern in project delivery and to disseminate innovations and best practices that already exist to states and others to overcome them .

epl is one of the ten ways to shorten project delivery times as part of the edc initiative .

the others are: expanding use of programmatic agreements ; legal sufficiency enhancements ; use of in - lieu fee and mitigation banking ; clarifying the scope of preliminary design ; flexibilities in right - of - way ; flexibilities in utility accommodation and relocation ; enhance technical assistance on ongoing eiss ; design - build ; and construction manager / general contractor .

innovative contracting included fhwa's special experiment project 14 ( sep - 14 ) and special experiment project 15 ( sep - 15 ) and the changes in tea - 21 ( section 1307 ) that made design - build contracting a permissible method of contracting in the federal - aid highway program .

some new options for accelerating specific phases of highway projects include the process for acquiring right - of - way , the relocation of affected residents and businesses , and how to deal with utilities .

traditionally , construction bids are let after the purchase of right - of way .

however , there have been proposals for fhwa to allow the bidding process and construction to begin while row is still being acquired .

typically in proposals of this type , the approval to proceed concurrently would not be a blanket approval , but would be contingent on the results of a risk analysis .

complying with the uniform relocation assistance and real property acquisition act of 1970 , as amended , when relocating residents and businesses is often argued to be cumbersome and time - consuming , in part , because the current law is interpreted to constitute a minimum requirement for states and localities .

consequently , there have been suggestions to allow states to use their own procedures , provided that fhwa has certified that a state's procedures properly protects property owners and tenants .

in the case of delays resulting from utility relocation , one option would be to encourage better partnerships between dots and utilities .

this might involve revising federal guidance and regulation to make it feasible for dots to do utility work themselves , by making it easier for dots to pay utilities for work , and allowing greater access for utility rights - of - way on transportation rights - of - way .

another option is to continue research on how to improve coordination between project developers and utility companies .

in prior legislation congress has made changes to the new starts program with a view to speeding up the project delivery process .

in safetea , for example , congress enacted the small starts program , in part , to simplify the application process for less expensive projects .

safetea also created a pilot project , the public - private partnership pilot program , or "penta - p," to see whether program simplification would increase private participation and risk - taking in project development , construction , and operation .

to accelerate program approvals , fta has offered regular training workshops to potential project sponsors and developed project delivery tools such as project requirements checklists .

going forward congress may want to consider other ways to simplify and shorten the new starts process , particularly for major new starts projects .

options for programmatic changes to reduce the complexity of the process typically involve reducing the number of steps in the new starts process and moving up the federal government's decision or signal of intent to fund a project to earlier in the process .

one option would be to replace approval for entry into preliminary engineering with approval for entry into the new starts program .

according to this proposal , approval into the program would signal the federal government's intent to ultimately fund a project providing certain conditions are met .

another possibility is to eliminate the requirement for fta to approve advancement into final design .

to help manage projects through this abbreviated process there have been proposals for project development agreements ( pdas ) .

apta argues: "the pda should include schedules and roles for both fta and the grantee and should define the criteria and conditions a project must meet to streamline and expedite overall project delivery and could be the basis for an early system work agreement once the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) process is completed. .

another option is for congress to provide fta with the ability to "fast - track" projects that are low - risk , because the project sponsor is experienced and other reasons , or that involve a relatively low share of federal funds .

critics worry that such changes may reduce the rigor of the evaluation process , ultimately leading to federal support of less beneficial projects .

this may run counter to the current push for greater performance measurement in transportation programs .

simplifying the process by creating a low hurdle for entry into the new starts pipeline also creates the possibility that fta may receive a large number of project proposals that it would have to manage through the evaluation process to ultimate denial .

another possibility is that fta will approve or intend to approve for funding many more projects than can be supported by the available funding .

this may mean relatively quick funding approval for projects that then languish while waiting in line for more funding to be made available by congress .

in essence , the small starts program fast - tracks projects using relatively small amounts of federal funds .

the downsides of fast - tracking are that problems might not be detected early in project development , that there may be charges of favoritism if some projects are treated to less scrutiny and quicker approval than others , and that some new starts sponsors may have little experience in project development and construction .

fta already has the authority to implement management or rulemaking changes that might speed - up and improve the new starts approval process .

as noted earlier , many of these were identified in the study commissioned by fta , and include defining project stages , overcoming organization conflicts within fta , and improving the prioritization of project reviews .

gao stated back in 2008 that fta is working to implement some of these recommendations .

congress might play an active role in overseeing the implementation of these improvements .

along these lines , it is possible that with more staff dedicated to reviewing new starts proposals , fta might be able to reduce the time it takes to evaluate projects .

an option congress might consider , therefore , is providing more funds for new starts administration , although this might prove difficult in the current fiscal environment .

finally , the frequent issuance of policy and guidance changes by fta is also believed to lead to project delay and additional costs because sponsors have to revise and resubmit project materials .

to avoid this , some suggest that fta apply these changes to future project submissions , although this may reduce fta's ability to improve its oversight on existing projects .

congress might direct fta on this issue .

if congress considers major changes to the new starts approval process as part of surface transportation reauthorization legislation , it may wish to revisit the provisions in staa that would have required fta to approve a project for entry into project development if it has been chosen as the locally preferred alternative under the metropolitan transportation planning process .

once a project is approved for project development , the multi - step approval process is reduced to one step , the approval of a ffga .

staa would also have done away with alternatives analysis required under the new starts program , which is often seen as a duplication of the alternatives analysis required under the national environment policy act ( nepa ) .

it would have allowed the secretary of transportation the option to fast track some projects , and would have based the rigor of fta's evaluation partly on the amount of federal assistance being sought by the applicant .

the break point between a major new start and a small start would have been raised from $75 million to $100 million in federal assistance .

projects requesting $25 million or less would have become exempt from the requirements of the program so that they could be advanced using a special warrant , presumably a written pledge of federal support if certain conditions are met .

