savvy criminals constantly develop new techniques to target u.s. persons , businesses , and interests .

central to the evolution of modern - day crime are four broad operational realities — geographic borders , criminal turf , cyberspace , and law enforcement jurisdiction .

individual criminals as well as broad criminal networks exploit these realities and often leverage the unique characteristics of one against the other to dodge law enforcement countermeasures and efforts to disrupt illicit activity .

further , the interplay of these realities can potentially encumber policing measures .

in light of these interwoven realities , policy makers may question how to best design policies to help law enforcement combat ever - evolving criminal threats .

in the first operational reality , criminals routinely take advantage of geographic lines .

they thrive on their ability to illicitly cross borders and provide illegal products or services .

indeed , much criminal activity is predicated on the ability to subvert border security regimens , thus earning a premium from black market clients and customers .

drug trafficking organizations ( dtos ) , for example , have constructed increasingly sophisticated cross - border tunnels to smuggle illegal drugs from mexico into the united states .

and , smugglers and fraudsters ship counterfeit goods from overseas , flooding u.s. markets with sham goods and depriving genuine manufacturers of profits .

the second reality is broadly related to the first .

some larger criminal groups even establish their own operational "borders" by defining and defending the "turf" or territories they control .

these boundaries are not formally recognized by law enforcement authorities , but they have strong influence in the criminal underworld .

in fact , much of the violence in mexico along the u.s. southwest border revolves around rival dtos clashing over territorial control .

the outlines of turf can cross borders at the national , state , and local levels , thus complicating policing efforts .

the third reality involves a largely borderless , virtual environment where criminals carry out illicit business .

criminals operate in the cyber world partly to circumvent more conventional , established constructs such as international borders .

in the virtual realm , criminals can rely on relative anonymity and a rather seamless environment to conduct business .

for instance , some criminals use electronic banking systems to quickly smuggle cash out of one nation and into another .

finally , u.s. law enforcement often remains constrained by geographic and legal boundaries or even its own notions of "turf" — partly defined in terms of competing agency - level priorities and jurisdictions .

u.s. officials have suggested that as criminals have evolved their operations , they have relied less on turf to conduct business ; the same evolution is unclear regarding u.s. law enforcement .

law enforcement agencies , even while collaborating through means such as interagency agreements , task forces , and fusion centers , retain investigational jurisdiction over certain categories of crime .

and recent reports have suggested that interagency disagreements over organizational boundaries may remain .

in addition to challenges presented by each of these four operational realities individually , law enforcement faces hurdles presented by the overlap of any or all of the realities .

complicating this , policy changes in one reality — both administratively and legislatively — can impact criminal activity and law enforcement countermeasures in other realities .

policy makers have expressed interest in ensuring that law enforcement is keeping pace with 21 st century criminals who threaten american society .

given that criminal investigations unfold in an environment of geographic borders , criminal turf , borderless cyberspace , and law enforcement jurisdictions , policy makers may question how to direct policy to best enable u.s. law enforcement to target contemporary criminals .

for instance , congress may choose to examine whether law enforcement agencies are effectively coordinating their investigations through the use of interagency agreements , task forces , and fusion centers .

policy makers may also debate whether law enforcement has the existing legal authorities , technology , and resources — both financial and manpower — to counter 21 st century criminals .

one of the principal debates for policy makers may be whether , or how , to design policies that cut across multiple operational realities .

this report examines the four operational realities within which law enforcement and crime operate .

it analyzes the challenges for u.s. law enforcement in each of these realities individually and in selected cases where they overlap .

the report also discusses how law enforcement has adapted to combat present - day criminals .

throughout , it raises questions regarding how congress may leverage its legislative and oversight roles to help u.s. law enforcement most effectively protect u.s. persons , businesses , and interests .

physical and virtual boundaries play significant roles in both criminal activity and police work .

in the physical world , recognized borders delineate the lines of municipal , state , and national authority .

at their most basic level , legally defined geographic borders outline the sovereignty of these entities .

for example , at official crossings along the u.s. border with mexico , law enforcement presence helps to distinguish one nation from another .

between ports of entry , the u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) has deployed personnel , technology , and tactical infrastructure along the southwest border to impede the illegal entry of vehicles and unauthorized persons .

when it comes to criminal turf , the virtual realm , and law enforcement jurisdictions , the lines separating one authority — legitimate or illegitimate — from another often grow fuzzier .

the following sections lay out discussions of borders , turf , cyberspace ( the virtual world ) , and jurisdiction that help shape modern criminal activity as well as law enforcement counter efforts .

as mentioned , many 21 st century criminals exploit borders and cyberspace in their illicit activities , and they occasionally establish operational turf .

in addition , as criminals may clash over their turf , law enforcement , too , can struggle over jurisdiction .

each of these realities presents unique opportunities for criminals and challenges to u.s. law enforcement .

further , the intersection of these elements can potentially compound obstacles to counter - crime efforts .

as seen in figure 1 , criminals may operate alone or as part of an extensive network .

without regard for geographic borders or law enforcement jurisdictions , criminals may organize with one another and carry out their illicit activities .

likewise , their operational turf is unconstrained by these lines .

criminals also rely on constantly advancing technology and near anonymity in cyberspace to work both within and across borders and jurisdictions .

all the while , law enforcement jurisdiction is often constrained by boundaries — established by jurisdictions and otherwise .

even within a given jurisdictional boundary , multiple agencies may have investigative authority , contributing to possible disagreements over case leadership and control .

each of the four operational realities within which law enforcement and crime operate ( borders , turf , cyberspace , and jurisdictions ) also overlap .

the following sections analyze selected areas of overlap , highlighting the modern - day opportunities for criminals and challenges to policing .

in light of these interwoven realities , law enforcement and policy makers may question how to best design administrative and legislative policies to combat ever - evolving criminal threats .

modern - day criminals take advantage of geographic borders , criminal turf , cyberspace , and law enforcement jurisdictions .

this has led law enforcement to transform their crime fighting efforts .

for instance , the fbi has — particularly since september 11 , 2001 — relied more heavily on collaboration , information sharing , and technology .

the following sections outline how federal law enforcement has relied on interagency cooperation and technological implementation to confront 21 st century crime .

the operational realities of 21 st century crime and policing present significant challenges to u.s. policy makers .

in particular , the interplay between borders , criminal turf , cyberspace , and law enforcement jurisdiction is such that policies directed toward countering crime in one reality will impact crime and law enforcement countermeasures in other realities .

as such , congress may choose to debate a host of legislative and oversight options to most effectively empower law enforcement .

legislatively , congress may consider whether law enforcement has the existing authorities , technology , and resources — both monetary and manpower — to counter 21 st century criminals .

for instance , given that many crimes are increasingly trans - border in nature , congress may deliberate whether certain offenses are best criminalized at the state or federal level .

if congress determines that these crimes may be most effectively countered at the federal level , policy makers may consider expanding federal law enforcement's statutory authorities to investigate these offenses .

policy makers may also consider whether to direct existing or additional resources toward bolstering federal law enforcement agents' skills and abilities to counter modern day threats .

for example , congress may direct the allocation of agent resources toward combating more traditional , yet evolving , crimes such as financial fraud .

policy makers may also choose to direct law enforcement training to enhance agents' technological savvy such that policing efforts can keep pace with modern - day criminals .

further , state and local law enforcement agencies are also tasked with countering these criminal threats .

as such , congress may debate whether to provide financial , technological , or investigative support to state and local law enforcement operations .

in exercising its oversight responsibilities , congress may examine whether law enforcement is utilizing existing mechanisms to effectively coordinate investigations and share information .

u.s. law enforcement has , particularly since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , increasingly relied on intelligence - led policing , enhanced interagency cooperation ( through formal and informal interagency agreements as well as fusion centers and task forces ) , and technological implementation to confront 21 st century crime .

nonetheless , there have been notable impediments in implementing effective information sharing systems and relying on up - to - date technology .

as such , policy makers may consider what is the appropriate level of interagency information sharing and whether law enforcement is effectively achieving this goal .

congress may also wish to explore whether existing inter - agency agreements are being adequately formulated , implemented , and overseen by the relevant agencies .

