the army corps of engineers is responsible for building and maintaining much of the federal water resources infrastructure in the united states .

the corps is faced with more demands for building and maintaining its projects than available federal funding allows .

this situation raises a number of basic questions about how the corps functions , including the efficacy , efficiency , and equity of corps planning and implementation .

recently the national research council identified a number of challenges facing the corps ( see box below ) .

this report discusses selected frequently asked questions ( faqs ) related to corps fiscal challenges which are commonly raised by congressional staff .

where available , it also includes related recommendations from expert and government reports , as well as current legislation that may be considered in regard to these challenges ( see table 8 for examples of legislation in the 112 th congress ) .

the faqs are organized into four categories: appropriations ; backlog and project delivery ; authorizations and missions ; and navigation trust funds .

for more detailed background on corps processes , see crs report r41243 , army corps of engineers water resource projects: authorization and appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

the frequently asked questions on corps appropriations address the corps' annual appropriations and supplemental funding , trends and categories of funding , and earmarks and emergency operations .

after the appropriations faqs , table 3 provides some of the recommendations made in government and expert reports for addressing issues raised in the appropriations faqs .

the faqs on the corps backlog and project delivery discuss the size and elements of the agency's construction backlog and operations and maintenance backlog , as well as the factors contributing to the expansion of the construction backlog .

after the backlog faqs , table 4 provides recommendations made in an expert report for addressing the backlog .

the faqs on the corps authorization and missions address the processes in place for authorization and deauthorization of corps activities , perspectives on the corps mission and role , and past efforts to refocus the agency .

after the authorization and mission faqs , table 5 provides recommendations made in an expert report for addressing the backlog .

the below faqs on navigation expenditures and trust funds address coastal harbor and inland waterway funding , including proposals to alter trust fund collections and their use and funding challenges for operations and maintenance / low use navigation projects .

at the end of this section , table 7 provides recommendations by government and expert reports for addressing navigation funding issues .

there are several legislative proposals related to corps fiscal challenges before the 112 th congress .

table 8 provides a list of legislation related directly to corps fiscal issues .

the provisions represent different responses to the corps' fiscal challenges .

some would deemphasize certain types of corps activities ( eg , water and wastewater projects ) , while others would provide greater financing for other types of corps activities ( eg , harbors ) .

the corps and its projects are part of the larger discourse about how to proceed with infrastructure investments and their role in the economy , job creation , and provision of public services .

in addition to the provisions listed in table 8 , other corps authorization and appropriations processes relevant to corps fiscal challenges also are underway , but are beyond the scope of this report .

these include more focused legislative provisions , such as those related to specific corps projects and activities ( eg , h.r .

433 , h.r .

723 , h.r .

892 , h.r .

922 , h.r .

1078 , h.r .

1421 , h.r .

1652 , h.r .

1865 , h.r .

2476 , s. 793 ) .

also not included in the table is information about the various actions related to earmarks and congressionally directed spending , which also affect the corps congressional fiscal context .

