before and after a disaster strikes , it is useful to understand the basic national emergency management structure and where authority rests at various stages of the process .

this report provides information to aid policymakers as they navigate the many levels of responsibility , and numerous policy pressure points ; it describes the laws and administrative policies governing the disaster response and recovery process .

the report also reviews the legislative framework that exists for providing federal financial assistance following disasters , as well as the policies the executive branch employs to provide supplemental help to state ( or territory ) , tribal , and local governments during time of disasters .

for information on federal declarations and assistance , see the " federal disaster declarations ," " federal financial assistance programs ," and " other federal assistance " sections of this report .

for information about how a congressional office may wish to prepare and respond to disasters in their state or district , see " congressional activity in disasters . .

for online resources with information on the response to current disasters , the disaster management process , federal disaster assistance programs , and the current scientific predictions for various natural hazards , see the " where to obtain further information " section of this report .

if the capacity of a local government has been overwhelmed by an incident , the local government may first turn to voluntary organizations within its community for additional support .

further , the local government may request assistance from other , nearby local governments through mutual aid and assistance agreements .

if the capacities of the local , state , and tribal governments have been overwhelmed by an incident , the tribe or state may wish to request assistance from the federal government .

in most cases , the first step is to request a federal declaration for the incident , typically through the stafford act .

there are also many other types of federal declarations and determinations that may trigger additional authorities or assistance separate from or in conjunction with the stafford act .

if a major disaster is declared under the stafford act , the three principal forms of federal financial assistance are the following: public assistance ( pa ) , which provides grants to tribal , state , and local governments and certain private nonprofit organizations to provide emergency protective services , conduct debris removal operations , and repair or replace damaged public infrastructure .

although certain nonprofit organizations may be eligible for these grants , for - profit businesses are not .

individual assistance ( ia ) , which provides direct aid to affected households , can take the form of housing assistance , other needs assistance , crisis counseling , case management services , legal services , and disaster unemployment assistance .

total assistance under this program is capped at $34,000 per household , though that amount is adjusted annually .

hazard mitigation assistance ( hma ) , which funds mitigation and resiliency projects and programs , typically across the entire state .

mitigation projects can include the construction of safe rooms , buyouts of frequently flooded properties , and retrofitting of facilities .

the federal - state agreement ( or fema - tribal agreement ) , which is signed by representatives of both the governor / chief and fema , enumerates the "conditions for assistance" and how it will be provided .

in addition to financial assistance that may be available from the stafford act , there are a number of other programs not administered by dhs or fema that can be involved in certain circumstances .

five significant programs include the following: sba disaster loan program: the sba provides federally subsidized loans to repair or replace homes , personal property , or businesses that sustained damages not covered by insurance following a disaster .

sba loans are a key source of assistance for the private sector and individual homeowners .

department of housing and urban development ( hud ) community development block grant disaster recovery ( cdbg - dr ) program: these funds can be used to meet a wide range of disaster needs , but the program typically requires a supplemental appropriation to accommodate the high cost of disaster relief .

u.s. department of transportation federal - aid highway emergency relief ( er ) program: the er program is the major source of grant funds for the repair and reconstruction of roads on the federal - aid highway system that have suffered serious damage as a result of either ( 1 ) a natural disaster over a wide area , such as a flood , hurricane , tidal wave , earthquake , tornado , severe storm , or landslide ; or ( 2 ) a catastrophic failure from any external cause .

u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) agriculture and rural assistance: there are multiple programs provided by usda that provide food , housing , and financial assistance , primarily to agricultural and rural communities .

u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) emergency assistance: the corps provides assistance to repair damaged flood control works ( eg , levees ) and federally constructed hurricane or shore protection projects that participate in the agency's rehabilitation and inspection program .

the corps has an emergency response authority ( 33 u.s.c .

ยง701n ) under which it performs flood - fighting , and other emergency response ( eg , emergency water supplies ) and disaster assistance focused on actions to save lives and protect improved property .

the corps also has limited authorities to assist with select activities during drought .

many federal departments and agencies have standing authorities to assist tribal , state , and local governments in a variety of ways .

for example , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) may provide a range of technical assistance on issues relating to public health concerns following a disaster .

further , other federal agencies may be able to waive certain regulations and requirements in times of disaster to aid the response and recovery effort .

for example , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , working with the department of energy ( doe ) , can issue emergency waivers of certain fuel standards in affected areas .

under a stafford act major disaster declaration , the president , the fema administrator , and the fema regional administrator may direct any federal agency , with or without reimbursement , to utilize its authorities and the resources granted to it under federal law ( including personnel , equipment , supplies , facilities , and managerial , technical , and advisory services ) in support of state and local assistance response and recovery efforts , including precautionary evacuations .

if another federal agency is called upon to assist during a disaster using this authority , typically they receive a mission assignment from fema and are reimbursed through the disaster relief fund .

federal government agencies also have numerous authorized deployable federal assets that can support the immediate response to disaster .

the federal government may also provide assistance without a request in more limited circumstances .

for example , a request does not need to be made by a state or tribal government when the primary responsibility for the response rests with the federal government .

this most frequently occurs because the incident involves an issue or hazard for which , under the constitution or a federal law , the president or other federal authority has exclusive or preeminent responsibility and authority .

likewise , there are situations when the federal government or a federal asset will provide immediate assistance , primarily to prevent the direct loss of life or significant property damage , without the request rising through the "normal" request procedures .

for instance , the department of defense ( dod ) , through its defense support of civil authorities ( dsca ) regulations and policies , authorizes local dod officials to provide immediate assistance without a formal request rising through the state and lead federal officials .

as mentioned previously , the stafford act , and overall federal disaster assistance , is fundamentally a relationship between the federal , state , and tribal governments .

however , there are steps along the way in which congressional input and distribution of information can assist the process toward recovery .

as a disaster situation unfolds , congressional offices may wish to take the following steps during the predeclaration period: encourage family and household planning through websites such as http: / / www.ready.gov , which provides predisaster planning advice .

establish a working relationship with the state / tribal emergency management office to understand the most valuable contributions that an office can make .

the lead agency for each state can be found at https: / / www.fema.gov / emergency - management - agencies .

learn about the types of mutual aid agreements in place for your district / state with neighboring communities .

consider a letter of support for the governor / chief's request for a declaration by framing the problems confronted by the state / tribe and local governments and the importance of specific federal , supplemental assistance .

provide input to the pda teams , through state , tribal , and local officials , regarding pockets of need or constituents who have noted problem areas that should be reviewed .

help to manage expectations of residents by explaining the process and the potential assistance , as well as its limitations .

if a declaration is made by the president , congressional offices can then establish their relationship with fema / dhs congressional liaisons to obtain accurate and timely information both at the headquarters level and in the field at the joint field office ( jfo ) level .

consider publicizing the online process for applying for many federal assistance programs as described at https: / / www.disasterassistance.gov / .

if needed , provide suggestions to fema / dhs on likely locations for fixed disaster recovery centers ( drcs ) and for possible sites for mobile disaster recovery centers to visit .

these drcs are typically staffed by fema and other federal agencies , as well as voluntary organizations , and provide citizens with the opportunity for face - to - face sessions with recovery staff .

work with fema / dhs to get an accurate listing of communities that are participating in the national flood insurance program and those that are either sanctioned , or have chosen not to participate .

consider publicizing the "applicants briefing" to local governments and nongovernmental organizations that sustained damage from the incident .

this briefing is the session in which fema staff explain the pa program ( repairs to infrastructure ) regulations and policies to local officials and potential applicants .

engage the state hazard mitigation officer to understand the state's plan for mitigation , the priorities it has established , and the timeline of its implementation .

be cognizant of the financial status of the disaster relief fund ( drf ) that funds the stafford act programs as well as other missions assigned to other departments and agencies to carry out response and recovery missions .

depending on the severity of the disaster and existing accounting balances , the a dministration may request , and congress could act on , legislation to provide supplemental appropriations in the drf and other disaster assistance program accounts .

crs has a wide array of experts available to assist congress by request .

please see crs report r43519 , natural disasters and hazards: crs experts , by [author name scrubbed] , for additional information .

there are also available online sources that provide the most immediate disaster response information .

current stafford act declarations: https: / / www.fema.gov / disasters .

fema news releases: http: / / www.fema.gov / news - releases .

fema also maintains a blog , a facebook page , and a twitter feed with the latest information on disasters: see http: / / blog.fema.gov / , http: / / www.facebook.com / fema , and https: / / twitter.com / fema , respectively .

sources of information on the federal emergency management process and policies .

how citizens can prepare for disasters: http: / / www.ready.gov / .

on national preparedness policy and the national planning frameworks: http: / / www.fema.gov / national - planning - frameworks .

on the national incident management system: http: / / www.fema.gov / nims / .

sources of information on disaster assistance programs .

how citizens and local governments can receive disaster assistance: http: / / www.disasterassistance.gov / .

background on all federal assistance programs: https: / / beta.sam.gov / .

sources of scientific information on the magnitude and location of natural hazards .

relating to hurricanes: http: / / www.nhc.noaa.gov / .

relating to earthquakes: http: / / earthquake.usgs.gov / earthquakes / .

current flood and drought maps: http: / / waterwatch.usgs.gov / new / .

current severe weather warnings , including tornados , thunderstorms , and flooding: http: / / www.spc.noaa.gov / products / wwa / .

