the american battle monuments commission ( abmc ) is responsible for the maintenance and construction of u.s. monuments and memorials commemorating the achievements in battle of u.s. armed forces since the nation's entry into world war i ; the erection of monuments and markers by u.s. citizens and organizations in foreign countries ; and the design , construction , and maintenance of permanent cemeteries and memorials in foreign countries .

the commission maintains 24 cemeteries and 25 memorials in foreign countries and on u.s. soil .

the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims was established by the veterans' administration adjudication procedure and judicial review act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-687 ) .

the court is an independent judicial tribunal with exclusive jurisdiction to review decisions of the board of veterans' appeals .

it has the authority to decide all relevant questions of law ; interpret constitutional , statutory , and regulatory provisions ; and determine the meaning or applicability of the terms of an action by the va .

it is authorized to compel action by the va .

it is authorized to hold unconstitutional or otherwise unlawful and set aside decisions , findings , conclusions , rules and regulations issued or adopted by the va or the board of veterans' appeals .

the secretary of the army is responsible for the administration , operation , and maintenance of arlington national cemetery and the soldiers' and airmen's home national cemetery .

in addition to its principal function as a national cemetery , arlington is the site of approximately 3,100 non - funeral ceremonies each year and has approximately 4 million visitors annually .

the senate - passed version of h.r .

2055 requires that the executive director of arlington cemetery report to congress within 90 days of enactment on the detailed plan , and timetable , for modernization of the information technology system , including burial records .

the armed forces retirement home trust fund provides funds to operate and maintain the armed forces retirement home in washington , dc ( also known as the united states soldiers' and airmen's home ) , and the armed forces retirement home in gulfport , ms ( originally located in philadelphia , pa , and known as the united states naval home ) .

these two facilities provide long - term housing and medical care for approximately 1,600 needy veterans .

the gulfport campus was severely damaged by hurricane katrina at the end of august 2005 , and residents of the facility were transferred to the washington , dc , location immediately after the storm .

the rebuilding of the gulfport facility was completed , with residents returning , on october 4 , 2010 .

the appropriation for the afrh facilities is normally all from the armed forces retirement home trust fund .

the trust fund is maintained through gifts , bequests , and a $0.50 per month assessment on the pay of active duty enlisted military personnel and warrant officers .

for fy2012 , the conference agreement on h.r .

2055 includes $14.62 million ( as a general fund transfer ) for repairs to the washington , dc campus as a result of damage incurred due to the earthquake on august 12 , 2011 .

table 6 shows the fy2011 enacted appropriations , the administration request , and h.r .

2055 funding for fy2012 for each of the related agencies .

