this report describes the president's fy2012 request for funding for dhs programs and activities , as submitted to congress on february 6 , 2011 .

it compares the enacted fy2011 amounts to the request , the house - passed and senate - reported appropriations bills , and the final conference report for fy2012 .

it tracks legislative action and congressional issues related to the fy2012 dhs appropriations bills with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts .

the report does not follow specific funding issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor does the report systematically follow any legislation related to the authorization or amendment of dhs programs .

title i covers the general administrative expenses of dhs .

it includes the office of the secretary and executive management ( osem ) , which is comprised of the immediate office of the secretary and 12 entities that report directly to the secretary ; the under secretary for management ( usm ) and its components , such as the offices of the chief administrative officer ( ocao ) , chief human capital officer ( ochco ) , and chief procurement officer ( ocpo ) ; the office of the chief financial officer ( ocfo ) ; the office of the chief information officer ( ocio ) ; the analysis and operations office ( aoo ) ; the office of the inspector general ( oig ) ; and dhs headquarters consolidation .

table 5 , below , shows title i appropriations for fy2010 , fy2011 , the president's request for fy2012 , the house - passed amounts for fy2012 , the senate - reported amounts for fy2012 , and the appropriations for fy2012 .

title ii contains the appropriations for the bureau of customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the bureau of immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , the u.s. coast guard , and the u.s. secret service .

table 8 shows the fy2010 and fy2011 enacted , and fy2012 appropriation action for title ii .

title iii includes appropriations for the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) , and the office of health affairs ( oha ) .

congress expanded fema's authorities and responsibilities in the post - katrina emergency reform act ( p.l .

109-295 ) and explicitly kept certain dhs functions out of the "new fema. .

in response to these statutory exclusions , dhs officials created the nppd to house functions not transferred to fema , and the oha was established for the office of the chief medical officer .

table 14 provides account - level appropriations detail for title iii .

title iv includes appropriations for u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) , the science and technology directorate ( s&t ) , and the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) .

table 18 provides account - level details of title iv appropriations .

three major activities dominate the work of the u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) : ( 1 ) adjudication of immigration petitions ( including nonimmigrant change of status petitions , relative petitions , employment - based petitions , work authorizations , and travel documents ) ; ( 2 ) adjudication of naturalization petitions for legal permanent residents to become citizens ; and ( 3 ) consideration of refugee and asylum claims , and related humanitarian and international concerns .

uscis funds the processing and adjudication of immigrant , nonimmigrant , refugee , asylum , and citizenship benefits largely through funds generated by the examinations fee account .

as part of the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) , uscis was directed to transform its revenue structure with the creation of the examinations fee account .

although the agency has received annual direct appropriations in the last decade , they have been largely directed towards specific projects such as backlog reduction initiatives .

the agency receives most of its revenue from adjudication fees of immigration benefit applications and petitions .

p.l .

112-74 appropriates $102 million for uscis , $267 million less than the administration requested and $44 million less than provided in fy2011 .

the conference report stipulates that this entire amount should be used for e - verify , and that all other programs should be funded through user fees .

the report stipulates that uscis use $10 million to fund immigrant integration grants and $29 million to continue conversion of immigration records to digital format .

according to the report , uscis operations that have been funded through fee revenue should continue to be funded in that manner , including the processing of refugee and asylum claims , systematic alien verification for entitlements ( save ) , and immigrant integration activities .

the report directs uscis to include these costs in its revised fee schedule given that no additional appropriations will be available to cover them .

the senate - reported h.r .

2017 proposed appropriating $121 million for uscis , $267 million less than the administration requested and $14 million less than provided in fy2011 .

this amount was divided between $102 million provided for e - verify , $11 million for the data development center , and $8 million for the immigrant integration initiative .

funding for the latter two programs was reinstated from the house - passed bill , and funding levels were , respectively , $2 million and $3 million below what was requested in the budget .

the committee directs that no appropriations be used to operate the office of citizenship services and that its operations continue to be fee - funded .

the total decline of $267 million from the requested amount stemmed from the committee's belief that the cost of processing asylum claims and refugee applications , as well as the systematic alien verification for entitlements ( save ) program , should be paid for through fee revenue rather than appropriations .

the committee expected uscis to revise its fee structure to accommodate the costs of these programs .

no funding was provided for military naturalizations which the committee notes has been requested in the department of defense budget .

the committee noted that roughly $91 million in the h and l fund for fraud investigations was carried over into fy2011 and is available for these and other purposes .

the house - reported h.r .

2017 proposed appropriating $132 million for uscis , $237 million less than the administration requested and $14 million less than provided in fy2011 .

this amount was divided between $102 million provided for e - verify and $30 million provided for the systematic alien verification for entitlements ( save ) program .

the total reduction of $237 million from the requested amount stemmed from the committee's belief that the cost of processing asylum claims and refugee applications should be paid for through fee revenue rather than appropriations .

no funding was provided for military naturalizations , which the committee believed should be funded by the department of defense .

from its fee revenue , the committee directed uscis to spend at least $29 million toward digital conversion of immigration records .

it also stipulated that any grants for immigrant integration be paid from uscis fee revenue and not from appropriations .

no changes were made to these funding levels through house floor action .

 table 19 , which presents the budget account detail for uscis , shows the requested gross budget authority for fy2012 at approximately $2,907 million .

this figure includes $369 million from congressional appropriations and $2,537 million from fee collections .

the requested direct appropriation of $369 million includes $102 million for the e - verify program , $13 million for data center development , and $20 million for the immigrant integration initiative .

moreover , the agency requested $30 million for the systematic alien verification entitlements ( save ) program to assist state , local , and federal agencies to determine individuals' eligibility for public benefits based on their immigration status .

uscis also proposed to fund asylum and refugee applications and military naturalizations — all which have no fees attached — with a direct appropriation of $203 million .

the remaining $2,537 million in gross budget authority requested was expected to be funded by fee collections .

of this fy2012 amount , $2,103 million would fund the uscis adjudication services , $86 million for information and customer services , and $348 million for administration .

for the fy2012 budget cycle , potential issues for congress included declines in immigrant and nonimmigrant applications , the use of fee - generated funding , and the uscis request for appropriations to process refugee , asylee , and military naturalization applications .

because uscis supports itself primarily through fee revenue , it must accurately project the number of anticipated applications to avoid building backlogs or over - budgeting projects .

uscis was criticized for its alleged unpreparedness in the face of surging applications prior to the 2007 fee increases .

more recently , the global economic downturn raised concerns about declining application volume and agency revenue .

such declines would affect future projects and require additional congressional appropriations .

in response , uscis has moved to more accurately project its application volume to better inform the budgeting process .

although uscis most recently altered its fee structure in november 2010 , it may need to repeat this process and increase some fees to accommodate the cost of programs whose budgets have declined , notably the save program .

in its fy2012 presidential budget request , uscis seeks direct appropriations of $203 million to fund applications for refugees , asylum - seekers , and military naturalizations .

historically , uscis has funded these no - fee applications through its general application fee revenue .

congress has considered providing uscis with direct appropriations for such application processing and the fees .

with p.l .

112-10 , congress allocated $25 million for processing applications for refugees , asylum - seekers , and military naturalizations , a fraction of the president's original $207 million request for fy2011 .

likewise , the fy2012 presidential budget request also includes a $30 million appropriation for the save program , currently funded through "surcharges" on immigration application fees .

the house committee proposed that costs for processing applications for refugees and asylum seekers be paid through uscis fee revenue , and that military naturalizations be paid for by the department of defense .

the senate concurred with this view and urged uscis to enter into a memorandum of understanding with dod that all future costs of military naturalizations will be borne by dod .

apart from military naturalizations , p.l .

112-74 appropriated no funds for uscis activities apart from e - verify , stipulating in the conference report that they be paid for with user fees .

the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) provides law enforcement instruction , such as firearms training , high - speed vehicle pursuit , and defendant interview techniques , for 85 federal entities with law enforcement responsibilities .

fletc also provides training to state and local law enforcement entities and international law enforcement agencies .

training policies , programs , and standards developed by an interagency board of directors focus on providing training that develop the skills and knowledge needed to perform law enforcement activities .

fletc administers four training sites throughout the united states and employs approximately 1,000 personnel .

p.l .

112-74 provided $271 million for fletc , $5 million ( 1.8% ) less than requested , but equal to the funding level for fy2011 .

as in the house and senate versions , this reduction was taken wholly from the appropriation for acquisitions , construction , improvements , and related expenses ( ac&i ) , where it reflects a 13% cut from the requested level of $37 million .

the senate - reported version of h.r .

2017 included $272 million for fletc .

this is less than $2 million more than was provided for fy2011 , and $4 million less than requested by the administration .

this reduction was taken from the appropriation for acquisitions , construction , improvements , and related expenses ( ac&i ) .

the senate bill contains a provision as it has in the past requiring the director of the center to ensure that all fletc facilities are "operated at the highest capacity feasible" over the course of the fiscal year .

report language also expects the center's facilities to be at or near capacity before entering into new leases with additional contractors or entering into partnership agreements with other organizations .

house - introduced h.r .

2017 includes $274 million for fletc .

this represents an increase of nearly $4 million over the final fy2011 enacted amount , and a decrease of $2 million ( almost 1% ) as compared with the fy2012 request .

this cut was taken from the ac&i appropriation as it was in the senate version , although the house recommended one of half the depth .

no changes were made to these provisions through house floor action .

the administration requested $276 million for fletc for fy2012 .

this represents an increase of $5 million or nearly 2% over the final fy2011 enacted amount of $271 million .

the directorate of science and technology ( s&t ) is the primary dhs organization for research and development ( r&d ) .

headed by the under secretary for science and technology , it performs r&d in several laboratories of its own and funds r&d performed by the department of energy national laboratories , industry , universities , and others .

the final appropriation for the s&t directorate was $668 million , which was 43% less than the administration had requested .

the total included $266 million for research , development , and innovation .

in laboratory facilities , the appropriation includes $50 million to begin construction of the national bio and agro - defense facility ( nbaf ) .

congress denied the administration's proposal to transfer certain radiological and nuclear r&d activities to s&t from the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) .

see table 20 for detailed funding levels .

the senate - reported bill provided $800 million for the s&t directorate .

for research , development , and innovation , it provided $440 million or 33% less than the administration's request .

it approved the proposed transfer from dndo .

it provided no funding for nbaf construction .

the committee report described the amount requested for nbaf as "not a useable construction segment" and directed s&t to provide an updated cost schedule for the project .

the house - passed bill provided $539 million .

for research , development , and innovation , it provided $106 million , or 84% less than the administration's request .

in laboratory facilities , it provided $75 million for nbaf construction .

it rejected the proposed transfer from dndo .

the committee report stated that "s&t must demonstrate how its r&d efforts are timely , with results relatively well - defined , and above all , make investment decisions based on clear and sensible priorities. .

it stated the committee's expectation that "the proposed funding levels will force s&t to make more focused , high - return investment decisions. .

the administration requested $1,176 million .

this was 42% more than the fy2011 appropriation of $829 billion .

the request included $150 million to support the beginning of construction at nbaf and about $109 million for nuclear and radiological activities currently conducted in dndo .

in late 2010 , the s&t directorate announced a reorganization and released a new strategic plan .

the reorganization reduced the number of direct reports to the under secretary and was accompanied by a change in budget structure , with most of the previous budget lines combined into two new categories: research , development , and innovation and acquisition and operations support .

according to dhs , the new strategy and organization will result in more robust partnerships with other dhs components , a smaller number of larger projects , and more emphasis on transitioning technology into the field rather than long - term research .

the house and senate committee reports both objected to the new budget structure .

the house report described the research , development , and innovation budget category as "all - encompassing ... too large and vague. .

the senate report stated that the new structure "reduces transparency and accountability. .

the conference report stated that the new rdi category "will enable s&t to more quickly shift resources ... between research activities" and "should ... partially offset the impact of an overall funding reduction," but it directed s&t to submit a quarterly "detailed breakout" of rdi projects "for accountability and visibility. .

the construction of nbaf will likely result in increased congressional oversight over the next several years .

for construction of nbaf and decommissioning of the plum island animal disease center ( piadc ) , which nbaf is intended to replace , the fy2012 budget justification projected a need for $691 million in total appropriations between fy2012 and fy2017 .

in the appropriations acts for fy2009 through fy2011 , congress authorized dhs to use receipts from the sale of plum island , subject to appropriation , to offset nbaf construction and piadc decommissioning costs .

the house - passed , senate - reported , and enacted bills for fy2012 all continued this authorization .

according to dhs , however , the likely value of such receipts "has been found to be considerably overestimated. .

the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) is the primary dhs organization for combating the threat of nuclear attack .

it is currently responsible for all dhs nuclear detection research , development , testing , evaluation , acquisition , and operational support .

p.l .

112-74 provides $290 million for dndo .

congress denied the administration's proposal to transfer the transformational r&d program to the s&t directorate , but provided only $40 million for that program , versus $96 million in fy2011 .

systems acquisition received $38 million , which was less than half the administration's request , but more than the program received in fy2011 .

the systems acquisition funding included $7 million for radiation portal monitors and $22 million for the securing the cities program .

the funds for securing the cities included $2 million to expand the program to a new city .

see table 21 for funding details .

the senate - reported bill provided $268 million for dndo .

it approved the administration's proposal to transfer the transformational r&d program to the s&t directorate .

it provided $40 million for systems acquisition , versus $84 million in the administration's request .

within systems acquisition , it provided $22 million for securing the cities , including $2 million for expansion to a new city .

the house - passed bill provided $337 million for dndo .

it rejected the transfer of transformational r&d to the s&t directorate , but provided only $45 million for that program .

it provided $52 million for systems acquisition .

it provided $22 million for securing the cities , including $2 million for expansion to a new city .

the administration requested $332 million .

this was a 1% decrease from the fy2011 appropriation of $342 million .

the request of $206 million for research , development , and operations was $69 million less than the fy2011 appropriation , largely because it included no funds for transformational r&d .

the request for systems acquisition was $84 million , versus $30 million in fy2011 .

the request included $27 million for the securing the cities program , which was previously funded at congressional direction and limited to the new york region ; the request proposed expanding it to an additional city in fy2012 .

congressional attention has focused in recent years on the testing and analysis dndo has conducted to support its planned purchase and deployment of advanced spectroscopic portals ( asps ) , a type of next - generation radiation portal monitor ( rpm ) .

congress included a requirement for secretarial certification before full - scale asp procurement in each homeland security appropriations act from fy2007 through fy2011 .

the house - passed and senate - reported bills for fy2012 included a similar requirement .

in february 2010 , dhs decided that it would no longer pursue the use of asps for primary screening , although it will continue developing and testing them for use in secondary screening .

although the fy2012 request included funds to purchase and deploy 44 asps for secondary screening , the director of dndo subsequently stated that dndo will deploy 13 asps that it has already purchased but will "end the asp program as originally conceived. .

the house committee report expressed an expectation that dndo will not deploy asps prior to certification , even for secondary screening , but noted that radiation portal monitor funding in the house - passed bill "is not restricted" to previous - generation systems .

the senate report stated that "the request to procure and deploy 44 [asps] is denied. .

noting the cancellation decision , the conference report omitted the previous requirement for asp certification .

it directed dhs to notify the appropriations committees if a successor program is initiated .

the global nuclear detection architecture overseen by dndo remains an issue of congressional interest .

the systems engineering and architecture activity includes a gnda development program as well as programs to develop and assess gnda activities in various mission areas .

the senate - reported bill directed dndo to prepare and submit "a strategic plan of investments necessary to implement the department of homeland security's responsibilities under the domestic component of the global nuclear detection architecture. .

it identified specific items that should be included in the required plan .

the enacted bill included similar language .

the mission of dndo , as established by congress in the safe port act ( p.l .

109-347 , title v ) , includes serving as the primary federal entity "to further develop , acquire , and support the deployment of an enhanced domestic system" for detection of nuclear and radiological devices and material ( 6 u.s.c .

592 ) .

the same act eliminated any explicit mention of radiological and nuclear countermeasures from the statutory duties and responsibilities of the under secretary for s&t .

congress may consider whether the proposed transfer of dndo's research activities to the s&t directorate is consistent with its intent in the safe port act .

congress may also choose to consider the acquisition portion of dndo's mission .

most of dndo's funding for systems acquisition was eliminated in fy2010 , and that year's budget stated that "funding requests for radiation detection equipment will now be sought by the end users that will operate them. .

in contrast , the fy2012 request for systems acquisition included funding for asps that would be operated by customs and border protection , as well as human - portable radiation detectors for the coast guard , customs and border protection , and the transportation security administration .

the reasons for this apparent reversal of policy were not explained in either the fy2011 or the fy2012 dndo budget justification .

federal - wide homeland security funding since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , there has been an increasing interest in the levels of funding available for homeland security efforts .

the office of management and budget , as originally directed by the fy1998 national defense authorization act , has published an annual report to congress on combating terrorism .

beginning with the june 24 , 2002 , edition of this report , homeland security was included as a part of the analysis .

in subsequent years , this homeland security funding analysis has become more refined , as distinctions ( and account lines ) between homeland and nonhomeland security activities have become more precise .

this means that while table a - 1 is presented in such a way as to allow year to year comparisons , they may in fact not be strictly comparable due to the increasing specificity of the analysis , as outlined above .

with regard to dhs funding , it is important to note that dhs funding does not comprise all federal spending on homeland security efforts .

in fact , while the largest component of federal spending on homeland security is contained within dhs , the dhs homeland security budget for fy2012 accounts for nearly 52% of total federal funding for homeland security .

the department of defense comprises the next highest proportion at nearly 26% of all federal spending on homeland security .

the department of health and human services at 6% , the department of justice at nearly 6% and the department of state at more than 3% round out the top five agencies in spending on homeland security .

these five agencies collectively account for approximately 93% of all federal spending on homeland security .

it is also important to note that not all dhs funding is classified as pertaining to homeland security activities .

the legacy agencies that became a part of dhs also conduct activities that are not homeland security related .

therefore , while the enacted fy2012 budget bills and existing law included total homeland security budget authority of $35.1 billion for dhs , the total budget authority for dhs is $52.5 billion as of the date of publication .

moreover , the amounts shown in table a - 1 will not be consistent with total amounts shown elsewhere in the report .

this same inconsistency between homeland security budget authority and requested total budget authority is also true for the budgets of the other agencies listed in the table .

