the mental health of veterans — and particularly veterans of operations enduring freedom and iraqi freedom ( oef / oif ) — has been a topic of ongoing concern to members of congress and their constituents , as evidenced by hearings and legislation .

knowing the number of veterans affected by various mental disorders and actions the department of veterans affairs ( va ) is taking to address mental disorders can help congress determine where to focus attention and resources .

using data from the va , this brief report addresses the number of veterans with ( 1 ) depression or bipolar disorder , ( 2 ) posttraumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) , and ( 3 ) substance use disorders ; appendix a discusses important data limitations .

for each topic , this report also briefly describes what the va is doing in terms of screening and treatment ; appendix b lists reports evaluating the va's efforts .

veterans generally must enroll in the va health care system to receive medical care ; for information about enrollment , health benefits , and cost - sharing , see crs report r42747 , health care for veterans: answers to frequently asked questions , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

from fy2002 through fy2012 , 1.6 million oef / oif veterans ( including members of the reserve and national guard ) left active duty and became eligible for va health care ; by the end of fy2012 , 56% of them had enrolled and obtained va health care .

the va publishes the cumulative prevalence of selected mental disorders among oef / oif veterans using va health care , based on information in the va's electronic health records .

systematic information regarding veterans who do not use va health care is not available .

data about oef / oif veterans using va health care should not be extrapolated to the rest of the oef / oif veteran population , or to the broader veteran population .

limitations of the va's data are discussed in appendix a .

depression and bipolar disorder are both mood disorders ; bipolar disorder includes episodes of both depressed mood ( which characterizes depression ) and mania ( elevated mood or irritability ) or hypomania ( a milder form of mania ) .

posttraumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) — one of the "signature injuries" of oef / oif — is a psychological response to a traumatic event ; however , a history of trauma is not enough to establish a diagnosis of ptsd .

the diagnosis requires a minimum number of symptoms in each of three categories: reexperiencing ( eg , recurring nightmares about the traumatic event ) ; avoidance ( eg , avoiding conversations about the traumatic event ) ; and arousal ( eg , difficulty sleeping ) .

symptoms must persist for at least one month and must result in clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning .

substance use disorders include dependence on and abuse of drugs , alcohol , or other substances ( eg , nicotine ) .

a diagnosis of dependence requires at least three symptoms ( eg , tolerance or withdrawal ) ; substance use that does not meet criteria for dependence , but leads to clinically significant distress or impairment , is called abuse .

each diagnosis is specific to the substance , so an individual may have multiple diagnoses of abuse or dependence — one for each substance ( eg , marijuana dependence and cocaine abuse ) .

figure 4 and figure 5 show the prevalence of drug dependence and abuse ( respectively ) among oef / oif veterans using va health care during fy2002 – fy2012 .

alcohol dependence ( 6% ) is more common than either drug dependence ( 3% ) or abuse ( 5% ) ; the prevalence of alcohol abuse was not provided .

these percentages are subject to important data limitations discussed in appendix a .

given the comparatively low rates of drug abuse and dependence ( relative to other disorders presented in this report ) , va policy does not require routine drug use screening .

department policy does require an annual alcohol screening , which is waived for veterans who drank no alcohol in the prior year .

the va offers medication and psychosocial interventions for substance use disorders , as well as acute detoxification care when necessary .

medication may be used to reduce cravings or to substitute for the drug of abuse ( eg , methadone for heroin users ) .

psychosocial interventions include ( among others ) brief counseling to enhance motivation to change ; intensive outpatient treatment ; residential care ( i.e. , living in a supportive environment while receiving treatment ) ; long - term relapse prevention ; and referral to outside programs such as alcoholics anonymous .

several reports that have evaluated the department's alcohol screening and substance use disorder treatment efforts and offered recommendations are listed in appendix b .

appendix a .

data limitations in order to understand the limitations of the data presented in this report , it is helpful to understand their sources .

the va identifies ptsd and substance use disorders by searching va administrative data for diagnosis codes associated with specific conditions ( eg , 309.81 for ptsd ) .

these codes are entered into veterans' electronic medical records by clinicians , in the normal course of evaluation and treatment .

the data provided by the va should be interpreted in light of at least three limitations , each of which is discussed below .

first , some conditions may be overstated , because veterans with diagnosis codes for a condition might not have the condition , as a result of provisional diagnoses or noncurrent diagnoses .

a provisional diagnosis code may be entered into a veteran's electronic medical record when further evaluation is required to confirm the diagnosis .

a diagnosis may be noncurrent when a veteran who had a condition in the past no longer has it .

in either case , the code remains in the veteran's electronic medical record .

second , some conditions may be understated , because veterans who have a condition might not be diagnosed ( and therefore might not have the diagnosis code in their records ) , if they choose not to disclose their symptoms .

veterans might not want to disclose information that would lead to a diagnosis of mental illness .

veterans have reported not wanting to disclose trauma for fear that that they will not be believed , that others will think less of them , that they will be institutionalized or stigmatized , or that their careers will be jeopardized , among other reasons .

also , veterans using va health care services may receive additional services outside the va , without the knowledge of the department .

third , the numbers provided by the va should not be extrapolated to all oef / oif veterans , or to the broader veteran population , because oef / oif veterans using va health care are not representative of all oef / oif veterans or the broader veteran population .

veterans who use va health care may differ from those who do not , in ways that are not known .

potential differences include ( among other characteristics ) disability status , employment status , and distance from a va medical facility .

appendix b .

selected evaluations of va services table b - 1 lists selected reports published since 2008 that evaluate the va's efforts to address veterans' mental health .

