the united states has long sought , via its domestic laws as well as foreign policies , to ensure that ostensibly peaceful nuclear commerce does not aid nuclear weapons programs .

mechanisms and instruments such as the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) , international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) safeguards , the nuclear suppliers group ( nsg ) , and economic sanctions all continue to play a role in stemming nuclear weapons proliferation .

the restrictions contained in u.s. law governing nuclear cooperation with other countries comprise another tool for preventing proliferation .

however , congress has become increasingly concerned that , with the growing international interest in nuclear power , u.s. laws and policies may need to be changed in order to prevent further nuclear proliferation .

this report begins with a brief overview of the global nuclear power industry , including the possessors of enrichment and reprocessing technology .

it then describes the state of the u.s. nuclear industry , particularly its dependence on both international trade and foreign suppliers .

the report then reviews the multilateral nuclear nonproliferation mechanisms .

it concludes with a detailed summary of u.s. nuclear cooperation agreements , the primary mechanism by which the united states both promotes u.s. nuclear commerce and ensures that such commerce does not contribute to clandestine nuclear weapons programs .

the report also includes appendices that provide additional details .

the united states has long engaged in civil nuclear commerce with other countries , buying and selling nuclear fuel , reactors , and related components .

perhaps the most significant congressional action to regulate such commerce was the nuclear nonproliferation act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-242 ) , which amended the atomic energy act of 1954 ( aea ) and imposed additional restrictions on u.s. nuclear commerce designed to ensure that transfers of nuclear energy technology would not contribute to the proliferation of nuclear weapons .

in the 113 th congress , members have introduced several bills that would add to the nonproliferation criteria and strengthen congressional oversight of bilateral nuclear cooperation under section 123 of the aea , as amended ( p.l .

95-242 ; 42 u.s.c .

§2153 et seq. ) .

 ( hereinafter "123 agreements" ) .

during the past decade , members of congress have become increasingly concerned that , with an increased global interest in nuclear power , additional countries may obtain domestic enrichment or reprocessing technology , the most sensitive components of the nuclear fuel cycle .

uranium enrichment can produce low - enriched uranium for use as fuel in nuclear reactors , but can also produce highly enriched uranium , which can be used as both reactor fuel and as fissile material in nuclear weapons .

by reprocessing spent nuclear reactor fuel , a state can produce plutonium , which it might use as fuel in certain types of nuclear reactors and also as fissile material in nuclear weapons .

obtaining fissile material is widely regarded as the most difficult task in building nuclear weapons .

 ( for an illustration of the nuclear fuel cycle , see appendix a . ) .

these proliferation concerns have generated increased congressional interest in laws governing bilateral nuclear cooperation agreements .

recent congressional debates over 123 agreements with india , russia , the united arab emirates ( uae ) , south korea , and vietnam highlighted concerns about the need to balance nonproliferation , commercial , and strategic goals .

additional agreements are expected to come before congress for consideration in the next few years .

sixteen countries are planning to build their first nuclear power plants by 2030 , according to the world nuclear association .

iaea estimates that world nuclear power generation by 2030 will grow 46% - 142% from 2012 , led by the far east and eastern europe ( along with possible reductions in western europe ) .

concerns about the safety of nuclear power and its economic competitiveness are the major near - term inhibitors of nuclear growth , according to iaea .

but the agency predicted , "in the longer run , the underlying fundamentals of population growth and demand for electricity in the developing world , as well as climate change concerns , security of energy supply and price volatility for other fuels , continue to point to nuclear generating capacity playing an important role in the energy mix. .

world nuclear power generation has dropped since 2006 , particularly after japan's reactors shut down following the 2011 fukushima disaster .

nuclear power critics contend that construction delays , cost overruns , and competition from renewable energy will strongly inhibit the future of nuclear power .

they point out that three countries — china , india , and russia — account for two - thirds of the reactors currently under construction worldwide .

in the countries considering their first nuclear reactors , such projects are at various stages of planning ( see appendix b ) .

ten countries that are currently building or formally planning reactor projects — bangladesh , belarus , egypt , indonesia , jordan , kazakhstan , poland , turkey , the uae , and vietnam — have never operated nuclear power plants .

according to the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , 36 countries that have never had nuclear power are "actively preparing" or have "expressed interest in starting a nuclear power programme. .

oecd categorizes the potential nuclear newcomer countries by the size of their economies and their electrical grid capacity , because those factors "may provide a rough indication of which countries may be the strongest candidates to proceed with nuclear development" ( see table 1 ) .

only canada , china , france , japan , russia , south korea , and the united states export nuclear reactors .

india is reportedly attempting to join this group .

some emerging nuclear power states have concluded agreements with non - u.s. reactor suppliers .

for example , vietnam has such contracts with russia and japan , turkey has an agreement with russia , and the uae has signed a reactor contract with south korea .

u.s. exports of nuclear plant components , equipment , fuel , and technology — which require nuclear cooperation agreements — have held steady at modest levels since the mid - 1990s , according to an analysis by the government accountability office ( gao ) .

however , the analysis found that , because worldwide nuclear - related exports rose significantly during that period , the u.s. share of the market dropped sharply .

the declining u.s. share of the world nuclear market is a dramatic reversal from earlier decades , when the united states was the dominant supplier of nuclear technology and fuel for the non - communist world .

the u.s. atomic energy commission ( aec ) and its successor agencies were the sole free - world suppliers of enriched uranium until european commercial enrichment plants began operating in the late 1970s .

since then , the u.s. share of world enrichment capacity has fallen to 7% , as all the three former aec plants were retired , leaving only the urenco usa plant , and foreign capacity expanded .

in the equipment supply sector , general electric ( ge ) and westinghouse directly supplied about three dozen reactors to foreign utilities during the 1960s , 1970s , and 1980s , but only about 10 during the past two decades .

u.s. reactor technology has typically been transferred to foreign industrial firms under licenses that allowed them to gradually take over most or all aspects of subsequent reactor projects , diminishing u.s. involvement .

that pattern has continued with china , which is currently building four westinghouse ap1000 reactors under a technology transfer agreement and now is developing its own designs based on westinghouse technology .

gao's analysis found that u.s. exports of enriched uranium and other nuclear materials totaled $20.7 billion from 1994 through 2008 ( in 2010 dollars ) , averaging about $1.4 billion per year .

japan accounted for 63% of those exports , far more than any other country , much of that apparently from uranium enrichment purchases .

sales of reactor components and equipment , according to gao , totaled $4.4 billion during 1994-2008 , averaging about $300 million per year .

japan , south korea , mexico , spain , and the czech republic accounted for 70% of the reactor component exports .

exports to south korea largely resulted from a technology transfer agreement with u.s. supplier combustion engineering , now part of westinghouse .

under the agreement , combustion engineering built four reactors in south korea during the 1990s with korean industrial firms , which then took the lead on subsequent projects .

gao could not find statistics for u.s. exports of nuclear services , which were described by commerce department officials as "an increasingly important and growing market segment for the u.s. nuclear industry. .

according to the united nations commodity trade statistics database ( comtrade ) , u.s. exports of enriched uranium and related nuclear material totaled $955 million in 2013 .

exports of nuclear reactors , fuel elements , and components in 2013 totaled $471 million .

the international community has adopted a variety of means to address the potential for ostensibly peaceful enrichment and reprocessing facilities to enable nuclear weapons programs .

these measures are designed to impede or slow the proliferation of nuclear weapons .

under existing law ( atomic energy act [aea] of 1954 , as amended ; p.l .

95-242 ; 42 u.s.c .

§2153 et seq. ) .

all significant u.s. nuclear cooperation with other countries requires a peaceful nuclear cooperation agreement .

significant nuclear cooperation includes the transfer of u.s. - origin special nuclear material subject to licensing for commercial , medical , and industrial purposes .

such agreements , which are "congressional - executive agreements" requiring congressional approval , do not guarantee that cooperation will take place or that nuclear material or technology will be transferred , but rather authorize and set the terms of reference for nuclear cooperation .

the aea includes requirements for an agreement's content , conditions for the president to exempt an agreement from those requirements , requirements for presidential determinations and other supporting information to be submitted to congress , conditions affecting the implementation of an agreement once it takes effect , and procedures for congress to consider and approve the agreement .

section 123 of the aea requires that any agreement for nuclear cooperation meet nine nonproliferation criteria and that the president submit any such agreement to the house committee on foreign affairs and the senate committee on foreign relations .

the department of state is required to provide the president an unclassified nuclear proliferation assessment statement ( npas ) , which the president is to submit , along with the agreement , to those two committees .

the state department is also required to provide a classified annex to the npas , prepared in consultation with the director of national intelligence .

the npas is meant to explain how the agreement meets the aea nonproliferation requirements .

the president must also make a written determination "that the performance of the proposed agreement will promote and will not constitute an unreasonable risk to , the common defense and security. .

the president may exempt an agreement for cooperation from any of the requirements in section 123a if he determines that the requirement would be "seriously prejudicial to the achievement of u.s. non - proliferation objectives or otherwise jeopardize the common defense and security. .

the aea provides different requirements , conditions , and procedures for exempt and non - exempt agreements .

under the aea , congress has the opportunity to review a 123 agreement for two time periods totaling 90 days of continuous session .

the president must submit the text of the proposed nuclear cooperation agreement , along with required supporting documents ( including the unclassified npas ) to the house foreign affairs committee and the senate foreign relations committee .

the president is to consult with the committees "for a period of not less than 30 days of continuous session. .

after this period of consultation , the president is to submit the agreement to congress , along with the classified annex to the npas and a statement of his approval of the agreement as well as a determination that it will not damage the national security interests of the united states .

this action begins the second period , which lasts for 60 days of continuous session .

in practice , the president has submitted the agreement to congress , along with the unclassified npas , its classified annex , and his approval and determination , at the beginning of the full 90-day period .

the 60-day period has been considered as following immediately upon the expiration of the 30-day period .

if the president has not exempted the agreement from any requirements of section 123a , it becomes effective at the end of the 60-day period unless , during that time , congress adopts a joint resolution disapproving the agreement and the resolution becomes law .

if the agreement is an exempted agreement , congress must adopt a joint resolution of approval and it must become law by the end of the 60-day period or the agreement may not enter into force .

at the beginning of this 60-day period , joint resolutions of approval or disapproval , as appropriate , are to be automatically introduced in each house .

during this period , the committees are to hold hearings on the proposed agreement and "submit a report to their respective bodies recommending whether it should be approved or disapproved. .

if either committee has not reported the requisite joint resolution of approval or disapproval by the end of 45 days , it is automatically discharged from further consideration of the measure .

after the joint resolution is reported or discharged , congress is to consider it under expedited procedures , as established by section 130i of the aea .

section 123 of the aea requires the president to keep the senate foreign relations committee and the house foreign affairs committee "fully and currently informed of any initiative or negotiations relating to a new or amended agreement for peaceful nuclear cooperation. .

the united states often has diverse policy goals when deciding to conclude a nuclear cooperation agreement with another country , including promoting nonproliferation , supporting the u.s. nuclear industry , satisfying the needs of the u.s. domestic nuclear energy program , and improving or sustaining overall bilateral and strategic relations .

a major u.s. goal of concluding nuclear cooperation agreements has been to ensure the peaceful use of any transferred nuclear technology .

the nuclear nonproliferation act of 1978 , which amended section 123 of the atomic energy act of 1954 , added new requirements for nuclear cooperation with the united states .

the house report on this legislation explained the new requirements: "the approach to the legislation is to provide both incentives for foreign nations to conform to comprehensive anti - proliferation safeguards , and deterrents to attainment of technologies and materials which would enable other nations to produce nuclear explosives in a short time. .

the united states and other countries have become increasingly concerned that with the spread of nuclear energy facilities , additional countries may obtain enrichment and reprocessing technology , the most sensitive components of the nuclear fuel cycle .

consequently , the united states and other governments have pursued policies both to persuade countries to refrain from enrichment and reprocessing and to conclude additional protocols to their iaea safeguards agreements .

former state department official fred mcgoldrick has argued that 123 agreements also "provide a framework for establishing invaluable person - to - person and institution - to - institution contacts and collaboration that can help advance our nonproliferation objectives. .

these agreements facilitate cooperation between business contacts and laboratories , as well as the department of energy and its counterparts , mcgoldrick said , adding that such "intangible" cooperation enables the united states to establish relationships with foreign nuclear energy establishments that might otherwise be dominated by non - u.s. nuclear suppliers .

as discussed , the aea requires that any agreement for nuclear cooperation meet nine nonproliferation criteria , but these do not include requirements that countries conclude additional protocols or forgo enrichment or reprocessing .

the aea mandates that u.s. nuclear cooperation agreements require u.s. consent for any "alteration in form or content" ( to include enrichment or reprocessing ) of u.s. - origin material or any material that was processed in a plant containing transferred u.s. nuclear technology .

they also require u.s. consent for any re - transfer of material or technology .

additional options are available under u.s. law to sanction a country for transfer or receipt of enrichment or reprocessing technology under the arms export control act , as amended .

these provisions are similar to those contained in the foreign assistance act of 1961 .

section 101 ( nuclear enrichment transfers ; 22 u.s.c .

2799aa , known as the symington amendment ) , prohibits foreign economic or military assistance to a country if the president determines that it has delivered or received "nuclear enrichment equipment , materials , or technology," unless it is placed under "multilateral auspices and management" when available and is under iaea safeguards .

the president can invoke similar penalties after making a determination regarding transfer or receipt of reprocessing equipment , materials , or technology under section 102 ( known as the glenn amendment ) .

with reprocessing transfers , there is no exception made if the reprocessing technology is under safeguards .

there is an exception for the transfer of reprocessing technology as part of an international program , in which the united states participates , for evaluation of technologies which are "alternatives to pure plutonium reprocessing. .

during the past several years , the united states has attempted to persuade certain countries with which it is negotiating nuclear cooperation agreements to forgo enrichment and reprocessing and conclude additional protocols .

washington has argued that its december 2009 nuclear cooperation agreement with the united arab emirates ( uae ) could set a useful precedent for mitigating the dangers of nuclear proliferation .

for example , president obama argued in may 2009 that the agreement "has the potential to serve as a model for other countries in the region that wish to pursue responsible nuclear energy development. .

similarly , then - state department spokesperson p.j .

crowley described the agreement as "the gold standard" during an august 5 , 2010 , press briefing .

the agreement's status as a potential model is grounded in two nonproliferation provisions not found in any other u.s. nuclear cooperation agreement .

first , the agreement requires that the uae bring into force its additional protocol to its iaea safeguards agreement before the united states licenses "exports of nuclear material , equipment , components , or technology" pursuant to the agreement .

second , the agreement states that the uae: shall not possess sensitive nuclear facilities within its territory or otherwise engage in activities within its territory for , or relating to , the enrichment or reprocessing of material , or for the alteration in form or content ( except by irradiation or further irradiation or , if agreed by the parties , post - irradiation examination ) of plutonium , uranium 233 , high enriched uranium , or irradiated source or special fissionable material .

furthermore , the u.s. - uae agreement also provides the united states with the right to terminate nuclear cooperation and to require the return of any nuclear "material , equipment or components ... and any special fissionable material produced through their use" if , after the agreement's entry into force , the uae "possesses sensitive nuclear facilities within its territory or otherwise engages in activities within its territory relating to enrichment of uranium or reprocessing of nuclear fuel. .

the u.s. - uae agreement also includes a provision that apparently intends to establish the agreement's conditions as a minimum standard for future such agreements in the middle east .

an agreed minute to the nuclear cooperation agreement states that "the fields of cooperation , terms and conditions" accorded by the u.s. - uae agreement "shall be no less favorable in scope and effect than those which may be accorded , from time to time , to any other nonnuclear - weapon state in the middle east in a peaceful nuclear cooperation agreement. .

the minute explains that , in the event that a future u.s. nuclear cooperation agreement with another regional government contains less - stringent requirements , the united states will , at the uae's request , consult with the uae "regarding the possibility of amending" the u.s. - uae agreement in order to make its terms equally favorable to the new agreement .

a similar provision in the 1981 u.s. - egypt agreement made it necessary for the united states to ensure that the agreement with the uae would be at least as stringent .

since the latter agreement is more stringent than the egypt agreement , it has established a higher standard for future u.s. nuclear cooperation agreements in the region .

the united states has made efforts to elicit from other regional governments nonproliferation commitments similar to those described in the u.s. - uae agreement .

washington has signed memoranda of understanding with bahrain , jordan , mongolia , and saudi arabia that express those countries' intention to refrain from pursuing enrichment or reprocessing technologies .

the united states signed a similar memorandum with the uae in 2008 .

these memoranda are statements of intent regarding future cooperation , but are not legally binding and are neither prerequisites for nor guarantees of concluding future nuclear cooperation agreements .

however , the department of state has argued that the memoranda are useful tools for cooperating with countries interested in the responsible use of nuclear energy , because they create opportunities to solicit specific commitments with regard to nuclear technology and safeguards choices .

nevertheless , u.s. efforts to establish the uae agreement as a model for future such agreements in the middle east may be faltering .

jordan , the next regional government most likely to conclude a nuclear cooperation agreement with the united states , reportedly may no longer be willing to include in the agreement the fuel - cycle commitments described in its memorandum of understanding .

however , ambassador richard stratford stated on march 29 , 2011 , that the two sides had been "very , very close" to an agreement containing similar commitments .

as noted , the negotiations have been suspended .

the obama administration does not envision that the u.s. - uae agreement will necessarily be a model for nuclear cooperation agreements with countries outside the middle east .

crowley stated during the august 2010 briefing that the united states "would encourage countries to make the same decision that the uae has made. .

however , he acknowledged that "not every country is going to make that decision," adding that "a particular approach is going to be different ... country by country or region by region. .

the administration has not yet decided whether to solicit from other countries commitments similar to those contained in the u.s. - uae agreement .

u.s. nuclear cooperation agreements with foreign countries are also designed to help promote growth in the u.s. nuclear industry by facilitating u.s. nuclear exports .

as noted , u.s. exports of nuclear plant components , equipment , fuel , and technology — which require nuclear cooperation agreements — have held steady at modest levels since the mid - 1990s and comprise a decreasing share of the global market .

that downward trend could be altered by new , higher - efficiency uranium enrichment plants currently planned in the united states and by new u.s. contracts to supply reactor technology and components in china and elsewhere .

recent plans for nuclear power expansion around the world , particularly in china and india , could lead to future growth in u.s. nuclear reactor exports .

a consortium led by westinghouse signed a contract with chinese nuclear firms on july 24 , 2007 , to supply four ap1000 reactors — westinghouse's newest design — at a cost estimated at $8 billion .

the four reactors are currently under construction at two sites .

according to the world nuclear association , 14 additional ap1000 reactors at seven sites are currently planned , 20 others are planned but deferred , and as many as 80 more ap1000 units have been proposed .

much like earlier u.s. agreements with south korea and other countries , the westinghouse - china deal includes the transfer of the ap1000 technology to chinese firms , who are expected eventually to be able to build the reactors on their own .

westinghouse is also working with another chinese consortium to develop larger versions of the ap1000 .

india has announced plans for up to 12 u.s. nuclear reactors at two sites , although the projects have been held up by liability issues .

u.s. uranium enrichment exports could see future growth resulting from planned new enrichment plants , despite the scheduled decommissioning of the main previously operating u.s. plant .

the first new commercial enrichment plant in the united states since the 1950s began commercial production in june 2010 in lea county , nm .

built by a u.s. subsidiary of the european enrichment firm urenco , the lea county plant reached full initially licensed capacity in april 2014 , with expansion of up to 50% planned by 2017 .

two other new enrichment plants of similar capacity are planned by the french firm areva in idaho and by centrus in ohio to replace a closed plant in kentucky , although neither has a firm schedule .

the urenco , areva , and centrus plants use advanced gas centrifuge technology , which is far less energy - intensive than the gaseous diffusion technology used by previous u.s. plants .

ge - hitachi is considering building an enrichment plant using laser enrichment technology that it is developing .

if all the planned and proposed u.s. enrichment capacity were to come online , total u.s. enrichment capacity would reach more than six times its current level .

123 agreements are required for the construction of enrichment facilities by foreign firms and for the export of enriched uranium .

123 agreements benefit the u.s. nuclear energy program in other ways .

for example , licenses under the u.s. - australia agreement have been primarily for the import of uranium to the united states from australia .

more recently , as noted , foreign firms have been involved in sustaining the u.s. nuclear energy program by , for example , participating in nuclear reactor projects in the united states ( see discussion above " increasing importance of foreign suppliers to u.s. nuclear power projects " ) .

lastly , but in some cases most importantly , nuclear energy cooperation agreements are very often a part of an overall diplomatic strategy to improve u.s. bilateral relations with a country .

for some policy makers , this was a key motivation for nuclear cooperation agreements that the united states concluded with both india and russia .

this report has focused on nonproliferation and bilateral nuclear cooperation agreements .

additional factors may strongly influence the outcome of u.s. attempts to influence other countries' nuclear policies .

many foreign governments provide liability insurance for their nuclear industry , or cap liability exposure .

other companies , such as rosatom in russia and areva in france , are granted sovereign immunity protections since they are at least partially state - owned .

some argue that the u.s. nuclear industry is at a disadvantage when competing for foreign contracts because the u.s. government does not provide similar liability protections .

the united states has ratified the convention on supplementary compensation for nuclear damage ( csc ) , which would cover u.s. nuclear equipment suppliers conducting foreign business , but the convention has not yet entered into force .

for many u.s. companies , ratification of the csc by the importing state is a requirement for them to do business there , although u.s. firms have built reactors in countries that are not csc signatories .

each party to the csc would be required to establish a nuclear damage compensation system within its borders .

for any damages not covered by those national compensation systems , the convention would establish a supplemental tier of damage compensation to be paid by all parties .

whether french and russian nuclear companies are actually shielded from nuclear liability claims is unclear .

french companies have recently stressed that the csc , which requires additional compensation limits apart from liability , is a prerequisite for them to do business in a country .

moreover , france and russia are discussing with india means of resolving their concerns about that country's liability law , which was adopted in august 2010 and , according to many observers , is inconsistent with the csc .

however , according to a nuclear energy agency analysis , russian and french companies could , in the event of a nuclear accident , still be less exposed to lawsuits than u.s. companies because moscow and paris would be in a "more powerful position to negotiate a settlement with the indian government than a private supplier may be. .

additionally , suppliers are more likely to be subject to class action lawsuits in the united states than would suppliers in russia or france .

the ability of the united states to influence regulations for international nuclear commerce has arguably diminished .

as discussed above , the u.s. nuclear industry's market power has declined and foreign competitors have been concluding nuclear supply agreements with other countries .

moreover , some influential governments have demonstrated limited enthusiasm for such regulations .

for example , as noted , some members of the nsg displayed resistance to proposals that would restrict the transfer of enrichment and reprocessing technology .

furthermore , the nsg decided in 2008 to exempt india from some of its export guidelines — a step which many observers argued would assist new delhi's nuclear weapons program .

some suppliers may use the 2008 decision to justify supplying other states that do not meet nsg guidelines ; indeed , china has agreed to supply pakistan with two additional nuclear reactors .

it is also possible that israel and pakistan , which , like india , do not have full - scope safeguards and have not signed the npt , may continue to ask for exemptions from nsg guidelines .

for its part , israel proposed export criteria in 2007 that would have had the effect of exempting israel from the current nsg guidelines and is widely believed to have sought a nuclear cooperation agreement with the united states .

recent proposals have called for restricting foreign nuclear firms' activities in the united states if they provide nuclear power plants to countries that have not agreed to forswear enrichment and reprocessing .

such restrictions would be intended to encourage other nuclear supplier countries to adopt export standards similar to those in the u.s. - uae 123 agreement .

for example , in a november 2010 letter to president obama , 16 nuclear energy policy experts specifically targeted france , urging that federal loan guarantees for proposed french nuclear projects in maryland and idaho be conditioned on france's adoption of the u.s. - uae framework .

in addition to loan guarantees , the letter recommended that licenses from the nuclear regulatory commission , as well as federal contracts , be denied to foreign firms "unless they are willing to support the very toughest nuclear nonproliferation standards our own government has developed in the u.s. - uae deal. .

many foreign firms operating in the united states or participating in u.s. nuclear projects could potentially be subject to such sanctions .

the french firm areva , which plans to build a reactor in maryland and a uranium enrichment plant in idaho , and also hopes to sell reactors in the middle east , says it has nearly 5,000 employees in the united states and canada .

many foreign companies that are likely to be involved in the worldwide supply chain for u.s. nuclear projects may also be involved in nuclear projects that do not include agreements by the recipients to forswear enrichment and reprocessing .

it would appear , therefore , that u.s. denial of loan guarantees , licenses , and contracts could be painful for the targeted companies , possibly putting pressure on their home governments .

however , such sanctions could also impede or halt planned u.s. nuclear projects , harm the u.s. operations of foreign companies , and disrupt federal nuclear activities .

as noted , congress has become increasingly concerned that u.s. laws and policies may need to be changed in order to prevent further nuclear proliferation .

in the future , congress may choose to consider such factors as the 2011 nuclear suppliers group's ( nsg ) decision on the supply of enrichment and reprocessing technology ; the extent to which the u.s. nuclear industry is dependent on foreign suppliers ; the magnitude of the proliferation threat from nuclear power programs ; the efficacy of current nonproliferation mechanisms , including iaea safeguards ; and whether and to what extent the united states can influence other governments' nuclear supply policies .

appendix a .

the conceptual nuclear fuel cycle for a detailed discussion , see crs report rl34234 , managing the nuclear fuel cycle: policy implications of expanding global access to nuclear power , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

appendix b .

status of world wide nuclear power plants appendix c. u.s. nuclear cooperation agreements the following states and other entities had civilian nuclear cooperation ( section 123 ) agreements with the united states in force as of november 1 , 2014: appendix d. articles i , ii , and iv of the nuclear nonproliferation treaty article i each nuclear - weapon state party to the treaty undertakes not to transfer to any recipient whatsoever nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices or control over such weapons or explosive devices directly , or indirectly ; and not in any way to assist , encourage , or induce any non - nuclear weapon state to manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices , or control over such weapons or explosive devices .

article ii each non - nuclear - weapon state party to the treaty undertakes not to receive the transfer from any transferor whatsoever of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices or of control over such weapons or explosive devices directly , or indirectly ; not to manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices ; and not to seek or receive any assistance in the manufacture of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices .

article iv 1 .

nothing in this treaty shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all the parties to the treaty to develop research , production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with articles i and ii of this treaty .

2 .

all the parties to the treaty undertake to facilitate , and have the right to participate in , the fullest possible exchange of equipment , materials and scientific and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy .

parties to the treaty in a position to do so shall also co - operate in contributing alone or together with other states or international organizations to the further development of the applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes , especially in the territories of non - nuclear - weapon states party to the treaty , with due consideration for the needs of the developing areas of the world .

appendix e. additional protocol trends appendix f. reactors , additional protocols , 123 agreements appendix g. nuclear suppliers group members the following 48 countries are members of the nuclear suppliers group as of november 1 , 2014 .

the european commission participates as an observer .

