the united states restricts the export of defense articles ; dual - use goods and technology ; certain nuclear materials and technology ; and items that would assist in the development of nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons or the missile technology used to deliver them .

a defense item is defined by regulation as one that "[m]eets the criteria of a defense article or defense service on the u.s .

munitions list" or "[p]rovides the equivalent performance capabilities of a defense article" on that list .

dual - use goods are commodities , software , or technologies that have both civilian and military applications .

the united states also controls certain exports in adherence to several multilateral nonproliferation control regimes .

in addition , u.s. export controls are used to restrict exports to certain countries on which the united states imposes economic sanctions , such as cuba , iran , and syria .

through the export controls act of 2018 ( eca ) , the arms export control act ( aeca ) , the international emergency economic powers act ( ieepa ) , and other authorities , congress has delegated , in the context of broad statutory power , to the executive branch its express constitutional authority to regulate foreign commerce by controlling exports .

various aspects of the u.s. export control system have long been criticized by exporters , nonproliferation advocates , allies , and other stakeholders as being too restrictive , insufficiently restrictive , cumbersome , obsolete , inefficient , or any combination of these descriptions .

some contend that such controls overly restrict u.s. exports and make firms less competitive .

others argue that u.s. defense and foreign policy considerations should trump commercial concerns .

in january 2007 , the government accountability office ( gao ) designated government programs designed to protect critical technologies , including the u.s. export control system , as a "high - risk" area warranting a "strategic reexamination of existing programs to identify needed changes. .

gao's report named poor coordination among export control agencies , disagreements over commodity jurisdiction between the departments of state and commerce , unnecessary delays and inefficiencies in the license application process , and a lack of systematic evaluative mechanisms to determine the effectiveness of export controls .

a 2017 gao report cited "progress" with regard to improving the export control system , but added that government - wide challenges remain , including the need to adopt a more consistent leadership approach , improve coordination among programs , address weaknesses in individual programs , and implement export control reform .

the 2019 version of the gao report noted improvements in the export control system , but still cited the need for further action .

on august 13 , 2009 , president barack obama announced the launch of a comprehensive review of the u.s. export control system ; then - secretary of defense robert m. gates announced key elements of the administration's agenda for reform in an april 2010 speech , with additional elaborations in subsequent months .

former secretary gates proposed a four - pronged approach that would establish a single export control licensing agency for both dual - use , munitions and exports licensed to embargoed destinations ; a unified control list ; a single enforcement coordination agency ; and a single integrated information technology system , which would include a single database of sanctioned and denied parties .

this section describes the characteristics of the dual - use , munitions , and nuclear controls .

the information contained in this section also appears in chart form in appendix a .

on august 13 , 2009 , president obama announced the launch of a comprehensive review of the u.s. export control system .

then - defense secretary robert m. gates announced key elements of the administration's agenda for reform in a speech on april 20 , 2010 , with additional elaborations in subsequent months .

former secretary gates proposed a four - pronged approach that would create a single primary export control licensing agency for both dual - use and munitions exports ; adopt a unified control list ; establish a single enforcement coordination agency ; and create a single integrated information technology system , which would include a single database of sanctioned and denied parties .

the administration's blueprint envisioned that these changes would be implemented in three phases , with the final phase requiring legislative action .

phase i would undertake preparatory work to harmonize the commerce control list ( ccl ) with the u.s .

munitions list ( usml ) .

this phase would also develop standardized licensing processes among the control agencies ; it would also create an "enforcement fusion center" to synchronize enforcement , along with a single electronic gateway to access the licensing system .

phase ii would implement a harmonized licensing system with two identically - structured tiered control lists , potentially allowing for a reduction in the amount of licenses required by the system .

this phase would include moving certain items from the usml to the ccl , for which congressional notification would be required ; examining unilateral controls on certain items ; and undertaking consultations with multilateral control regime partners to add or remove multilateral controls on certain items .

under the proposal , the new export control system would debut in phase iii , which would establish a single licensing agency ; merge the two harmonized , tiered control lists , with mechanisms for review and updating ; merge the two primary export control enforcement agencies , oee and ice ; and operationalize a single it system for licensing and enforcement .

changes in agency structure would require legislation .

in a february 2011 speech , then - bis assistant secretary kevin wolf elucidated seven principles driving the administration's export control reform efforts controls should focus on a small core set of key items that can pose a serious national security or intelligence threat to the united states and its interests ; controls should be fully coordinated with the multilateral export control regimes in order to be effective ; unilateral controls must address an existing legal or foreign policy objective ; control lists must clearly identify which items are controlled and be easily updated as technology emerges , matures , or becomes widely available ; licensing processes must be predictable and timely ; enforcement capabilities must be enhanced to address noncompliance and increase capacity to interdict unapproved transfers ; and controls must address counterterrorism policy and the need to export items that support homeland security priorities .

in his speech introducing the administration's reform efforts , then - secretary gates described the bureaucratic structure of the u.s. export control system as a "byzantine amalgam of authorities , roles , and missions scattered around different parts of the federal government. .

as noted above , licensing is divided among the department of commerce for dual - use and certain military items , the department of state for munitions , the department of the treasury for certain sanctions , and the nuclear regulatory commission and department of energy for certain nuclear materials and technologies .

these entities operate under different statutory authorities and enforce different regulations .

while there are mechanisms in place for license referrals and to address licensing disagreements , critics have long maintained that the multi - agency structure contributes to institutional disputes among the different agencies responsible for export control licensing .

having one licensing system would also end disputes about commodity jurisdiction over a given item .

on june 30 , 2010 , then - national security adviser general jim jones announced that the obama administration intended to create an independent licensing agency with cabinet members from existing control agencies serving as a board of directors .

while that administration did not provide specific details , this new agency is expected to take over the licensing functions of bis , ddtc , and ofac ; this agency would likely house the civil and administrative enforcement functions of bis and ddtc .

the obama administration did not propose moving licensing procedures of the nrc for nuclear materials and of the department of energy for nuclear - related technology ; an obama administration official attributed this decision to the relatively small volume of licensing undertaken by these agencies as well as by the small universe of exporters .

general jones argued that a unified licensing structure would end the situation in which no agency knew the total of export licenses granted or denied by the u.s. government .

under current referral processes , dual - use and certain military items licenses are referred by bis to the department of defense , the department of state ( economic energy and business bureau [eeb] , international security and non - proliferation bureau , and the regional bureaus ) , and the department of energy for review .

however , bis licenses are not referred to ddtc .

ddtc refers munitions licenses to dod and to the above - mentioned bureaus at state , and in some instances to energy , but not to bis .

some ofac licenses are referred only to state's eeb .

as a result , situations have arisen whereby licenses requested by the same exporter to the same destination have been approved by one license agency and denied by another .

brian nilsson , then - deputy assistant secretary of state for defense trade controls , indicated during a february 2016 hearing that that the single information technology system in use by the departments of commerce , energy , and state ( see below ) has begun to address the lack of agencies' visibility regarding license information .

yet , interagency policy differences may continue to exist because agencies would continue to refer licenses to ensure continued checks and balances .

an issue concerning dual - nationals may provide an example of the effort that will be necessary to create a unified export control system .

the white house announced on march 11 , 2010 , that it would take action to eliminate "obstacles to exporting to companies employing dual nationals. .

specifically , the obama administration announced that it would "begin to harmonize" conflicting standards used by the departments of commerce and state to determine a foreign person's nationality — a step that these departments must take in order to make certain export control decisions .

the commerce department , according to a 2010 government accountability office ( gao ) report , determines "nationality for release of technology to a foreign national" based on that person's "most recent citizenship or permanent residence. .

the state department , however , considered not only a foreign national's current citizenship status , but also their country of birth if it differs from the person's country of citizenship or permanent residency .

even if a foreign entity is approved for a manufacturing license agreement or a technical assistance agreement with a u.s. firm , the state department must approve the transfer of technical data , defense services , and defense articles to dual nationals and third - party nationals employed by the foreign entity .

"if a person's country of birth is prohibited from receiving u.s. arms , as are china , iran , and north korea , state [collected] additional information to confirm that the individual has no significant ties to his or her country of birth," according to the gao .

however , the state department stopped using "country of birth" as of 2015 , although the department does "consider all current and former citizenships , in addition to current permanent residency. .

both the state department and private - sector experts argue that these requirements are contentious because , in addition to being administratively burdensome , they are a potential employment discrimination issue in other countries ; in order to comply with the regulations , non - u.s. employers may need to limit employment opportunities in potential violation of their countries' employment laws .

after publishing a proposed rule on august 11 , 2010 , the state department published a final rule on may 16 , 2011 , amending the itar to allow the transfer of defense articles and technical data to dual or third - party nationals who are "bona fide , regular employees , directly employed by the foreign consignee or end - user. .

such transfers must take place completely within the physical territory of the country where the end - user is located , where the governmental entity or international organization conducts official business , or where the consignee operates , and be within the scope of an approved export license , other export authorization , or license exemption .

the end user or consignee must take a variety of measures designed to prevent the diversion of any exports ; the final rule includes a requirement for the end user to screen employees for "substantive contacts with restricted or prohibited countries" listed in the itar .

the rule , which became effective on august 15 , 2011 , also explains that , although "nationality does not , in and of itself , prohibit access to defense articles or defense services , an employee that has substantive contacts" with persons from prohibited countries "shall be presumed to raise a risk of diversion," unless the state department determines otherwise .

it is worth noting that , according to the state department , "most diversions of u.s .

munitions list ... items appear to occur outside the scope of approved licenses , not within foreign companies or organizations providing access to properly screened dual national or third country national employees. .

the obama administration concentrated on rationalizing the control lists to form the basis from which other reforms will flow .

the administration first worked to transform the current usml from a "negative list" characterized by general descriptions of articles and design - intent - based criteria to one resembling the current ccl , a "positive" list of dual - use items that are controlled according to objective criteria or parameters .

this is being done through the "bright line" process to determine which items should be controlled as dual - use goods and which should be controlled as munitions .

the bright line is being determined at the commodity level , based on technical specification and military needs , and is not an overarching concept or framework .

the obama administration argued that the bright line is necessary , in part , because of the usml's current reliance on design intent ( i.e. , whether an item was "specifically designed , modified , or adapted" for military use ) and its catch - all controls of parts and components of these items .

while the ccl is described as more "positive," it too contains entries containing the term "specially designed" for a specific purpose that may need to be modified to conform to bright line standards .

each category of the usml has been screened by an interagency team led by dod ; proposed rewrites to each usml category , including certain items proposed to be moved to the ccl , have been published as proposed rulemakings .

originally , each of the items on the resulting usml list was to have been assigned to a tier to determine its level of control .

the obama administration created three tiers applicable to both the ccl and the usml to categorize a different level of control .

however , the administration postponed this process , reportedly because it would have been necessary to decide on the tiers for all usml items prior to publishing any revised usml categories .

deputy assistant secretary nilsson testified that the obama administration prioritized revising the categories which have the greatest effect on u.s. military interoperability with allied governments .

to date , the executive branch has completed transferring items in the following categories from the usml to the ccl: category iv ( launch vehicles , missiles , rockets , torpedoes , bombs , mines , and other military explosive devices ; category v ( explosives and energetic materials , propellants , incendiary agents and their constituents ) ; category vi ( vessels of war and naval equipment ) ; category vii ( tanks and military vehicles ) ; category viii ( aircraft and associated equipment ) ; category ix ( military training equipment ) ; category x ( protective personal equipment and shelters ) ; category xi ( military electronics ) ; category xii ( fire control , range finder , optical and guidance and control equipment ) ; category xiii ( auxiliary military equipment ) ; category xiv ( toxicological agents , including chemical agents , biological agents , and associated equipment ) ; category xv ( spacecraft and related articles ) ; category xvi ( nuclear weapons related articles ) ; category xviii ( directed energy weapons ) ; and category xx ( submersible vessels and oceanic equipment ) .

the state department also created a new usml category xix ( gas turbine engines ) .

then - deputy assistant secretary nilsson stated in september 2017 that items would not be moved from usml categories i - iii ( firearms , close assault weapons and combat shotguns , guns and armament , ammunition / ordnance ) to the ccl until 2018 .

the executive branch posted proposed rules concerning movement of items from these categories on may 14 , 2018 .

on february 8 , 2019 , representative norma torres introduced h.r .

1134 , the prevent crime and terrorism act of 2019 , which would prohibit the president from removing "any item" from "category i , ii , or iii" of the usml .

similarly , on february 12 , 2019 , senator robert menendez introduced s. 459 , the stopping the traffic in overseas proliferation of ghost guns act , which states that "the president may not remove any firearm , or technical information relating to such firearm" from the usml .

a final rule on a new "0y521" classification series became effective on april 12 , 2013 .

this series is used for items that are neither identified under an existing eccn nor controlled under an existing u.s. or multilateral export control regime , but warrant control for foreign policy reasons or because they could provide a significant military or intelligence advantage .

according to the ear , such items "are typically emerging technologies. .

bis has subsequently added new items to this series .

items so classified "must be re - classified under another eccn within one calendar year from the date they are listed" in the relevant part of the ear .

if they are not reclassified , the items "are designated as ear99 items unless either the ccl is amended to impose a control on such items under another eccn or the eccn 0y521 classification is extended. .

bis may extend this classification "for two one - year periods , provided that the u.s. government has submitted a proposal to the relevant multilateral regime ( s ) to obtain multilateral controls over the item. .

bis may further extend the classification "only if the under secretary for industry and security makes a determination that such extension is in the national security or foreign policy interests of the united states. .

according to the obama administration , the usml would contain "only those items that provide at least a significant military or intelligence applicability that warrant the controls the aeca requires. .

the reconstituted munitions list may then be aligned with the ccl by adopting its a - e commodity organization structure and adding two additional categories: f and g for itar specific controls .

as a result of this alignment , each usml category will be divided into seven groups: a — equipment , assemblies , and components ; b — test , inspection , and production equipment ; c — materials ; d — software ; e — technology ; f — defense services ; and g — manufacturing and production authorizations .

as a result of the bright line process , the obama administration moved some usml items to the ccl .

under section 38 ( f ) of the aeca , the president may not remove any article from the usml until 30 days after providing notice to the house foreign affairs committee , and the senate foreign relations committee , including a description of the nature of any subsequent controls on the item .

section 38 ( f ) ( 6 ) of the aeca requires that "any major defense equipment" on the 600 series "shall continue to be subject to" several "notification and reporting requirements" of the aeca and the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( p.l .

87-195 ) .

in order to comply with section 38 ( f ) , the manner in which usml items transferred to the ccl are to be controlled is described in a proposed rulemaking on july 15 , 2011 , and is part of the "mega rule" issued on april 16 , 2013 .

it involves the creation of a "600 series" subcategory of export control classification numbers ( eccns ) for each category on the ccl .

this new series is populated by items that are judged not to need the relatively - stricter controls mandated under the usml .

items moved to the ccl in this manner require a license to all destinations except canada .

all items controlled pursuant to multilateral control regimes retain their existing controls .

in addition , "600 series" items will be subject to a general policy of denial to countries subject to a u.s. or u.n. arms embargo .

such items are also subject to the prohibition on defense department procurement of "goods and services" on the usml "from any communist chinese military company" mandated by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 ( p.l .

109-163 ) .

the rule also places restrictions on the extent to which certain license exceptions can be applied .

end - use items transferred to the 600 series would be eligible for the recently announced strategic trade authorization ( sta ) license exception ( described below ) only after a determination is jointly made by the state , defense , and commerce departments that such an exception should be made available for the item in question .

most parts , components , and accessories transferred under this process would be automatically eligible for an sta license exception for exports to the governments of sta - eligible countries .

items expressly defined as "less significant" would be eligible for a license exception for destinations other than those controlled for antiterrorism reasons .

"600 series" items would also be eligible for other preexisting license exceptions .

the u.s. control status of parts and components also is addressed by the 600 series .

under the ear , the license requirement is based on the finished product , generally without regard to its parts and components .

however , a foreign product containing more than 25% controlled u.s. content ( 10% controlled u.s. content in the case of a transaction to a country identified as a state sponsor of terrorism ) may require a reexport license from the united states .

however , for itar - controlled items , ddtc has employed a jurisdictional interpretation known as a "see - through" rule , which subjects to itar control u.s. - origin parts and components incorporated into end products manufactured overseas .

for items migrating to the 600 series , a 25% rule applies , but no de minimus amount would apply to embargoed destinations .

to facilitate the transfer of items from the usml to the ccl , the obama administration proposed a new definition of "specially designed. .

as noted above , the administration sought to move away from the design - intent standard of the usml and the use of the catch - all phrase "specifically designed" for military use to subject parts and components to itar jurisdiction .

the obama administration argued that new definition was necessary because "specifically designed" in the usml did not have the same meaning as the term "specially designed" which appears in the ccl and also in various multilateral control lists .

the administration also argued that removing the term ( s ) entirely by enumerating each part and component being moved from the usml to the ccl was infeasible .

the obama administration published its final rule on the definition of "specially designed" on april 16 , 2013 .

some have dubbed the two - part definition as a "catch and release" approach because the first part may capture an item as specially designed for military use and the second part may release the item from control under the definition if it does not qualify under certain parameters .

under the first part of the regulation , an item qualifies as specially designed if ( 1 ) as a result of "development" has properties peculiarly responsible for achieving or exceeding the performance levels , characteristics , or functions in the relevant eccn or u.s .

munitions list ( usml ) paragraph ; or ( 2 ) is a "part," "component," "accessory," "attachment," or "software" for use in or with a commodity or defense article 'enumerated' or otherwise described on the ccl or the usml .

under the regulation , if neither of these criteria apply to an item , then the item is not specially designed .

if one or more of these criteria describes an item , the item is potentially qualified as specially designed and is subject to the following six exclusions .

the item is excluded from being specially designed if it ( 1 ) has been identified to be in an eccn paragraph that does not contain "specially designed" as a control parameter or as an ear99 item in a commodity jurisdiction ( cj ) determination or interagency - cleared commodity classification ( ccats ) ; ( 2 ) is , regardless of 'form' or 'fit,' a fastener ( e.g .

 , screw , bolt , nut , nut plate , stud , insert , clip , rivet , pin ) , washer , spacer , insulator , grommet , bushing , spring , wire , solder ; ( 3 ) has the same function , performance capabilities , and the same or 'equivalent' form and fit , as a commodity or software used in or with an item that: ( i ) is or was in "production" ( i.e .

 , not in "development" ) ; and ( ii ) is either not 'enumerated' on the ccl or usml , or is described in an eccn controlled only for anti - terrorism ( at ) reasons ; ( 4 ) was or is being developed with "knowledge" that it would be for use in or with commodities or software ( i ) described in an eccn and ( ii ) also commodities or software either not 'enumerated' on the ccl or the usml ( eg , ear99 commodities or software ) or commodities or software described in an eccn controlled only for anti - terrorism ( at ) reasons ; ( 5 ) was or is being developed as a general purpose commodity or software , i.e. , with no "knowledge" for use in or with a particular commodity ( eg , an f / a - 18 or hmmwv ) or type of commodity ( eg , an aircraft or machine tool ) ; or ( 6 ) was or is being developed with "knowledge" that it would be for use in or with commodities or software described ( i ) in an eccn controlled for at - only reasons and also ear99 commodities or software ; or ( ii ) exclusively for use in or with ear99 commodities or software. .

under this decision approach , the item is potentially "caught" as specially designed by the first two criteria , but it may be "released" from that definition if any of the six subsequent qualifiers apply .

the commerce regulations apply to the "600 series" of items moved from the usml .

the proposed regulation to define specially designed in the itar as a replacement for the currently utilized "specifically designed" is similar in nature .

in a speech on july 17 , 2012 , then - bis assistant secretary kevin wolf acknowledged that the specially designed concept is "inherently difficult to apply in reality," and that it is "not consistent with the "ultimate goal of creating a truly positive , objective list of controlled items. .

however , he noted that , concurrent with this approach , bis also published an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking in june 2012 seeking comments on the feasibility of enumerating or positively identifying each item determined classified as specially designed on the ccl .

in 2011 , the obama administration devised a new license exception known as the strategic trade authorization ( sta ) , which was designed to facilitate transfers to low - risk countries and to promote interoperability to allies in the field .

to be eligible , exporters must provide notification to bis of the transaction and a destination control statement notifying the foreign consignee of the exception's safeguard requirements ; exporters must also obtain from the foreign consignee a statement acknowledging the consignee's understanding and willingness to comply with the requirements of the license exception .

sta - eligible recipients of u.s. munitions items contained on the ccl are not allowed to reexport such items without a license .

such recipients are also prohibited from reexporting "sta - eligible items to any destination outside the sta - eligible countries. .

under the final rulemaking , sta is available to 2 groups consisting of 44 countries .

to a group of 36 countries made up of nato partners and members of all 4 multilateral nonproliferation control regimes , dual - use items controlled for national security ( ns ) , chemical or biological weapons , nuclear nonproliferation , regional stability , crime control , or significant items ( hot section jet technology ) are eligible for an sta .

this includes almost all items on the ccl that are not controlled for statutory reasons .

an additional eight countries are eligible for exports , reexports , or transfers controlled for ns - only and that are not designated as sta - excluded .

the united states - israel strategic partnership act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-296 ) requires the president , "consistent with the commitments of the united states under international arrangements," to "take steps" to move israel from the second list of countries to the first list of countries .

however , israel's sta status does not appear to have changed .

an august 3 , 2018 , commerce department rule moved india from the second list of countries to the first list of countries .

dual - use items controlled for missile technology , chemical weapons , short supply , or surreptitious listening are not be eligible for export under an sta .

certain implements of execution and torture , pathogens and toxins , software and technology for "hot - sections" of aero gas - turbine engines , and encryption have also been excluded from the sta .

the third singularity involves the creation of a streamlined export enforcement system .

under phase i of the new approach , a single export "fusion center" would be created to "coordinate and de - conflict investigations , serve as a central point of contact for coordinating export control enforcement with intelligence community activities , and synchronize overlapping outreach programs. .

on november 9 , 2010 , the obama administration issued executive order 13558 , which created the export enforcement coordination center ( eecc ) .

the center officially opened in march 2012 within the department of homeland security and replaced and expanded on the functions of the existing national export enforcement coordination network in ice .

it consists of a director from the department of homeland security and two deputies appointed from the departments of commerce and justice , with an intelligence community liaison designated by the director of national intelligence .

the center functions as the primary forum to coordinate export control enforcement efforts among the departments of state , the treasury , commerce , defense , justice , energy , and homeland security and the director of national intelligence and to resolve potential conflicts in criminal and administrative export control enforcement .

the center is also able to screen all license applications .

previously , the oee at bis was the only entity that could screen dual - use licenses , whereas ice could screen licenses from ddtc and ofac .

the unit will also establish government - wide statistical tracking capabilities for criminal and administrative enforcement activities .

also in march 2012 , an information triage unit was established in the department of commerce to serve as an information gathering and screening unit among law enforcement agencies , the intelligence community , and the export licensing agencies .

the unit is designed to serve as a central point to disseminate relevant information for each license application prior to decisionmaking .

there may be weaknesses in the eecc's mission execution .

"[p]rocedures for coordination between the investigative export control enforcement agencies and the intelligence community have not been finalized," according to a march 2019 gao report , which adds that the center's "lack of formal coordination" limits its effectiveness and has stalled "its efforts to develop standard operating procedures. .

absent such coordination , the center "is limited in its ability to realize its full potential to facilitate enhanced coordination and intelligence sharing. .

the eecc is not to be confused with the national export control coordinator , housed in the justice department , which is "responsible for ensuring full coordination between the justice department and the many other us law enforcement , licensing , and intelligence agencies that play a role in export enforcement. .

the role of the coordinator has been described as the chief prosecutor of export control enforcement with the authority to determine which cases to bring for criminal prosecution .

the donald trump administration may request the movement of the bis office of export enforcement to ice .

currently , ice conducts investigations and criminal enforcement for ddtc and ofac , and by virtue of its authority under the ieepa , it shares dual - use investigations with oee .

removal of oee to ice will end this overlap of authority .

the obama administration envisioned that a consolidated licensing agency would continue to have authority over administrative enforcement actions .

the fourth singularity is the creation of a single information technology system for administering the export control system .

the departments of commerce , state , and defense have begun using the usxports database , originally used by the department of defense to track referred license applications .

the reform effort envisions that usexports will become the platform for a proposed single export license application form to be used by state , commerce , and the treasury's office of foreign assets control .

the department of energy , immigration and customs enforcement , and the export coordination enforcement center are also to use the database .

the obama administration's plan called for the adoption of usxports first for internal communications such as license referrals , while exporters would continue to use the existing snap - r and d - trade electronic license filing portals .

the obama administration indicated that eventually it wanted to facilitate interoperability between the license portals , the internal system , and customs' automated export system ( aes ) , the information system that tracks actual movement of goods .

in conjunction with the single it system , the obama administration developed a single license application form .

to make this possible , the administration standardized certain definitions between the different regulations , such as the use of the term "technology" in the ear as opposed to the term "technical data" used in the itar .

to assist in compliance with u.s. export regulations , the obama administration also compiled a consolidated screening list of over 24,000 entities from existing commerce , treasury , and state department screening lists .

the list consolidates the bis denied person list , unverified list , and entity list ; the department of state's nonproliferation sanctions list ; the directorate of defense trade controls debarred list ; and the office of foreign assets control specially designated nationals list .

while not announced as part of the four singularities , the obama administration proposed reforming encryption controls as one of the first deliverables in the export control reform process .

the administration announced on march 11 , 2010 , that it would change a filing requirement for exporters of products with encryption capabilities .

at the time , exporters of such products were required to file for a technical review by the commerce department , a process that , according to the white house announcement , could take "between 30-60 days. .

the announcement advocated replacing this process with "a more efficient one - time notification - and - ship process," which would ensure that the "u.s. government still receives information it needs for its national security requirements while facilitating u.s. exports and innovation for new products and new technologies. .

the commerce department announced on june 25 , 2010 , that it was amending the export administration regulations ( ear ) as "the first step in the president's effort to reform u.s. encryption export controls. .

as described by the commerce department's bureau of industry and security , the amendment to the ear includes replacing , for encryption products "of lesser national security concern," the "30-day waiting requirement for a technical review" with a "provision that allows immediate authorization to export and reexport these products" after the exporter submits an electronic encryption registration to bis ; similarly replacing the 30-day requirement for most mass - market encryption products ; an "overarching note to exclude particular products that use cryptography from being controlled as 'information security' items" — a measure that implements changes approved by the wassenaar arrangement members in december 2009 ; this regulatory change eliminates controls under the ccl on "[m]any items in which the use of encryption is ancillary to the primary function of the item" ; and a provision that makes most encryption technology eligible for export and reexport to nongovernmental end - users in countries other than those of "greater national security concern. .

according to the june 2010 announcement of the ear amendment , the united states "will also review other issues related to encryption controls. .

decontrolling additional items would require approval by the members of the wassenaar arrangement .

appendix a .

basic export control characteristics appendix b. dual - use export licensing process appendix c. list of acronyms aeca — arms export control act aes — automated export system bis — bureau of industry and security , department of commerce cbp — customs and border protection , department of homeland security ccl — commerce control list cml — commerce munitions list cpi — counter - proliferation investigations dcis — defense criminal investigation service ddtc — directorate of defense trade controls , department of state dhs — department of homeland security doj — department of justice dtsa — defense technology security administration eaa — export administration act ear — export administration regulations eccn — export control classification number eecc — export enforcement coordination center eeb — economic , energy , and business bureau , department of state fp — foreign policy controls gao — governmental accountability office ieepa — international emergency economic powers act ice — immigration and customs enforcement agency , department of homeland security isn — international security and nonproliferation bureau , department of state ita — international trade administration , department of commerce itar — international traffic in arms regulations mtcr — missile technology control regime nrc — nuclear regulatory commission ns — national security controls nsg — nuclear suppliers group oee — office of export enforcement odtc — office of defense trade compliance , ddtc ofac — office of foreign assets control , department of the treasury si — significant items controls sl — surreptitious listening controls ss — short supply controls sta — strategic trade authorization usml — u.s .

munitions lis .

