the global economy has undergone dramatic changes over the past 60 years .

in the early 1950s , the world economy was essentially divided between developed or industrialized countries in the "north" and developing or non - industrialized countries in the "south. .

developed countries , excluding japan , at that time accounted for 90% of world manufacturing output and 90% of world exports of manufactured goods .

production remained largely enclosed within national boundaries and trade patterns reflected the respective country specializations .

inputs for most products were sourced within national borders .

in addition to a large imbalance in the structure of production and exports , there was a dramatic imbalance in living standards and political power as well .

from the 1950s to the mid - 1990s , these imbalances began to reverse gradually .

by 1995 , for example , the advanced countries' share of manufacturing output had fallen to 80% .

but the narrowing of the great 20 th century divide between advanced and developing countries accelerated rapidly over the past two decades with traditional production , trade , and finance patterns being replaced by new and more balanced configurations .

spurred by the information technology ( it ) revolution , trade liberalization and other economic reforms , the entry of an estimated 2 billion people into the labor force as a result of the breakdown of the soviet bloc and the opening of china , and the freer movement of capital and technology from developed countries to developing countries , the size of the global economy doubled over the decade preceding the 2008-2009 global financial crisis , increasing from $31 trillion in 1999 to $62 trillion in 2008 .

while the growth reached practically every region of the world and encompassed dozens of developing countries , a handful of large developing countries — led by china , india , and brazil — accounted for a major share of the global growth .

other emerging economies with large populations , such as indonesia , mexico , russia , turkey , and vietnam , also grew at a rapid pace .

this faster growth has enabled developing countries to expand their share of global gdp , rising from around one - fifth of global gdp in 2000 to more than one - third of world output today , fueling speculation that the world's economic balance of power is rapidly shifting away from the united states and europe toward rising powers in asia and latin america .

in addition to altering global gdp rankings , the changes in the global economy have affected the centers of economic growth , the location of manufacturing , and international trade patterns .

buttressed by their exporting success and rising incomes , developing countries are also becoming more important players in the international financial system .

if current trends persist , the shifts in wealth and power could become more pronounced over the next several decades .

with important responsibilities for the formulation of u.s. international trade and financial policies , congress has an interest in understanding how these shifts of wealth and power are affecting u.s. economic interests .

this report addresses these concerns in two parts by ( 1 ) describing and analyzing trends that are transforming the global economy , and ( 2 ) highlighting varied policy challenges raised by the new global economy for congressional consideration .

discussion and analysis of these trends has intensified over the past few years .

international institutions , such as the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , the world bank , the world trade organization ( wto ) , and the international monetary fund ( imf ) ; private research institutions , such as the brookings institution and the carnegie endowment for international peace ; and private sector research entities , such as goldman sachs and pricewaterhouse coopers , have all issued analyses of the changing global economy .

this report summarizes many of their key findings with a view to what the evolving global economy means for congressional concerns and responsibilities in the formulation of u.s. international trade and financial policies .

driven by technological changes that have reduced the costs of communication and transportation , a dramatic increase in the world supply of labor , and a reduction of trade barriers , broad shifts in economic activity from developed to developing countries have taken place over the past two decades .

the biggest change involves a long - term shift in economic power from advanced to a handful of large developing countries that have grown twice as fast as advanced countries for more than a decade .

these rising economic powers have become increasingly important generators of world economic growth .

their share of global trade has increased significantly , with trade and investment between developing countries ( south - south trade and investment ) becoming an important new force in the global economy .

these countries now export a diversified range of manufactured products and are actively upgrading their ability to produce more sophisticated and higher value - added products .

these trends have been accompanied by a major shift in the location of manufacturing from advanced to developing countries , particularly to asia .

often referred to as "factory asia," this development has been driven by the proliferation of global supply chains that rely on significant amounts of goods and services inputs from different countries , including from the united states .

in this new environment , countries no longer specialize exclusively in producing finished products , but rather in specific stages of the production process .

the rising economic powers have also increased their financial holdings and wealth and are becoming more important players in international financial markets .

while a dominant share of financial assets , financial centers , and financial regulatory power remains concentrated in the united states and europe , these emerging economies have accumulated large volumes of foreign exchange reserves , established sovereign wealth funds , borrowed capital from international financial markets , attracted foreign direct investment , and begun investing some of their assets abroad .

corporations based in these countries are playing an increasingly prominent role in global business and cross - border investment , often competing with u.s. and european multinationals for natural resources , technology , and investment in other developing countries .

singapore , hong kong , and shanghai are growing in importance as financial centers and will perhaps rank someday with the traditional hubs of new york , london , frankfurt , and tokyo .

as their role in international trade and investment increases , demand for emerging market currencies is also likely to grow over time , perhaps paving the way for an international monetary system with more than one key reserve currency .

as a result of these changes , the long - standing division between advanced and developing countries has eroded , particularly for the handful of rising economic powers .

the advanced or developed countries may still be the richest countries in terms of per capita incomes , but their economies may no longer be the largest , the fastest - growing , or the most dynamic .

this development , in turn , has implications for u.s. economic well - being and global economic leadership that are subject to debate .

key changes in the global economy are documented in more detail below .

the changing global economic landscape poses numerous challenges and opportunities for u.s. international trade and financial policies , including the functioning of the global economic institutions .

developing countries in 2009 accounted for 34% of u.s. exports of manufactured products ( up from 25% in 1989 ) and 56% of u.s. imports of manufactured goods ( up from 24% in 1989 ) .

they are also becoming an increasingly important destination , as well as a source , of foreign investment flows .

a growing middle class population in these countries , estimated at up to several billion , along with increased south - south interactions , provide new opportunities for u.s. exporters and investors .

at the same time , a range of u.s. stakeholders can expect growing competition and pressures on wages and employment in the years ahead .

as many of these countries are engaged in various practices that provide preferences for their home companies at the expense of foreign companies , increased u.s. pressures to open their markets further to u.s. exports of goods and services can be expected .

the changes in the global economy are also raising challenges for the trading system and the role of rising economic powers in shaping it .

these include continuing efforts to complete the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations and rising concerns about the "fairness" of the rules of the system .

the doha negotiations , launched 10 years ago under the aegis of the world trade organization , have been stymied , in large part , by resistance of the top emerging powers — china , india , and brazil — to offer meaningful concessions .

some of the emerging economies have also been driven by interventionist , export - led growth strategies .

these strategies , in turn , have prompted questioning in the united states and europe about whether all wto members are playing by the same rules or taking on responsibilities commensurate with their economic standing .

the future direction of u.s. trade negotiations — multilateral , regional , and bilateral — as well as analysis of trade relations , may need to take into better account the growing role that production chains and trade in intermediate products are playing in today's global economy .

these developments call into question traditional ways of calculating and analyzing the significance , in particular , of bilateral trade imbalances and country of origin labeling requirements .

new issues raised by the changing global landscape include the role of state - owned enterprises , access to developing country markets for procurement , and distinctions among developing countries concerning their world trade obligations .

in addition , south - south trade barriers remain high and , if reduced , could provide substantial global welfare benefits .

just as in the goods market , the increasing weight of developing countries in international finance raises a number of policy concerns .

these include concerns about the adequacy of the regulatory system for integrating developing countries into international financial arrangements , rules for direct investment , the role and operation of sovereign wealth funds , and the future of the dollar as world's primary reserve currency .

as global trade and economic power becomes more balanced , pressures are increasing for making global economic governance and representation at the bedrock bretton woods institutions — the international monetary system ( imf ) , the world bank , and the world trade organization — more inclusive .

although these institutions have adapted over time to provide the rising powers with more power and influence in setting the rules and arrangements of the world economy , there are concerns that many rising powers may not be willing to take on more responsibility for the maintenance of the system .

while the evolution of the g - 20 as a key forum for international economic policy coordination mechanisms is considered by many as a major step toward increasing the responsibility of the rising powers for the smooth functioning of the world economy , the g20 also raises questions about representation and legitimacy .

these issues are discussed in more detail below .

the global economy has been reshaped over the past two decades .

shifts in global shares of production and trade from advanced nations to a small group of developing countries , many located in asia , have been pronounced and dramatic .

shifts in financial holdings and assets are also occurring , but at a slower rate .

as a result of these changes , the global economy has seen the rise of more countries that can contribute to global growth and that have the resources to be important regional and global actors .

whether these trends will continue over the next few decades remains unknown .

most projections of the shift in global economic power are based on some assumptions about the future rates of growth of developed and developing countries .

fiscally constrained developed countries are predicted by a number of economic forecasters to grow at rates that are three to five percentage points lower than developing countries .

much could happen that would narrow this gap in growth rates , thus offsetting predicted outcomes .

in the case of advanced countries , successful efforts at consolidation and reduction of public debt levels could instill investor confidence and unleash growth - creating , entrepreneurial activity that leads to higher than projected growth rates .

in the case of developing countries , whose growth has been facilitated by access to export markets , capital , and technology , a rise in world - wide trade barriers could adversely affect their growth rates .

most rising economic powers , which have grown by borrowing and adapting existing technology , may also have to become more successful at innovation if they are to continue on a rapid growth trajectory .

moreover , many of these countries face formidable internal obstacles to growth , such as an aging work force , corruption , and political stability , that could easily alter projections for growth .

regardless of future trends , the rise of many heavily populated developing countries to date has posed significant opportunities and challenges for u.s. economic interests .

on the one hand , most economists view the transition of developing countries from low to higher levels of production and wealth as being a "win - win" situation and mutually advantageous .

this view is that a larger world economic pie , combined with hundreds of millions of people in developing countries escaping poverty , is good for everyone via dramatic increases in world production and consumption .

on the other hand , the rising economies have affected u.s. employment opportunities and incomes differentially , with more favorable impacts for highly educated workers .

because many of these countries' governments play a large role in guiding market developments and corporate growth , there is also concern that the distribution of the benefits that are derived from international trade and investment flows may be distorted .

shifts in relative economic power positions also raise broader questions concerning possible impacts on u.s. influence and leadership of the global economy .

nevertheless , under either scenario , congress , the executive branch , and the private sector will be pressed to find new ways of partnering and cooperating with these rising powers in order to maximize benefits and minimize costs for american companies and workers .

