about 8.3 million children under age 19 in the united states , or 10.4% of children in this age group , had no health insurance for at least some of 2009 .

 ( similarly , about 10.3% of children in this age group had no health insurance for at least some of 2008. ) .

uninsured children are , on average , less likely than insured children to have the recommended number of well - baby and well - child medical visits and less likely to receive standard immunizations .

children without health insurance also rely more on hospital emergency rooms for basic care and therefore receive such care in the least cost - efficient manner .

a child's health insurance status depends largely on decisions made by his or her parents or guardians , and is highly dependant on whether these adults receive employer - sponsored coverage .

if the child's parents receive employer - sponsored coverage , it is likely that the child will as well .

for those children not covered by their parents' ( or guardians' ) employer - sponsored insurance , public may be programs available .

medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary , acute , and long - term medical care .

each state designs and administers its own version of medicaid under broad federal rules .

the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) allows states to cover targeted low - income children with no health insurance in families with incomes above medicaid eligibility levels .

states may enroll targeted low - income children in chip - financed expansions of medicaid , create new separate state chip programs , or devise combinations of both approaches .

a small number of children without employer - sponsored coverage , medicaid , or chip may have other health insurance coverage .

some disabled children are eligible for medicare .

other children have insurance from policies purchased in the small - group market or from policies granted as a part of military benefits .

this report examines the health insurance status of children under age 19 in 2009 .

following a brief discussion of the data , the report looks at the relationship between the types of health insurance held by a child and the characteristics of the child and his or her parents ( including age , other demographic characteristics , and ties to the labor market ) .

next , the report demonstrates the different conclusions that might be drawn from different analyses of the childhood uninsurance data .

the report concludes with a discussion of trends in insurance status since 1999 for children under age 18 ; comparable data exist for years been 1999 and 2009 , inclusive .

this report uses 2009 data collected in the 2010 current population survey ( cps ) conducted by the census bureau of the u.s. department of commerce .

the cps is a monthly survey of non - institutionalized civilian households used primarily to collect employment data .

the annual social and economic supplement ( asec ) to the cps collects information on individual health insurance status , income , and poverty .

the asec is also known as the march supplement , because most of the surveys are completed in march , with many questions covering the prior year .

about 100,000 addresses comprise the sample households to be interviewed .

statistical techniques adjust the data to represent all households in the nation .

the march supplement to the cps is one of several widely used sources used to estimate the levels of uninsurance in the united states .

the key variable in this report is whether each child was uninsured in 2009 .

more specifically , the uninsurance variable measures whether the child lacked health insurance for at least some part of 2009 .

this report , therefore , uses the term "uninsured" to mean uninsured at a point in 2009 , not necessarily uninsured over the entire year .

this section covers the relationships between health insurance and a child's and / or parent's demographic and employment characteristics .

this section demonstrates that , in evaluating groups of uninsured children , it is important to decide on an appropriate comparison group .

although family status for children living with at least one parent is used as an example , the issues covered in this section are applicable to other traits as well .

the conclusion is that different representations of the same data can lead to different conclusions if care is not taken when evaluating the data .

figure 1 looks at the total number of uninsured children and displays the percentage of uninsured children living with at least one parent by family structure .

from this picture alone , one could conclude that uninsurance was highest among two - parent families .

this is because almost 60% of the total pool of uninsured children live with two parents , while about 31% of the total pool of uninsured children live with a single mother , with the remaining 11% living with a single father .

in this example , it is important to remember that all comparisons are relative to the total number of uninsured children .

different conclusions , however , might be drawn if the analysis compares the percentage of uninsured children within each group's family structure .

these comparisons are illustrated in figure 2 for two - parent families , single - father families , and single - mother families , respectively .

even though figure 1 shows that those living in two - parent households are the largest group of uninsured children , figure 2 demonstrate that children living in two - parent families are less likely to be uninsured than children living with only one parent .

this apparent paradox — that the group least likely to be uninsured makes up the largest portion of the uninsured — also exists when looking at other characteristics .

it comes about because the group representing the largest share of the relevant population ( i.e. , children living in two - parent families ) can have the largest number of uninsured children even if they have the lowest uninsurance rate .

these differences raise important issues for policy makers considering policy options to reduce the number of uninsured .

for example , proposals that may affect the greatest number of children in two - parent families ( which comprise almost 59% of the uninsured children ) may not affect the greatest number of children living in single - father families ( of whom 16% are uninsured ) .

this report has , until this point , documented the health insurance and uninsurance patterns of children under age 19 in 2009 .

the focus of the report now switches to an examination of trends in insurance and uninsurance between 1999 and 2009 , a period including two economic recessions .

the data used in this section come from the cps and are available in a consistent way only since 1999 for children under age 18 .

it is not possible to predict whether the percentage of uninsured children will increase or decrease during a recession .

those working may lose their jobs , and thus their employer - sponsored health insurance .

these employment effects would lead to an increase in the uninsurance rate for children because not all parents who lose their employer - sponsored coverage will extend their insurance through the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 ( cobra ) provisions or purchase insurance in the individual market .

on the other hand , a drop in parental income during the economic downturn may allow children to become eligible for the need - based entitlement programs of medicaid and chip .

if the newly eligible do indeed enroll , the uninsurance rate may not increase ( or may even decrease ) during an economic recession .

in addition , congress and / or state legislators may choose to change an insurance program's eligibility or benefits in response to a recession .

for example , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) provided financial assistance for many individuals to maintain their health coverage under cobra , effective february 17 , 2009 .

this should have reduced the number of children who would have otherwise been uninsured after early february 2009 .

finally , because the unemployment rate is slow to recover after a recession , and because employment is a determinant of insurance status , any effects of unemployment on uninsurance may linger past the end of the recession .

figure 3 presents the national percentages of children under age 18 who were uninsured , were covered by employer - sponsored health insurance , and were covered by public health insurance between 1999 and 2009 .

the gray shaded areas in figure 3 represent periods of economic recessions .

the uninsurance rate ranged from a high of 12.5% in 1999 to a low of 9.0% in 2008 .

there was therefore a 3.5 percentage - point spread between the high and low uninsurance rates over the 10-year period .

neither the short recession in 2001 nor the longer recession in 2008 and 2009 seemed to have much of an effect on the uninsurance rate of children .

when looking simply at the uninsurance rate , the effects of the economy on the children's uninsurance rate do not seem especially meaningful .

nevertheless , these uninsurance data mask two larger changes in children's insurance status over the 10-year interval .

first , the number of children covered by employer - sponsored insurance fell from 65.2% in 1999 to 55.8% in 2009 .

employer - sponsored insurance fell during both recessions , and it did not subsequently increase after the first recession .

in short , the falling rate of employer - sponsored insurance ( in and of itself ) pushed toward an increase in the uninsurance rate for children .

at the same time , however , the number of children covered by public health insurance ( predominately medicaid and chip ) increased over the 10-year period .

in 1999 , 20.3% of children under age 18 were covered by public insurance , but by 2009 , 33.8% of children under age 18 were covered by public insurance .

several factors may have contributed to the increase in public insurance .

first , arra provided a temporary increase in the percentages used to determine federal medicaid payments to states .

to be eligible for this matching increase , the states could not restrict their existing medicaid eligibility standards .

therefore as more children became eligible for medicaid when their parents lost their jobs and health insurance , arra's maintenance of effort requirement for medicaid kept eligibility standards unchanged .

this should have reduced the number of children who might have otherwise been uninsured had states restricted eligibility .

second , enrollment in chip increased throughout the decade .

in particular , chip was enacted in 1997 , and enrollment across the states began within several years .

the increase in the take - up of chip over the past decade is thought to have been a contributor to the increase in public coverage .

beyond these statutory changes , there may have been changes in parental take - up of public health insurance for their children .

first , as parents lost their jobs and other income and / or assets , more children could have met the need - based criteria for eligibility .

in addition , the parents of children who were always eligible may have chosen to take up the benefits for their children .

in any case , between 1999 and 2009 , the offsetting downward trend in children covered by employer - sponsored health insurance and upward trend in children covered by public health insurance attenuated variations in the percentage of uninsured children .

