high oil prices affect nearly every household and business in the united states .

figure 1 illustrates that during the course of 2008 , oil prices doubled to more than $145 per barrel and then rapidly fell by 80% .

in early 2011 , there was a run - up of about 20% , sending gasoline prices near 2008 highs .

few would rule out the possibility of similar price swings in the months to come .

what explains oil price volatility ? .

there are two possible kinds of explanations .

the first looks to the fundamentals of oil production and energy consumption .

rapid global economic growth has led to rising demand for oil , and supply could not keep up at previous oil prices .

but oil supply and demand are inelastic to price changes , at least in the near - term , which some would argue means that relatively small shifts in supply or demand can be expected to trigger significant price movements .

others consider price movements such as those of 2008 and early 2011 to be more extreme than warranted by the fundamentals of supply and demand .

the second explanation for unstable commodity prices focuses on financial markets for derivatives contracts that are linked to the price of oil — futures , options , and swaps .

many market participants are pure financial speculators , who never deal in physical oil , but seek to profit from correctly forecasting price trends .

critics claim that speculators can drive oil prices above fundamental levels , resulting in a "speculative premium" that imposes unjustified costs on consumers .

although the relationship between speculation and commodity prices has been studied extensively , there is no consensus among academics and regulators as to whether speculative trading causes episodes of unusual price volatility .

this report provides background on the oil derivatives markets and the different types of firms that trade in those markets .

it reviews the concepts of manipulation and excessive speculation .

it includes a brief section describing the fundamental factors that affect oil prices .

although the basic question of fundamentals versus speculation remains unsettled , this report provides a context for evaluating the opposing claims .

the united states consumes about 19 million barrels of oil each day .

maintaining the supply of oil involves thousands of daily transactions , at prices varying by location , quality , quantity , and local supply and demand conditions .

there is no single price at which spot ( or physical ) oil deals take place , but there are a number of benchmarks that buyers and sellers use as reference points .

private and government sources publish benchmark data about spot prices at various locations .

another important oil price benchmark is the futures price .

a futures contract is a form of oil "derivative" — it is a financial instrument that gains and loses value as the price of oil rises and falls .

in effect , futures traders buy the price of oil ( and make or lose money as the price changes ) without necessarily delivering or taking possession of a single barrel of the physical commodity .

thousands of traders buy and sell oil futures contracts .

their purposes , strategies , and investment horizons vary , but the sum of their transactions determines the futures market price , which is publicly available to all market participants .

many spot trades take place at the futures price , or at the futures price adjusted by some factor .

headlines reporting a dramatic jump or fall in oil prices are likely to quote the futures price .

both physical and derivative trades ( futures , options , and swap contracts linked to the price of oil ) contribute to setting the price .

it is thus very difficult to disentangle the price impact of trades by producers and commercial users of oil from those of financial speculators who seek to profit by forecasting price trends .

does excessive speculation drive prices away from levels justified by supply and demand fundamentals , or do speculators provide liquidity and facilitate the price - setting mechanism ? .

these questions remain controversial .

the next sections of this report describe the mechanics of oil futures and the kinds of traders who participate in the market .

although oil swaps and options use different terminology , the economic substance is the same: they are bilateral contracts under which one party gains if the price moves in one direction , and the other party gains if the price moves in the opposite direction .

there are no public data on how much oil futures trading is speculative , although the assumption is that speculators account for most short - term trading , which in turn accounts for most market turnover .

the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) , however , publishes weekly commitments of traders ( cot ) reports , which present data on the size of positions held by several kinds of market participants .

cot data , usually published late afternoon each friday , reflect the open interest , or the number of contracts outstanding , as of close of trading on the previous tuesday .

thus , comparing week - to - week cot figures shows whether classes of traders have increased or decreased the size of their long , short , or spread positions .

the cot figures do not show how much trading has gone on during the week , or whether a position has been liquidated and then built back up , but simply offer a snapshot of positions at the market close on tuesday .

another significant limitation of cot data is that they do not cover swap contracts — another form of oil derivative contract not traded on exchanges .

thus , cot figures arguably cover only a subset of oil derivatives , all of which play a role in setting prices .

the dodd - frank act ( p.l .

111-203 ) gave the cftc new regulatory authority over the swaps market .

in the future , cot reports may reflect swap positions , but the data currently available cover only exchange - traded futures and options on futures .

table 1 breaks down open interest in crude oil futures and options on futures as of july 19 , 2011 .

the figures represent the sum of identical contracts traded on the new york mercantile exchange ( or nymex , part of cme group located in new york ) and ice futures europe ( based in london ) .

both contracts reference west texas intermediate ( wti ) crude , also called "light , sweet" oil , as traded in cushing , oklahoma ( a major pipeline junction ) .

the data in table 1 prompt several observations about the market: speculators appear to hold most of the open interest in crude oil contracts .

producer / merchant hedgers account for only 19% ; only part of swap dealers' 38% represents hedging interests ; and non - reportable contracts ( which may be either speculative or hedges ) are less than 4% .

the remainder is held by speculators .

no class of trader has a clearly dominant market share , either long or short .

over half of all contracts are part of spread positions , involving simultaneous purchases of long and short contracts ( with different expiration months ) .

spread positions are less risky and offer less potential reward than outright short or long positions .

managed money positions , which include hedge fund investments , account for a fairly small share of total open interest , but are heavily concentrated on the long side .

this means that they profit when prices rise .

reportable positions — those with at least 350 contracts — account for more than 95% of all open interest .

this suggests that small , retail investors play a minor role in oil futures markets .

the number of reporting traders in each category is fairly small , compared ( for example ) with stock and bond markets , where many thousands of individuals and institutions have significant positions .

in june 2011 , the cftc released a one - time report on large trader net position changes in nymex crude oil futures , supplementing the cot reports .

this data set covers the period between january 2009 and may 2011 , and it shows ( on a weekly basis ) the daily average of net position changes for both long and short positions for each of the categories of traders shown in table 1 .

the figures show the amount by which long traders increased their long positions ( net buys ) and the amount by which short positions were increased ( net sells ) .

thus , for each week and for class of trader , the data show whether on average long positions ( buys ) exceeded short position increases ( sells ) , or the reverse .

figure 2 presents ( 1 ) the net figure of buys and sells for managed money trading , which includes trades of hedge funds , commodity pool operators , and others ; and ( 2 ) changes in the price of oil during the same period .

each point in the graph represents a single week's change in these two figures: the net average sales or purchases by money managers and the price change over the same week .

the horizontal and vertical axes divide figure 2 into quadrants .

data points located in the upper right indicate weeks when money managers were net buyers and the price of oil rose .

points in the lower left indicate weeks when the price dropped and money mangers were net sellers .

the other two quadrants indicate weeks when prices rose and money managers sold or when prices fell and they were net buyers: in other words , when their transactions and the price moved in opposite directions .

figure 2 suggests that there is a correlation between money manger transactions and price movements .

weeks in which the price rose sharply tended to be when they bought heavily .

the more prices fell , the more they tended to sell .

very few data points fell into the upper left quadrant , that is , money managers were rarely net buyers when prices were falling .

indeed , the results of regression analysis , given in appendix a , show that a strong and statistically significant correlation does exist between money manger transactions and price movements .

 ( please see appendix a for details of the regression. ) .

figure 3 shows the same data for the trades of commercial hedgers ( the group called "producer / merchants" in table 1 ) .

here , there appears to be no correlation , or trend - line .

neither is there any apparent correlation between the trades of ( 1 ) swap dealers or ( 2 ) other speculators and price movements , as shown in figure 4 and figure 5 .

figure 2 suggests that crude oil futures are not a textbook case of an efficient market , where prices incorporating all known information about the commodity move in a random walk .

the group of speculators classified as money managers appears able either to anticipate price movements or to cause those price movements through their trades .

this observation raises some interesting questions .

why should money managers be better forecasters of oil price movements than other speculators or commercial hedgers ? .

given that their long and short positions constitute a small share of the total market , why should money manager trades have a unique price impact ? .

most fundamentally , are money managers' trades determining prices or are they simply more adept than others in following trends or identifying information and news that will drive prices up or down ? .

assuming that money managers have a unique impact on price , what is the mechanism by which their transactions — relatively small in terms of the total market — move prices ? .

a possibility is that they affect intraday trading , which the available open interest data fail to capture .

short - term traders might observe and seek to copy the strategies of certain money managers who are regarded as especially capable of identifying new information that might be expected to move prices , or who simply have achieved superior returns in the past .

if significant numbers of short - term speculators copy money manager trades , the impact of those trades on prices would be magnified .

in effect , under this scenario , money managers may have market power beyond what the size of their positions would suggest .

if managed money trades trigger a significant number of similar transactions by others , they become a kind of self - fulfilling prophecy .

such "herding behavior" among speculators , if it exists , would support arguments that the oil price at times includes a "speculative premium" above and beyond the price justified by the fundamentals .

on the other hand , it may be that money managers do trade on fundamental information and that they are especially skilled at identifying news that is going to move prices .

if money managers are consistent in their ability to identify new and relevant information that will affect prices ( and trade on that information before others do ) , one result would be the observed correlation .

a potential objection to this explanation is that it implies that some financial speculators are better analysts of the oil market than actual producers and end - users of oil , who also trade in the futures market .

money managers might also profit by following price trends .

rather than cause price changes , they may buy when they see prices are rising and sell when prices begin to fall .

but why would money managers' trading patterns , and not those of other market participants , be correlated with price changes in this way ? .

other market participants may have longer investment time horizons or be less sensitive to price changes .

hedgers , for example , are generally less affected by price changes , because whatever they may lose on their futures positions , they make back in the spot market ( because , for example , the physical commodity they produce will have gone up in price ) .

similarly , swap dealer positions may reflect long - term commodity index investments by pension funds and other institutional investors who are seeking to allocate part of their portfolio to an asset class that is not correlated to other assets they hold , such as stocks and bonds .

because the object of such investment is portfolio diversification , such investors are less likely to buy or sell in reaction to short - term price movements .

hedge funds , by contrast , are known for taking aggressive positions in search of high yields and for seeking to extract the maximum return from any price trend .

a 2008 cftc study referred to speculators "who take positions based on price expectations over a period of days , weeks , or months" as "trend followers. .

trading with this time horizon would be captured by the weekly cot reports and the net position change data in figures 2 through 5 , and may be more common with money managers than other traders in oil futures and options .

if money manager trades can be said to cause price movements ( that is , if we assume that such trades cause price changes , rather than follow them ) , are they responsible for long - term price changes such as the run - up of prices in the first half of 2008 ? .

the data released by the cftc do not support that conclusion .

when weekly position changes are plotted against changes in price in the following week ( instead of the same week , as in figures 2 though 5 ) , the correlation essentially disappears .

in other words , managed money trades may cause prices to rise or fall in the week they are made , but they do not appear to trigger longer price trends .

the same is true over other time horizons .

for example , figure 6 shows changes in money manager positions and price changes four weeks later .

the data suggest that there is no correlation between whether hedge funds and other money managers buy or sell this week and what happens to prices over the next month .

if derivatives speculators have mispriced oil during recent years , there are two ways this could have happened .

the first is through deliberate manipulation of the price by a group of market participants .

knowing action to create artificial prices is a violation of the commodity exchange act , and the regulators and exchanges have market surveillance programs to detect attempted manipulation .

the second possibility is much harder to evaluate: do derivatives markets in their normal operation have the potential to distort prices ? .

section 4a ( a ) of the commodity exchange act describes "excessive speculation" as "an undue and unnecessary burden on interstate commerce," but there is no statutory or regulatory definition of the term .

there is an extensive literature on the relationship between speculation and commodity prices , but the question is not settled — the data are subject to conflicting interpretations .

a number of factors have contributed to higher prices for oil and other energy commodities .

rapid global economic growth led to rising demand for oil , and supply could not keep up at previous prevailing oil prices .

in theory , this contributes to prices rising until some consumers no longer buy oil and producers provide more supply , putting the market in balance again .

but oil supply and demand is inelastic to price changes , especially in the near - term , which means it may take a larger percentage change in prices to incentivize relatively small changes in supply or demand .

legislation before the 112 th congress ( s. 1200 and h.r .

2328 , both entitled end excessive oil speculation now act of 2011 ) would authorize and direct the cftc to take certain actions to reduce the volume of speculation in oil and related energy commodities .

these identical bills would impose a margin requirement of 12% for swaps and futures traded on crude oil , gasoline , diesel fuel , jet fuel , and heating oil .

such margin requirements would not apply , however , to "bona fide hedging" transactions , including those that represent a substitute for a position to be taken at a later time in a physical marketing channel , and those used to hedge a potential change in value of assets held or produced .

s. 1200 and h.r .

2328 also mandate that the cftc impose speculative position limits on swaps and futures in crude oil , gasoline , diesel fuel , jet fuel , or heating oil that are equal to the position accountability levels or position limits established by the new york mercantile exchange ( nymex ) .

the bills include a sunset provision by which they would be terminated once the cftc imposes position limits as required by title vii of the dodd - frank act .

h.r .

2003 , the taxing speculators out of the oil market act , would impose a tax on oil futures , swaps , and options transactions , except for those hedging commercial risk .

the tax would be levied at 0.01% of the value of a futures contract ; 0.01% of the premium paid on an option ; or , for a swap , 0.01% of the value of the underlying assets for each year until the swap matures .

supply and demand issues — market fundamentals — played a central role in the increase of oil prices in recent years .

fundamental factors may have also created the conditions that enabled financial factors to have an impact on price: in a price - elastic market , purely financially driven price run - ups could quickly set off supply and demand adjustments that could again bring prices down .

the absence of such adjustments may allow financial investors to drive prices for periods of time .

conditions in financial markets in energy contracts may also exacerbate volatility: relatively small changes in speculative positions appear to be associated at times with significant price swings .

what remains unresolved is how much price movement in recent years is attributable to fundamental factors versus financial factors .

appendix a .

speculative trading and price table a - 1 shows the results of a linear regression analysis conducted using the software program stata .

the results show a statistically significant positive correlation between the net weekly change in managed money positions ( i.e. , the net long or short positions ) , and the weekly change in oil prices .

the regression uses the same weekly data from the cftc discussed in this report .

the correlation between the weekly oil price change and the net positions of hedgers , swap dealers and "other" traders , however , is not statistically significant , using a 95% confidence interval .

in interpreting the results , the coefficient ( "coef. .

in column 2 ) shows the marginal , or incremental , effect of the independent variables on the dependent variable .

here , the independent variables are the weekly net changes in position for each of the four groups of traders ; and the dependent variable is the weekly change in the price of oil .

in the case of money managers , for instance , the coefficient of .7635849 implies that a net change of 1,000 positions by managed money traders would be associated with a change in the price of oil of about 76 cents per barrel .

the complete dataset had 125 observations , or data points .

crs report r41902 , hedge fund speculation and oil prices , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , finds that a similar statistical relationship holds when cot report data are analyzed , and that the correlation is robust after controlling for certain macroeconomic variables .

appendix b .

options in the futures contracts discussed in the text , all gains by short traders create equal losses by long traders ( or vice versa ) : futures trading is a zero - sum game .

traders who wish to limit their potential losses may choose to employ options , where gains and losses are not symmetrical .

the key distinction between options and futures is that one party has the right , but not the obligation , to buy an asset in the future at a price determined when the option is purchased .

there are two kinds of options: calls and puts .

a call gives the holder of the options contract the right to buy an asset at a fixed price , whereas a put gives the holder the right to sell at a fixed price .

the price at which the underlying asset may be bought or sold is called the exercise price , or the strike price .

an options contract confers the right to buy or sell for a specified period of time — each option has an expiration date .

on the other side of a put or call is the seller , or writer , of the option .

the seller is obliged to buy or sell the asset at the strike price whenever the buyer chooses to exercise the option .

in exchange for this right , the seller of the option receives a one - time payment , called the premium .

the buyer's risk is limited to the amount of the premium — if prices move contrary to what the buyer expected , he simply lets the option expire unexercised , and the seller keeps the premium .

on the other hand , the option buyer's potential profit is unlimited ( just as a futures trader's is ) , because no matter how high or low the market price of the underlying asset may go , the option writer is obliged to buy or sell at the specified strike price .

the price of an option is reflected in the amount of the premium that is charged by the seller .

a number of factors affect option prices: first , the relationship between the strike price and the current market price of the asset , which is called the intrinsic value of the option .

if , for example , a put option on 100 shares of company a's stock has a strike price of $14 and the current share price is $13.50 , the intrinsic value of the contract to the buyer is $50 ( $0.50 per share times 100 shares ) .

an option is said to be "in the money" when the holder can exercise at a profit .

if company a's shares climbed to $15 , the put option would be "out of the money," or "underwater," because the right to sell a $15 share for $14 is worthless .

in addition to intrinsic value , an option has time value .

if the put on company a in the example above is currently out of the money , there is still the chance that the share price will drop below the strike price before the option expires .

time value depends on the length of time to expiration and the price volatility of the underlying asset , which determines the probability of the option coming into the money during the life of the contract .

options are traded both on securities and futures exchanges and over - the - counter ( otc ) .

underlying assets include stocks , stock indexes , futures contracts , currencies , interest rates , and physical commodities .

many otc contracts include option - like features , including swaps , which are discussed in appendix c .

appendix c. swaps counterparties to a swap contract agree to exchange payments over a specified time period .

in the simplest form , one payment is fixed , while the other fluctuates in accordance with changes in some financial variable , such as an interest rate , a stock index , or a commodity price .

in a simple oil swap , one counterparty might agree to buy 1 million barrels of crude oil from the other every three months over the next five years for $80 / barrel .

the other counterparty would agree to buy 1 million barrels at the nymex spot - month price on the day the payment was due .

counterparty 1 , who might be an airline wishing to hedge the risk of fuel price increases , has locked in the $80 price for five years .

it will gain if the market price rises above $80 .

counterparty 2 is committed to selling oil at $80 / barrel — it will benefit from the swap if current market prices drop below $80 .

it is possible that the second counterparty is hedging the risk of falling prices , as a producer would wish to do , but in practice most swaps involve a dealer who is willing to offer swaps on either side of the market ( that is , take the floating or fixed leg of the swap ) .

swap dealers may manage the risk of their price exposure through another offsetting swap , or they may take an offsetting position in futures markets .

 ( assuming that the second counterparty in this hypothetical oil swap is a dealer , it would take a long position in futures , which would pay off if the price of oil increased .

gains in futures would offset losses on the swap ; the dealer would profit through spreads and fees. ) .

in practice , the swapping of fixed for floating payments does not occur .

the counterparties observe the change in the price of oil since the last swap payment date and calculate a single net payment , which actually changes hands .

swaps generally do not require physical delivery of oil .

contracts in which delivery is mandatory are considered to be forward contracts and are exempt from regulation under the commodity exchange act .

