the term "social media" refers to internet - based applications that enable people to communicate and share resources and information .

some examples of social media include blogs , discussion forums , chat rooms , wikis , youtube channels , linkedin , instagram , facebook , and twitter .

social media can be accessed by computers , tablets , smart and cellular telephones , and mobile telephone text messaging ( sms ) .

the use of social media is an evolving phenomenon .

rapid changes in communication technologies in the past decade have enabled people to interact and share information through media that were non - existent or widely unavailable as recently as 15 years ago .

in the last 10 years social media has played an increasing role in emergencies and disasters in both the public and private sectors .

facebook hosts numerous emergency - related organizations , including information systems for crisis response and management ( iscram ) , and the humanitarian free and open source software ( foss ) project .

additionally , numerous emergency and disaster - related organizations , including universities , the private and nonprofit sectors , and state and local governments use facebook to disseminate information , communicate with each other , and coordinate activities such as emergency planning and exercises .

there is also evidence that social media is increasingly being used at the community and household level to respond to emergencies and crises .

a study conducted in 2012 by the american red cross found that 40% of the respondents said they would use social tools to tell others they were safe .

that percentage is most likely higher today given the rapid proliferation and acceptance of social media in recent years .

other examples of community and household use of the media include warning others of unsafe areas or situations , creating ad hoc volunteer response groups , and raising funds for disaster relief and recovery efforts .

perhaps one of the greatest benefits of social media is that it allows people to communicate when traditional lines of communication are unavailable .

for example , when power or landline service is interrupted , people generally continue to have access to information — at least on a limited basis — through social media platforms with sms and global positioning satellite ( gps ) frameworks , such as twitter .

thus , certain elements of social media can remain viable during catastrophic events when traditional forms of communication are rendered unusable .

the use of social media for emergencies and disasters can be conceptualized as two broad categories of usage .

first , social media can be used as an output to disseminate public safety related information .

second , social media can be used as an emergency management tool through the use of inputs .

some examples of using social media as an emergency management tool include using the medium to conduct emergency communications and issue real time warnings ; using social media to receive requests for assistance ; monitoring user activities and postings to establish situational awareness ; using uploaded images to create damage estimates ; and using social media to conduct investigations and post - incident analysis .

within the past decade , reports on successful use of social media during emergencies and disasters have spurred congressional interest and policy discussions concerning how to better incorporate social media at the federal level .

much of the congressional and executive branch interest has centered on how social media can be used to improve disaster response and recovery capabilities .

on may 5 , 2011 , craig fugate , the fema administrator , testified before the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , subcommittee on disaster recovery and intergovernmental affairs that he had met with representatives from apple , craigslist , facebook , google , microsoft , and twitter to discuss how to harness the "capabilities of the digital world to better serve the public. .

according to fugate , possible future applications include using smartphone - friendly mobile versions of fema websites to allow users to access information , request assistance , and facilitate communication between citizens , first responders , volunteer groups , the private sector , and all levels of government .

subsequent hearings were held by the subcommittee on emergency preparedness , response , and communications committee on homeland security on june 4 , 2013 , and july 9 , 2013 .

the hearings investigated how social media efforts could be enhanced .

the hearings also explored how social media was transforming preparedness , response , and recovery efforts in the private sector and how lessons learned in these sectors might be applied at the federal level .

lessons learned were also discussed as well as how crowdsourcing can be used to enhance the quality and timeliness of critical information .

crowdsourcing information can be geotagged with longitude and latitude coordinates .

according to mathew stepka , vice president , technology for social impact for google , during some disasters , authoritative sources may not have as expansive information as individuals who are experiencing the incident first - hand .

stepka provided an example of crowdsourcing in his testimony to the subcommittee .

according to stepka , it was unclear during hurricane sandy which filling stations had gasoline .

stepka related that during sandy , a group of student volunteers called stations in new jersey to check whether they were open and had gas available .

within a few days they had data for more than 1,000 different stations , which was fed into our sandy crisis map automatically .

the department of energy's call center ended up referencing this information .

study findings reported at the hearings also underscored the growing use of social media during emergencies and disasters .

according to suzanne defrancis , chief public affairs officer of the american red cross , 20% of americans received some form of emergency information from an app .

surveys conducted in 2012 by the american red cross found that 76% of american expect help within three hours of posting a request on social media and 40% would use social media to inform others they were safe .

both of these figures are higher than the percentages reported ( 68% and 24% respectively ) in their 2011 survey .

the study also found that roughly 75% of social media users use the medium to seek information about an incident including road closures , damage reports , and weather conditions .

one noteworthy finding from the hearings was a reported need to enhance public and private partnerships to facilitate communications and collaboration between the two sectors .

legislation to address this need was introduced in the 113 th congress ( h.r .

4263 ) and later in the 114 th congress ( h.r .

623 ) .

h.r .

623 , which was enacted on november 5 , 2015 ( p.l .

114-80 , the dhs social media improvement act of 2015 ) amended the homeland security act of 2002 to direct the secretary of homeland security to establish within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) a social media working group .

the law requires the social media group to submit an annual report to congress that includes a review of current and emerging social media technologies being used to support preparedness and response activities related to terrorist attacks and other emergencies ; a review of best practices and lessons learned on the use of social media during the response to terrorist attacks and other emergencies that occurred during the period covered by the report ; recommendations to improve dhs's use of social media for emergency management purposes , to improve public awareness of the type of information being disseminated through social media and how to access such information during a terrorist attack or other emergency , and to improve information sharing among dhs and its components and among state and local governments ; a review of available training for government officials on the use of social media in response to a terrorist attack or other emergency ; and a summary of coordination efforts with the private sector to discuss and resolve legal , operational , technical , privacy , and security concerns .

another bill introduced in the 114 th congress , h.r .

3517 , requires the dhs secretary to conduct a one - year pilot program with the american red cross to research and develop mechanisms to better leverage social media to improve preparedness and response capabilities , including ( 1 ) the timely dissemination of public preparedness information for terrorist attacks and other disasters , and ( 2 ) the delivery of response supplies to affected areas .

the bill requires the dhs secretary to issue a report to the house committee on homeland security and the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs no later than 90 days after completion of the pilot program regarding the extent to which the dhs partnered with the american red cross in furtherance of preparedness and response capabilities in the previous year .

h.r .

3517 was referred to the subcommittee on emergency preparedness , response , and communications .

the following section describes how some federal entities use social media for emergencies and disasters .

this list is not exhaustive — there are many federal entities that use social media for emergencies and disasters in various capacities .

the federal government does not use a single platform for emergency and disasters .

rather , federal entities use different social media for different purposes .

some have platforms dedicated to emergencies and disasters while others have emergency and disaster information comingled with other agency information .

this section highlights just some of the ways in which social media are being used by the federal government .

when possible statistics on social media use are provided ; however , not all entities collect such data .

it is important to note that social media is subject to rapid advances in applications and technologies .

new uses are being adopted on a continual basis .

social media has made tremendous inroads into emergency management for a variety of reasons .

for one , social media can provide accurate , reliable , and timely information .

this information is vital for public safety before , during , and after an incident .

in addition , disaster response efforts — particularly during large scale disasters — have been plagued by communication challenges .

social media has proven to be a useful method for communicating when traditional forms of communication are ineffective or inoperable .

in addition , there are strong indications that the use of social media for emergencies and disasters will increase as people continue to embrace new technologies .

this increase will lead to a greater expectation that government will meet their information needs during crisis situations through social media .

accordingly , many emergency managers and agencies have already adopted the use of social media to meet this expectation .

emergency management organizations have also started using social media because they recognize its usefulness beyond providing public safety information .

as mentioned at the outset of this report , social media applications in emergency management can be conceptualized in two broad categories of usage: output and input .

by and large , the federal government uses social media as an output to disseminate information .

while useful , the emphasis on outputs could prevent the federal government from fully realizing social media's potential as an effective emergency management tool .

a different approach would be to reorient the focus with an emphasis on inputs .

the reorientation , however , could be a complicated matter .

some might argue that the federal role in social media efforts should be limited because the decentralized nature of social media makes the medium too unwieldy for large , centralized organizations to control in a manner similar to smaller organizations or emergent groups .

they may further argue that federal involvement might lead to standardization and rigid usage guidelines which might hinder the nimbleness of social media to be applied in new and novel ways .

they may therefore conclude that state and locals should take the lead with social media with the support of the federal government .

some starting points would include pilot programs and public private partnerships .

congress could also require fema to develop and deploy 3g and 4g mobile networks in presidentially declared disasters , and provide grants to state and local governments to help them develop their social media capabilities .

congress could also investigate the use of social media at the federal level to help inform decisionmaking and policymaking .

this could include determining hardware and software costs , personnel costs , surge capacity during large - scale disasters , and the federal government's ability to keep pace with advances in and the social media and changing patterns of public usage .

congress could also explore ways to address and overcome some of the other challenges described in this report including using social media to request assistance , inaccurate or malicious crisis information , information overload , and technical limitations .

selected examples of federal social media selected examples of federal social media use for hurricane sand .

