nearly one - third of the land area of the united states is covered by forest land .

the 750 million acres of u.s. forests are owned both privately — by individuals and corporations — and publicly — by federal , state , and local governments .

at the federal level , the forest service — an agency within the u.s. department of agriculture — is the principal forest management agency , charged with managing 193 million acres designated mostly as national forests .

the forest service manages the forest resources under a multiple use - sustained yield mandate , meaning that the agency must balance uses such as providing recreation opportunities , timber supplies , livestock grazing , watershed protection , and fish and wildlife habitats , in a manner that does not impair the productivity of the land for future resource yields .

the national forests have been the focus of controversy for many years .

reduced timber harvests , increased wildfire risks , degraded forest health , and disagreements among users and other stakeholders have led to congressional disputes over appropriate management .

some interests have suggested third - party certification of sustainable management of the national forests as a possible solution to many of these difficulties .

sustainable forest certification programs were created in the 1990s as a nongovernmental approach to promote sustainable forest management practices .

sustainable forest management generally requires that the stewardship and use of the forests balance current and future demand for the resources with maintaining ecological , economic , and social functionality .

forest landowners may voluntarily participate in these programs with the goal of gaining a market advantage through independent third - party assessments and product labels to communicate compliance with standards of sustainable management .

the standards are developed by different multi - stakeholder groups with little or no government participation .

although initially directed at private forest owners , certification programs have evolved and developed mechanisms to certify public forests .

in 1997 , the usda forest service declared it would not pursue certification of any of the national forests .

however , the certification of several state , department of energy ( doe ) , and department of defense ( dod ) forests has raised new questions about this policy .

in 2005 , the forest service sponsored a study evaluating the potential certification of the national forests , but the agency has not issued any changes to its certification policy since the study was released in 2007 .

if congress determines that the national forests should be subject to certification , congress could direct the forest service to pursue certification for some or all of the 105 national forest administrative units .

certifying the national forests as sustainably managed may have many potential benefits .

certification might demonstrate and emphasize that the management of the national forests is held to high ecological , economic , and social standards .

certification might reduce existing conflicts over management decisions for the national forests , and has the potential to streamline the management process .

for example , certification programs have requirements for planning , management , and public involvement programs as well as for measurable performances on the ground .

while these requirements currently exist in policy , regulations , or statutes , congress may consider that certification would be sufficient and could replace the existing structure .

in addition , certification of the national forests may provide benefits to the private sector .

the timber and wood products industries as well as the "green" products industries may benefit from having access to a greater supply of certified materials .

finally , certifying the sustainability of the national forests may complement other sustainability policy directives , such as federal green purchasing and green building policies .

however , certifying the national forests may present some costs , risks , and uncertainties .

the certification process would require direct and indirect investments .

direct costs include the initial fee to pay for the audit process , and then whatever annual or semi - annual costs are required to maintain certification .

indirect costs include changes that may be required to earn or maintain certification , such as implementing new monitoring and reporting systems or adjusting harvest levels .

these costs may or may not be recovered in improved management , or even in higher stumpage prices for the certified products leaving the national forests .

while certification was initially seen as a means to gain market advantages , those expectations have rarely been realized in the domestic u.s. market .

in addition , the certification process and maintenance requirements could have the unintended , opposite effect of becoming another layer of administrative complexity for the forest service to navigate .

this report outlines the history and development of forest certification as a voluntary , market - based mechanism to promote sustainable forest practices .

it then describes , compares , and contrasts the two major certification programs used in the united states based on a broad range of sustainable forest management issues pertinent to the national forest system .

both the fsc and the sfi programs have two parts: landowner certification to ensure the sustainable management of the land , and chain - of - custody certification to trace the life cycle of wood products originating in a certified forest .

although certification programs were established to deal with logging and timber products in the marketplace , timber harvesting is not required .

certification evaluates the extent to which forest management is meeting the objectives laid forth in a forest management plan , and then evaluates the extent to which the plan is meeting the standards of sustainable forest management .

on a broad scale , both the fsc and the sfi operate within similar frameworks with similar governance structures , procedures to develop the standards , and accreditation and auditing requirements .

system governance and the development of the sustainability standards are balanced among the competing groups interested in sustainable forest management .

this forces the environmental , social , and economic / industry groups to work together and negotiate standards that are broadly acceptable measures of sustainability .

the certification audit is done by an accredited , independent third party that evaluates the management plan and the on - the - ground activities , and includes conversations with staff as well as with stakeholders .

the audit process may find minor or major non - conformances with the standard , which must be remedied prior to or immediately following certification .

upon certification , there are maintenance and re - certification requirements .

each system includes monitoring , consistency , and enforcement provisions .

once a forest is certified , products leaving the forest may use the system's label .

however , a separate , chain - of - custody certification is required in order to use the certification label along the supply chain .

the chain - of - custody standard is designed to ensure that certified wood is accounted for as it leaves the forest , and typically includes sourcing , production controls , record - keeping , and documentation requirements .

each producer or vendor along the supply chain must be certified in order to use the label .

both the sfi and fsc programs use a chain - of - custody certification process that is adapted from the landowner certification process described above .

despite their broad similarities within this general framework , the fsc and the sfi each have their own unique attributes at a detailed , specific level .

table 1 provides a side - by - side comparison .

there are relatively few reports that directly and objectively compare the sfi and fsc programs , the two primary certification programs for large landowners in the united states .

several reports claim objectivity , but actually were published by fsc , sfi , or one of their partners .

in addition , many of the comparisons are based on previous versions of both the sfi and fsc standards and are no longer relevant .

one of the first objective comparisons was the report commissioned by the home depot in 1999 , which included participation from representatives of each program .

the comparison process and publication of that report in 2001 were a catalyst for significant changes in the sfi program .

in 2008 , the yale program on forest policy and governance compared the programs for the usgbc , but that comparison is based on outdated versions of the standards .

most recently , the dovetail partnership , inc. , an environmental ngo that appears to have no ties to either program , released the only comparison based on the current standards .

among the few objective comparisons , the general consensus is that structurally the programs are now very similar .

the fsc standard is more prescriptive while the sfi standard allows more flexibility .

each program has different strengths and weaknesses that relate to their different ideas about sustainability .

the sfi program emphasizes sustainable timber harvesting , and places forest management as a tool to achieve that objective .

the fsc program emphasizes sustainable forest management , and places timber harvests as one tool to achieve that objective .

overall , the strengths and weaknesses in each program are complemented by the strengths and weaknesses in the other program , and dual certification from both programs is relatively common , especially for public forests .

although initially directed at private forest owners , forest certification programs have become increasingly used by public forest management agencies .

in the united states , several state and county forests have become certified , including but not limited to the michigan department of natural resources , the minnesota department of natural resources , the new york department of environmental conservation , the pennsylvania department of conservation and natural resources , the wisconsin county forests and the wisconsin department of natural resources , and the washington department of natural resources .

instead of choosing just one program , most of these public forests opted for dual certification and became certified by both the sfi and fsc programs .

there are no standard metrics to evaluate the benefits and costs of the state certification programs .

while the sfi program has stated that it is ready to certify the national forests , the fsc program is likely several years away from having procedures that would address a national forest certification process .

prior to certification , the fsc program would need to determine if the national forests meet the three threshold requirements set forth in its federal lands policy .

then , if the national forests meet the threshold requirements , the fsc would have to develop and approve a standard specific for the national forests .

it is not clear how certification would affect the management of the national forests .

however , certification could evaluate the extent to which the forest management plans align with the standards of each certification program , and then evaluate the extent to which those forest plans are being implemented .

the results of these third - party evaluations of the forest plans and their implementation could potentially alleviate — or escalate — stakeholder and congressional disputes over the appropriate management of the national forests .

it is unclear whether the forest service has the existing authority to certify the national forests .

if congress chooses to require certification of the national forests , there are other questions to consider , including which certification program ( s ) to require ; what ( if any ) forest management process requirements ( eg , public involvement standards ) might be relaxed ; and what would be the impact on timber purchasers of processing certified sustainable wood .

congress may also consider if certification should occur across the entire national forest system , or at the unit level , and then how many and which units should be certified .

this table presents a side - by - side comparison of the fsc and sfi standards that would be applicable to u.s. national forests .

the comparison criteria categories used were developed by crs for assessing sustainable forestry , the standards and criteria from the montreal process , public forest land management , and other factors .

summaries of the fsc and sfi measures are presented .

several measures are listed more than once if they are applicable to more than one area .

however , not all of the sfi and fsc measures are included in the table , as some are not relevant for the sustainable management of federal forests .

each entry identifies the relevant fsc and sfi measures using the numbering system of that program .

