the state partnership program ( spp ) is a department of defense ( dod ) security cooperation program run by the national guard .

it also serves as a mechanism for training national guard personnel .

the current goals of the program are listed in figure 1 .

the spp relates to several areas of potential interest to congress , including improving the capabilities of partner nations to protect their citizens ; strengthening relationships with partners to facilitate cooperation , access , and interoperability ; improving cultural awareness and skills among u.s. military personnel ; and fostering the integration of reserve and active component forces into a "total force. .

the spp evolved from an effort begun in 1992 to use professional contacts between the u.s. military and the militaries of the newly independent nations of the former soviet union to help reform the defense establishments of those nations .

the program has expanded greatly since then .

today , it is a significant component of dod's security cooperation efforts , linking state and territorial national guards in 63 partnerships with 70 partners nations ( listed in appendix a ) .

nearly every state national guard participates in the spp , as do the national guard of guam , puerto rico , the u.s. virgin islands , and the district of columbia .

the spp's rapid expansion has led to congressional scrutiny of the conformity of some spp activities with the law , the effectiveness of the program , and the relationship of spp activities to the priorities of u.s. geographic combatant commanders and u.s. ambassadors abroad .

congressional interest in spp is also tied to broader concerns that some dod security cooperation activities may encroach on , complicate , or conflict with state department and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) responsibilities and prerogatives .

as previous published research on the program is limited , this report relies heavily on interviews with individuals at dod , the national guard bureau ( ngb ) , and the department of state ( dos ) who are involved with the program .

the dod regulations regarding funding for activities conducted under the spp , as required by section 1210 of the fy2010 national defense authorization act , are supposed to be finalized in the near future by way of a directive type memorandum ( dtm ) .

the dtm will subsequently be converted into a department of defense instruction ( dodi ) .

monitoring its implementation will allow congress to determine whether it effectively defines appropriate activities and constrains unauthorized activities .

it should also provide congress with additional information on areas of the program that merit particular attention if congress later elects to codify the program in law .

however , as the dtm is bound by existing statutory guidance , it will have a limited ability to resolve some of the tensions relating to types of missions performed , authorized participants , and oversight responsibilities .

to ensure that the spp is contributing substantially to u.s. objectives , and in a cost - effective manner , congress may wish to review the spp's program goals , assessment methodology , and internal assessments .

congress may also wish to evaluate how robustly spp events support key plans , including combatant commanders' theater campaign plans ( tcps ) and u.s. ambassadors' mission strategic and resource plans ( msrps ) .

it could do this through committee hearings or by requiring periodic reports to congress on the topic .

alternatively , it could direct a review by an external agency , such as the government accountability office .

ngb currently exercises approval authority over any activities that it funds , but not over activities that cocoms fund .

each cocom exercises approval authority over spp activities within its area of responsibility , but not over activities elsewhere .

there is no centralized oversight of the program .

this may increase the possibility of mistakes being made in the administration of the program .

requiring a single organization — such as ngb , the defense security cooperation agency , or the department of state — to have approval authority over all spp activities might facilitate a more standardized approach to the program and thereby improve program administration .

on the other hand , adding an additional layer of management could make event coordination cumbersome .

because of the wide array of statutory authorities and funding sources that spp currently draws upon , it takes significant effort and legal guidance to determine which spp activities are permissible and which are not .

this may generate confusion and lead to approval of spp activities that are outside the scope of the law .

therefore , congress may consider establishing specific parameters for spp activities in law .

depending on the content of the dtm that dod is currently developing for the spp , congress may consider a variety of statutory responses .

congress could codify that guidance if it sets adequate standards and procedures to ensure the appropriate use of funds and adequate oversight .

if the dod guidance lacks those elements , congress may develop its own guidelines for the program .

this authority might contain a list of the type of events permitted , the purposes they are to serve , the appropriate funding sources , a mandate for state department approval or consultation , and periodic reports to congress .

this approach might have drawbacks .

depending on how it is drafted , such a law might restrict the current broad range of spp activities and impose new requirements that limit flexibility and timeliness .

spp activities may also be more difficult to implement under a law if it contains more coordination requirements than under current authorities governed by unifying dod guidance .

if congress chooses to codify the program in law , some areas that may deserve particular attention are detailed below .

some have advocated modifications to the current program focusing on missions sets in which the national guard has particular military expertise or in which national guard personnel have civilian expertise , allowing certain u.s. civilians and a wider range of foreign civilians to participate in spp events .

congress may include language that details the scope of authorized activities , the extent to which u.s. citizens other than members of the national guard can participate , and the types of foreign personnel they can engage .

it may require standardized programs of instruction for topics that fall outside of current military doctrine .

if state , local , or private sector individuals are allowed to participate in spp , congress may establish the circumstances under which their participation can be funded by the federal government and provide for reimbursement mechanisms in other circumstances .

though determining the effectiveness of security cooperation programs such as spp is inherently challenging , it is an area that congress may wish to address in any spp statute .

to this end , congress may consider defining certain program goals in law , provide some guidance on an assessment methodology , stipulate the frequency of assessments , assign responsibility to a particular office , and require periodic reports from the executive branch on the topic .

if congress were to adopt a new statute governing the spp , some may question whether it should be placed under title 10 of the u.s. code , which covers the armed forces , or title 22 , in which the state department generally has the lead .

those who prefer title 10 would note that spp activities are currently conducted under title 10 and ndaa authorities , and that spp funding is provided through the dod budget .

in addition , spp programs may be more flexible and easier to implement under title 10 .

on the other hand , the state department has used the national guard for title 22 training activities with their foreign partners ( see appendix c ) , and some members may prefer that spp events be placed under title 22 .

spp events may have side effects for foreign policy not anticipated by state government and dod planners or ambassadors .

some may argue for greater state department oversight to ensure that state governments are aware of foreign policy concerns and guidelines , especially if these events are accompanied by or lead to non - defense - related engagements of u.s. and foreign civilians .

if placed under title 22 , the program could take on more of a public diplomacy role .

for example , congress might more readily provide authority under title 22 for spp to use national guard troops for activities using their civilian skills instead of just their military skills .

similarly , under title 22 authority congress might be more willing to dispense with the requirement under some title 10 authorities used for spp that the primary purpose of training events be the training of u.s. forces , possibly providing a broader range of activities for spp .

placing spp under title 22 , however , may well add another layer of complexity for state - based organizations with little experience operating with the department of state .

it might weaken the ability of the combatant commanders to use spp to engage with foreign militaries , and thereby reduce their interest in supporting the program .

in addition , placing spp under title 22 might shift the focus away from using the military skills of the national guard personnel in favor of their civilian expertise , which could limit the utility of spp in exercising the military skills of participants .

finally , state department capacity to oversee military programs is viewed as having limitations and some may argue for augmenting this capacity before adding additional duties .

appendix a .

state partnerships: table and world map appendix a .

appendix b .

title 10 and national defense authorization act authorities that may be used by the spp appendix c. state partnerships and title 22 authorities according to ngb representatives , the spp currently operates only under title 10 , title 32 and national defense authorization act authorities .

under this definition , therefore , spp events do not occur under title 22 authorities at the present time .

however , there are circumstances in which a state national guard might operate under title 22 authorities in support of their partner nation .

for example , a nation that is approved to receive peacekeeping training under the global peace operations initiative ( gpoi ) may request that the state national guard it is partnered with provide some of the trainers .

if such a request were approved by the appropriate dos and dod officials , then gpoi funds would be used to fund some of the expenses associated with the state national guard training of its partner nation's forces .

while these are not considered to be "spp events" by ngb , the distinction may not be apparent to many of those participating in the training .

individuals interviewed for this report referred to three title 22 authorities that have been used in the past to fund training by a state national guard with its partner nation .

they are listed below .

determining the frequency of such title 22 events was outside the scope of this report , but they appear to have been relatively infrequent in comparison to the frequency of title 10 spp events .

appropriations for these three title 22 programs are provided under the state department's security assistance ( previously the military assistance ) account .

global peace operations initiative .

through gpoi the u.s. government provides foreign military forces from developing countries with training in peacekeeping skills and helps develop associated peacekeeping capacity .

gpoi was built on the earlier african contingency operations training and assistance ( acota ) program and its africa component often is still referred to by that acronym .

the state department is primarily responsible for the program , but works closely with dod to plan and implement programs through dod's defense security cooperation agency ( dsca ) and the geographic combatant commands .

authorization is provided by section 551 of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( faa , p.l .

87-195 ; 22 u.s.c .

2348 ) , as amended .

international military education and training program .

the imet program provides foreign military personnel with the opportunity to attend a variety of u.s. military educational institutions and training courses .

the expanded - imet ( e - imet ) component provides foreign civilian and military leaders and mangers of foreign military establishments with opportunities to enhance their skills in managing and administering military establishments and budgets , creating and maintaining effective military judicial systems and military codes of conduct ( including observance of international recognized human rights ) , and fostering respect for the principle of civilian control of the military .

the state department , with input from dod , decides which foreign countries will be permitted to participate and their respective funding levels .

dod's dsca implements the program .

authorization is provided by section 541 of the foreign assistance act ( faa , p.l .

87-195 ; 22 u.s.c .

2347 ) , as amended .

foreign military sales and foreign military financing programs .

the fms program is the united states government's primary vehicle for sales of weapons and associated equipment and training to friendly foreign governments .

through the fmf element of the program , the u.s. government may extend loans to countries that have difficulty paying for needed weapons , military equipment , and related items , or it may forgive payments altogether .

the state department is primarily responsible for determining which nations receive military assistance from this program .

dod's dsca bears primary responsibility for implementing the program .

fms is authorized by sections 1-4 of the arms export control act ( aeca , p.l .

90-629 ; 22 u.s.c .

2751 - 2754 ) , as amended ; fmf is authorized by section 23 of the aeca ( 22 u.s.c .

2763 ) .

