on august 5 , 2011 , standard & poor's ( s&p ) , a prominent credit rating agency , lowered the rating of long - term u.s. government debt from aaa to aa+ .

the lowered rating reflects s&p's view that the risk that holders of u.s. debt will not receive interest and principal in a timely fashion has increased slightly .

in the view of s&p's analysts , the recent debt ceiling agreement passed by congress ( p.l .

112-25 , the budget control act of 2011 ) "falls short of the amount that we believe is necessary to stabilize the general government debt burden by the middle of the decade," and ( more generally ) "america's governance and policymaking [has become] less stable , less effective , and less predictable than what we previously believed. .

in municipal and corporate debt markets , in which investors may choose among many similar bonds , a ratings downgrade usually leads to higher borrowing costs for the affected firm or governmental entity , as investors demand higher interest rates to compensate for higher perceived risk .

with u.s. treasury securities , however , the effect of a downgrade is not straightforward , because treasuries play a unique role in the global financial system .

u.s. government bonds have long been considered the "risk - free" baseline against which other investments are measured ; they serve as collateral in a wide range of financial transactions ; they are held by many financial institutions around the world , including central banks that use them in monetary policy and exchange rate operations ; and they serve as a "safe haven" during financial crises .

even if holders of treasury debt wished to switch to other debt instruments , no immediate substitute is available in many cases .

thus , the impact of the downgrade is hard to gauge .

this report provides basic background information on standard & poor's and other credit rating firms and analyzes the implications of the downgrade for u.s. government finances and for the markets at large .

credit rating agencies , of which s&p , moody's investors service , and fitch ratings are the largest , are private firms that issue ratings for thousands of bonds and other debt instruments .

ratings consist of letter grades backed by analysis of the creditworthiness of debt issuers .

although there is no legal requirement that issuers of bonds obtain a credit rating , investors place considerable reliance on the judgment of the rating agencies , and they have done so since the mid - 1800s .

the rating agencies were unregulated until the credit rating agency reform act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-291 ) , which was enacted partly in response to the rating agencies' failure to warn investors of the impending collapse of firms like enron and worldcom .

the 2006 act requires certain rating agencies to register with the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) as "nationally recognized statistical rating organizations" ( nrsros ) and to comply with various governance and disclosure requirements .

congress amended rating agency regulation with the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ) , again in response to a perceived failure — this time related to bonds backed by subprime mortgages that were initially rated aaa , but suffered extremely high losses , helping to trigger the 2007-2009 financial crisis .

dodd - frank mandated new disclosures about rating methodology and performance , increased legal liability for mistaken ratings , created a new system for assigning ratings of complex asset - backed bonds , and required federal agencies to remove references to credit ratings from their regulations .

although nrsro operations are now extensively regulated , neither the content of ratings nor the methodology used to determine ratings is subject to government regulation .

thus , there is no governmental authority to challenge s&p's rating actions .

the other major nrsros , moody's and fitch , have not issued a downgrade .

they have , however , issued statements of concern regarding the creditworthiness of the united states .

moody's , on august 2 , 2011 , confirmed the aaa rating for treasury securities but assigned a "negative outlook. .

moody's indicated the possibility of a downgrade if " ( 1 ) there is a weakening in fiscal discipline in the coming year ; ( 2 ) further fiscal consolidation measures are not adopted in 2013 ; ( 3 ) the economic outlook deteriorates significantly ; or ( 4 ) there is an appreciable rise in the us government's funding costs over and above what is currently expected. .

fitch indicated in june 2011 that it would place u.s. debt on "rating watch negative," indicating the possibility of a downgrade , unless the debt ceiling were raised by august 2 .

in the wake of the budget control act , fitch issued a statement that "despite the intensity and theatre of political discourse in the united states , there is the political will and capacity to ultimately do the right thing .

in fitch's opinion , the agreement is an important first step but not the end of the process towards putting in place a credible plan to reduce the budget deficit to a level that would secure the united states' 'aaa' status over the medium - term. .

according to s&p , an issuer of debt rated aaa has an "extremely strong capacity to meet its financial commitments," whereas aa issuers have "very strong" capacity .

the two differ "only to a small degree. .

because the united states' rating is now aa+ , the degree of additional risk signaled by the rating change is very small .

the rationale for the change appears to be qualitative — s&p's opinion about the prospects for political action to change the government's long - term debt path — rather than quantitative .

s&p acknowledged that its initial calculations used an inappropriate congressional budget office measure ( an "alternate," rather than "baseline" estimate of future discretionary spending ) , resulting in a $2-trillion error , but declined to reconsider the rating change when treasury analysts noticed the mistake .

thus , the downgrade does not convey any new information to the markets about the u.s. fiscal situation , beyond the pessimism of s&p's analysts themselves .

in the context of unsettled global financial markets , however , the historically unprecedented downgrade may affect the confidence and perceptions of market participants and bring changes that are difficult to anticipate .

specific market sectors are linked to the treasury bond market in different ways .

in the long run , the status of treasury bonds depends on the success or failure in dealing with long - term budget problems .

the standard & poor's downgrade is a single step in what may be a long process .

in the intermediate term , two scenarios seem most plausible .

first , the markets may shrug off the downgrade .

does s&p have any special information about the u.s. political situation that others lack ? .

while the rating change comes in a period of financial uncertainty , including a sharp decline in world stock markets , the initial market response — bidding up treasury bond prices and lowering yields — suggests at the very least that the downgrade has not brought about any watershed revaluation of u.s. debt .

it may be that for some time "treasuries will remain the world's least ugly safe asset. .

again , there is the problem of finding a substitute for treasuries as a safe - haven store of value .

on the other hand , the downgrade may be part of a gradual shift away from reliance on the united states as the center of the global financial system .

according to the head of pimco , a large bond investment firm , the downgrade "will over time erode the standing of the global public goods [the united states] supplies — from the dollar as the world's reserve currency to its financial markets as the best place for other countries to deposit savings .

this will weaken the effectiveness of the [united states] as the global anchor , accelerating the unsteady migration to a multipolar system. .

foreigners now hold trillions in treasury debt — their perceptions and actions will have significant implications for the value of treasury securities and the cost of financing that debt .

reserve currency status gives the united states access to cheaper financing and the ability to borrow in its own currency ; loss of that status could raise the cost of borrowing from abroad .

but the long - run position of the united states in the global economy depends more on fiscal and economic developments than rating agency decisions .

