the u.s. energy sector is large and complex .

multiple energy sources , including fossil , nuclear , and several renewable sources , are used to produce energy products for multiple demand sectors ( transportation , electricity , industrial , and residential / commercial ) .

today , fossil fuels are the dominant sources of energy , comprising 83% of total u.s. primary energy supply .

renewable energy sources , which can be used to generate electricity , produce liquid transportation fuels , and provide heating and cooling for industrial and residential / commercial sectors , provided 8% of total u.s. primary energy supply in 2009 ( see figure 1 ) .

the largest source of energy demand in the united states is the electric power sector , which consumed just over 40% of total u.s. energy supply in 2009 .

the u.s. electric power sector generates approximately 4 million gigawatthours of electricity each year .

like the total u.s. energy sector , electricity generation is dominated ( 89% ) by fossil fuels and nuclear power .

renewable electricity generation , including hydro , wind , solar , geothermal , and biomass , contributed 11% of total u.s. electric power in 2009 ( figure 2 ) .

most u.s. renewable generation comes from conventional hydropower , which has limited growth potential .

other renewable electricity sources constitute about 4% of u.s. generation , but have been growing more rapidly .

the purpose of this report is to analyze the prospects , opportunities , and challenges for renewable energy sources to increase their contribution to the electric power sector .

there is growing interest in increasing the amount of renewable electricity generation to reduce the amount of fossil fuel consumption for u.s. electric power .

that interest is driven by concerns about greenhouse gas emissions , the realization that economically recoverable fossil fuel supplies are ultimately finite , and the desire to position the united states as a global leader for renewable energy technology and manufacturing .

these concerns are counter - balanced by the fact that fossil fuel electricity generation has long been — and generally continues to be — the least expensive form of electricity generation , by the fact that the united states has access to considerable resources of coal and natural gas for electricity generation , and from the economic and cultural inertia of the existing infrastructure in place for coal and natural gas to be used in large quantities for electricity generation .

renewable electricity generation provides two advantages when compared to fossil generation: ( 1 ) it relies on energy sources that may not decline over time , and ( 2 ) it produces little or no net greenhouse gas emissions or other pollutants during use .

however , renewable electricity generation does have liabilities and implementation challenges that will be further discussed in this report .

this report addresses two fundamental questions about u.s. renewable electricity generation potential: ( 1 ) how much renewable electricity generation might be possible in the united states ? .

and ( 2 ) what technical , operational , and economic challenges might renewables encounter when considering large - scale deployment for electricity generation ? .

this section provides a brief overview of current u.s. renewable electricity generation , followed by a series of discussions of specific renewable electricity technologies .

current electricity generation , estimated potential generation , and deployment challenges are discussed for wind , solar , geothermal , hydroelectric ( hydro ) , ocean - hydrokinetic , and biomass energy sources .

each type of renewable energy technology has certain advantages and disadvantages relative to each other and relative to fossil fuel energy sources .

an extensive literature exists on these advantages and disadvantages .

this part of the report offers brief observations and discussion of certain challenges that might affect the full development and deployment of renewable electricity generation technologies .

many policies directed at renewable energy deployment are designed to address these challenges .

the potential for renewable electricity generation in the united states is very large , yet current use of renewable energy for electricity production is relatively modest , constituting only 11% of total electricity generation and 8% of total energy consumption .

based on the current status of renewables in the united states , policy makers may consider some key questions about the future of renewable energy: should the united states actively seek greater use of renewable energy to supply electricity , or should the energy and electricity markets be allowed to work without further interference with the existing structure of subsidies and incentives ? .

if greater use of renewable energy for electricity is desired , what are the key barriers or actions that should be addressed by federal policy ? .

future trends in renewable electricity will depend heavily on the cost of both renewable technologies and fossil fuel costs , and on government incentives for renewable energy .

in the absence of subsidies for renewable electricity technologies , and in the absence of accounting for external costs of using fossil fuel combustion to generate electricity , several renewable electricity technologies are currently not commercially viable , or only marginally so .

reference case projections by eia of growth in wind and solar electricity to 2035 are predicated on the use of renewable portfolio standards , renewable fuel standards , and subsidies in the tax code .

with low coal and natural gas prices , and high renewable energy technology costs , and the absence of regulation or subsidies , renewable electricity may not increase significantly .

without some form of carbon pricing or other consideration of the externalities of fossil fuel combustion , the united states may remain in an era of relatively low - cost fossil fuel electricity for decades .

however , policy makers may decide that growth in renewable electricity is desirable because of concerns about greenhouse gas emissions and climate change , because fossil fuel supplies are ultimately finite , and because of a desire to position the united states as a global leader for renewable energy technology and manufacturing .

renewables could be made more cost competitive by means of improved renewable technologies or revised cost of carbon - based fuels , but financial or regulatory incentives may be required to make certain renewable sources more economically viable in the short term .

in the event that levelized costs of renewable electricity become competitive with those of fossil fuel electricity , the additional issues of intermittency / variability , land - use and footprint , the need for additional transmission , plus other resource and environmental impacts of renewable electricity will need to be addressed by local , state , and federal officials and policy makers .

cumulative u.s. renewable electricity generation capacity more than doubled from 2006 to 2010 , increasing from approximately 22 gw to nearly 55 gw .

in 2010 , renewable sources of energy provided approximately 11% ( 7% from hydropower and 4% from other renewables ) of total net electricity generation and the eia aeo 2011 reference case projects that renewable electricity generation will increase to between 14% and 15% by 2035 .

the renewable electricity generation research conducted for this report indicates that the potential may exist for renewable energy sources to make a sizeable contribution toward total u.s. electricity generation demand .

however , renewable electricity generation will likely encounter serious challenges , issues , and barriers as technologies and projects look to realize large - scale deployment .

as congress evaluates various energy policy objectives , policy makers may move to holistically evaluate the potential intended benefits , such as emissions reduction and job creation , with potential risks and consequences , such as electricity cost / price increases and electricity delivery reliability issues associated with increasing renewable electricity generation .

