some time ago , a federal prosecutor referred to the mail and wire fraud statutes as "our stradivarius , our colt 45 , our louisville slugger … and our true love. .

not everyone shares the prosecutor's delight .

commentators have argued that the statutes "have long provided prosecutors with a means by which to salvage a modest , but dubious , victory from investigations that essentially proved unfruitful. .

federal judges have also expressed concern from time to time , observing that the "mail and wire fraud statutes have 'been invoked to impose criminal penalties upon a staggeringly broad swath of behavior,' creating uncertainty in business negotiations and challenges to due process and federalism. .

nevertheless , mail and wire fraud prosecutions have brought to an end schemes that bilked victims of millions , and sometimes billions , of dollars .

the federal mail and wire fraud statutes outlaw schemes to defraud that involve the use of mail or wire communications .

both condemn fraudulent conduct that may also come within the reach of other federal criminal statutes .

both may serve as racketeering and money laundering predicate offenses .

both are punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years ; for not more than 30 years , if the victim is a financial institution or the offense is committed in the context of major disaster or emergency .

both entitle victims to restitution .

both may result in the forfeiture of property .

the mail and wire fraud statutes are essentially the same , except for the medium associated with the offense — the mail in the case of mail fraud and wire communication in the case of wire fraud .

as a consequence , the interpretation of one is ordinarily considered to apply to the other .

in construction of the terms within the two , the courts will frequently abbreviate or adjust their statement of the elements of a violation to focus on the questions at issue before them .

as treatment of the individual elements makes clear , however , there seems little dispute that conviction requires the government to prove ( 1 ) the use of either mail or wire communications in the foreseeable furtherance , ( 2 ) of a scheme and intent to defraud another of either property or honest services , ( 3 ) involving a material deception .

the mail and wire fraud statutes essentially outlaw dishonesty .

due to their breadth , misconduct that constitutes mail or wire fraud may constitute a violation of one or more other federal criminal statutes as well .

this overlap occurs perhaps most often with respect to ( 1 ) crimes for which mail or wire fraud are elements ( "predicate offenses" ) of another offense ; ( 2 ) fraud proscribed under jurisdictional circumstances other than mail or wire use ; and ( 3 ) honest services fraud in the form of bribery or kickbacks .

some federal crimes have as an element the commission of some other federal offense .

the money laundering statute , for example , outlaws laundering the proceeds of various predicate offenses .

the racketeering statute outlaws the commission of a pattern of predicate offenses to operate a racketeering enterprise .

mail and wire fraud are predicate racketeering and money laundering predicate offenses .

rico .

the racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations ( rico ) provisions outlaw acquiring or conducting the affairs of an enterprise , engaged in or whose activities affect interstate commerce , through loan sharking or the patterned commission of various other predicate offenses .

the racketeering - conduct and conspiracy - to - engage - in - racketeering - conduct appear to be the rico offenses most often built on wire or mail fraud violations .

the elements of the rico conduct offense are ( 1 ) conducting the affairs ; ( 2 ) of an enterprise ; ( 3 ) engaged in activities in or that impact interstate or foreign commerce ; ( 4 ) through a pattern ; ( 5 ) of racketeering activity .

"racketeering activity" means , among other things , any act that is indictable under either the mail or wire fraud statutes .

as for pattern , a rico pattern "requires at least two acts of racketeering activity .

the racketeering predicates may establish a pattern if they [were] related and … amounted to , or threatened the likelihood of , continued criminal activity.' .

the pattern of predicate offenses must be used by someone employed by or associated with a qualified enterprise to conduct or participate in its activities .

"congress did not intend to extend rico liability … beyond those who participated in the operation and management of an enterprise through a pattern of racketeering activity. .

nevertheless , "liability under § 1962 ( c ) is not limited to upper management … an enterprise is operated not just by upper management but also by lower rung participants. .

the enterprise may be either any group of individuals , any legal entity , or any group "associated in fact. .

"nevertheless , 'an association - in - fact enterprise must have at least three structural features: a purpose , relationships among those associated with the enterprise and longevity sufficient to permit those associates to pursue the enterprise's purpose.' .

moreover , qualified enterprises are only those that "engaged in , or the activities of which affect , interstate or foreign commerce. .

penalties : imprisonment for not more than 20 years and a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for organizations ) .

money laundering .

mail and wire fraud are both money laundering predicate offenses by virtue of their status as rico predicates .

the most commonly prosecuted federal money laundering statute , 18 u.s.c .

§1956 , outlaws , among other things , knowingly engaging in a financial transaction involving the proceeds generated by a "specified unlawful activity" ( a predicate offense ) for the purpose ( 1 ) of laundering the proceeds ( i.e. , concealing their source or ownership ) , or ( 2 ) of promoting further predicating offenses .

to establish the concealment offense , the government must establish that " ( 1 ) [the] defendant conducted , or attempted to conduct a financial transaction which in any way or degree affected interstate commerce or foreign commerce ; ( 2 ) the financial transaction involved proceeds of illegal activity ; ( 3 ) [the] defendant knew the property represented proceeds of some form of unlawful activity , [such as mail or wire fraud] ; and ( 4 ) [the] defendant conducted or attempted to conduct the financial transaction knowing the transaction was designed in whole or in part to conceal or disguise the nature , the location , the source , the ownership or the control of the proceeds of specified unlawful activity. .

to prove the promotional offense , "the government must show that the defendant: ( 1 ) conducted or attempted to conduct a financial transaction ; ( 2 ) which the defendant then knew involved the proceeds of unlawful activity ; ( 3 ) with the intent to promote or further unlawful activity. .

nothing in either provision suggests that the defendant must be shown to have committed the predicate offense .

moreover , simply establishing that the defendant spent or deposited the proceeds of the predicate offense is not enough without proof of an intent to promote or conceal .

penalties : imprisonment for not more than 20 years and a fine of not more than $500,000 .

merely depositing the proceeds of a money laundering predicate offense does not alone constitute a violation of section 1956 .

it is enough for a violation of 18 u.s.c .

§ 1957 , however , if more than $10,000 is involved .

section 1957 uses section 1956's definition of specified unlawful activities .

thus , mail and wire fraud violations may serve as the basis for the prosecution under section 1957 .

"section 1957 differs from section 1956 in two critical respects: it requires that the property have a value greater than $10,000 , but it does not require that the defendant know of [the] design to conceal [or promote] aspects of the transaction or that anyone have such a design. .

penalties: imprisonment for not more than 10 years and a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 ) for organizations .

this category includes the offenses that were made federal crimes because they involve fraud against the united states or because they are other frauds that share elements with the mail and wire fraud .

the most prominent are the proscriptions against defrauding the united states by the submission of false claims , conspiracy to defraud the united states , and material false statements in matters within the jurisdiction of the united states .

bank fraud , health care fraud , securities and commodities fraud , and fraud in foreign labor contracting are all chapter 63 companions of mail and wire fraud .

defrauding the united states — false claims .

section 287 outlaws the knowing submission of a false claim against the united states .

"to prove a false claim , the government must prove that ( 1 ) [the defendant] 'made and presented' to the government a claim , ( 2 ) 'the claim was false , fictitious , or fraudulent,' ( 3 ) [the defendant] knew the claim was false , fictitious , or fraudulent , and ( 4 ) 'the claim was material' to the government. .

penalti es : imprisonment for not more than five years and a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for organizations ) .

conspiracy to defraud the u nited s tates .

the general conspiracy statute has two parts .

it outlaws conspiracies to violate the laws of the united states .

more relevant here , it also outlaws conspiracies to defraud the united states .

"to convict on a charge under the 'defraud' clause , the government must show that the defendant ( 1 ) entered into an agreement ( 2 ) to obstruct a lawful government function ( 3 ) by deceitful or dishonest means and ( 4 ) committed at least one overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy. .

thus , the "fraud covered by the statute reaches any conspiracy for the purpose of impairing , obstructing or defeating the lawful functions of any department of the government" by "deceit , craft or trickery , or at least by means that are dishonest. .

unlike mail and wire fraud , the government need not show that the scheme was designed to deprive another of money , property , or honest services ; it is enough to show that the scheme is designed to obstruct governmental functions .

penalties : imprisonment for not more than five years and a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for organizations ) .

false statements .

section 1001 outlaws knowingly and willfully making a material false statement on a matter within the jurisdiction of the executive , legislative , or judicial branch of the federal government .

a matter is material for purposes of section 1001 when "it has a natural tendency to influence , or is capable of influencing , the decision of" the individual or entity to whom it is addressed .

a matter is within the jurisdiction of a federal entity "when it has the power to exercise authority in a particular matter" and federal jurisdiction "may exist when false statements [are] made to state or local government agencies receiving federal support or subject to federal regulation. .

penalties : imprisonment for not more than five years and a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for organizations ) .

fraud elsewhere in chapter 63 .

chapter 63 contains four other fraud proscriptions in addition to mail and wire fraud: bank fraud , health care fraud , securities and commodities fraud , and fraud in foreign labor contracting .

each relies on a jurisdictional base other than use of the mail or wire communications .

bank fraud .

the bank fraud statute outlaws ( 1 ) schemes to defraud a federally insured financial institution , and ( 2 ) schemes to falsely obtain property from such an institution .

to establish the bank - property scheme to defraud offense , "the government must prove: ( 1 ) the defendant knowingly executed or attempted to execute a scheme or artifice to defraud a financial institution ; ( 2 ) the defendant did so with the intent to defraud a financial institution ; and ( 3 ) the financial institution was federally insured. .

as for the bank - custody offense , "the government must prove ( 1 ) that a scheme existed to obtain moneys , funds , or credit in the custody of a federally - insured bank by fraud ; ( 2 ) that the defendant participated in the scheme by means of material false pretenses , representations , or promises ; and ( 3 ) that the defendant acted knowingly. .

penalties : imprisonment for not more than 30 years and a fine of not more than $1 million .

health care fraud .

the health care fraud provision follows the pattern of other chapter 63 offenses .

it condemns schemes to defraud .

the schemes it proscribes include honest services fraud in the form of bribery and kickbacks .

attempts and conspiracies to violate its prohibitions carry the same penalties as the complete offense it describes .

it is often prosecuted along with other related offenses .

parsed to its elements , the section declares , "[a] whoever [b] knowingly and willfully [c] executes or attempts to execute [d] a scheme or artifice ( 1 ) to defraud any health care benefit program , or ( 2 ) to obtain , by means of false or fraudulent pretenses , representations , or promises , any money or property owned by , or under the custody or control of , any health care benefit program [e] in connection with the delivery of or payment for health care benefits , items , or services shall be …" penalties : a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for organizations ) and ( 1 ) if death results , imprisonment for life or any term of years ; ( 2 ) if serious bodily injury results , imprisonment for 20 years ; ( 3 ) otherwise , imprisonment for not more than 10 years .

securities and commodities fraud .

section 1348 , the securities and commodities fraud prohibition , continues the progression of separating its defrauding feature from its obtaining - property feature .

the elements of defrauding offense "are ( 1 ) fraudulent intent , ( 2 ) a scheme or artifice to defraud , and ( 3 ) a nexus with a security. .

to prove a violation of section 1348 ( 2 ) , the government must establish that the defendant ( 1 ) executed , or attempted to execute , a scheme or artifice ; ( 2 ) with fraudulent intent ; ( 3 ) in order to obtain money or property ; ( 4 ) by material false or fraudulent pretenses , representations , or promises .

penalties : imprisonment for not more than 25 years and fines of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for organizations ) .

fraud in foreign labor contracting .

"the substantive offense of fraud in foreign labor contracting [under 18 u.s.c .

§ 1351] occurs when someone: ( 1 ) recruits , solicits , or hires a person outside the united states , or causes another person to do so , or attempts to do so ; ( 2 ) does so by means of materially false or fraudulent pretenses , representations or promises regarding that employment ; and ( 3 ) acts knowingly and with intent to defraud. .

the offense occurs outside the united states when related to a federal contract or u.s. presence abroad .

penalties : imprisonment for not more than five years and a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for an organization ) .

after the supreme court's 2010 decision in skillin g v. united states , honest services mail and wire fraud consists of bribery and kickback schemes furthered by use of the mail or wire communications .

mail and wire fraud aside , the principal bribery and kickback statutes include 18 u.s.c .

§§ 201 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( bribery of federal officials ) , 666 ( bribery relating to federal programs ) , 1951 ( extortion under color of official right ) ; 15 u.s.c §§ 78dd - 1 to 78dd - 3 ( foreign corrupt practices ) ; and 42 u.s.c .

§ 1320a - 7b ( medicare / medicaid anti - kickback ) .

bribery of federal officials .

conviction for violation of section 201 ( b ) ( 1 ) "requires a showing that something of value was corruptly ... offered or promised to a public official ... or corruptly ... sought ... or agreed to be received by a public official with intent ... to influence any official act ... or in return for 'being influenced in the performance of any official act. .

the hallmark of the offense is a corrupt quid pro quo , "a specific intent to give or receive something of value in exchange for an official act. .

the public officials covered include federal officers and employees , those of the district of columbia , and those who perform tasks for or on behalf of the united states or any of its departments or agencies .

the official acts that constitute the objective of the corrupt bargain include any decision or action relating to any matter coming before an individual in his official capacity .

penalti es : imprisonment for up to 15 years , a fine of up to $250,000 ( up to $500,000 for an organization ) .

bribery and fraud related to federal programs .

section 666 outlaws both ( 1 ) fraud and ( 2 ) bribery by the faithless agents of state , local , tribal or private entities — that receive more than $10,000 in federal benefits — in relation to a transaction of $5,000 or more .

"a violation of section 666 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) requires proof of five elements .

the government must prove that: ( 1 ) a defendant was an agent of an organization , government , or agency ; ( 2 ) in a one - year period that organization , government , or agency received federal benefits in excess of $10,000 ; ( 3 ) a defendant … obtained by fraud … ; ( 4 ) … property owned by , or in the care , custody , or control of , the organization , government , or entity ; and ( 5 ) the value of that property was at least $5,000. .

"a person is guilty under § 666[ ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ] if he , being an agent of an organization , government , or governmental agency that receives federal - program funds , corruptly solicits or demands for the benefit of any person , or accepts or agrees to accept , anything of value from any person , intending to be influenced or rewarded in connection with any business , transaction , or series of transactions of such organization , government , or agency involving anything of value of $5,000 or more. .

penalties : imprisonment for not more than 10 years and a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for organizations ) .

hobbs act .

the hobbs act , 18 u.s.c .

§ 1951 , outlaws obtaining the property of another under "color of official right," in a manner that has an effect on interstate commerce .

conviction requires the government to prove that the defendant " ( 1 ) was a government official ; ( 2 ) who accepted property to which she was not entitled ; ( 3 ) knowing that she was not entitled to the property ; and ( 4 ) knowing that the payment was given in return for officials acts: ( 5 ) which had at least a de minimis effect on commerce. .

conviction does not require that the public official sought or induced payment: "the government need only show that a public official has obtained a payment to which he was not entitled , knowing that the payment was made in return for official acts. .

penalties : imprisonment for not more than 20 years and a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for an organization ) .

foreign corrupt practices .

the bribery provisions of the foreign corrupt practices act ( fcpa ) are three: 15 u.s.c .

§§ 78dd - 1 ( trade practices by issuers ) , 78dd - 2 ( trade practices by domestic concerns ) , and 78dd - 3 ( trade practices by others within the united states ) .

other than the class of potential defendants , the elements of the three are comparable .

they "make[] it a crime to: ( 1 ) willfully ; ( 2 ) make use of the mail or any means or instrumentality of interstate commerce ; ( 3 ) corruptly ; ( 4 ) in furtherance of an offer , payment , promise to pay , or authorization of the payment of any money , or offer , gift , promise to give , or authorization of the giving of anything of value to ; ( 5 ) any foreign official ; ( 6 ) for purposes of [either] influencing any act or decision of such foreign official in his official capacity [or] inducing such foreign official to do or omit to do any act in violation of the lawful duty of such official [or] securing any improper advantage ; ( 7 ) in order to assist such [corporation] in obtaining or retaining business for or with , or directing business to , any person. .

none of the three proscriptions apply to payments "to expedite or to secure the performance of a routine governmental action," and each affords defendants an affirmative defense for payments that are lawful under the applicable foreign law or regulation .

penalties : imprisonment for not more than five years and a fine of not more than $100,000 ( not more than $2 million for organizations ) .

medicare kickbacks .

the medicare / medicaid kickback prohibition in 42 u.s.c .

1320a - 7b ( b ) outlaws "knowingly and willfully [offering or paying] , soliciting [or] receiving , any remuneration ( including any kickback ) ... ( a ) to induce the referral of [ , or ( b ) the purchase with respect to] medicare [or] medicaid beneficiaries ... any item or service for which payment may be made in whole or in part under the medicare [or] medicaid programs...." penalties : imprisonment for not more than five years and a fine of not more than $25,000 .

