historically , the u.s. government has played an active role in promoting u.s. exports of goods and services by administering various forms of export assistance through federal government agencies .

in 2010 , president obama introduced a national export initiative ( nei ) , a strategy for doubling u.s. exports to $3.14 trillion in 2015 , to generate and support u.s. jobs .

the nei comes at a time when the united states faces challenges in recovering from the global economic downturn that began in december 2007 , interrupting the prior decades - long expansion of international trade .

the u.s. unemployment level soared from 5% at the onset of the crisis to over 10% by october 2009 , and dropped to 9.0% by november 2011 .

the nei also coincides with increasing u.s. interest in global commercial opportunities , given that an estimated 95% of the world's consumers live outside of the united states .

congress has had a long - standing interest in the effectiveness and efficiency of federal export promotion activities and their role in generating economic growth and jobs .

the introduction of the nei , as well as slower growth in the u.s. economy , has increased congressional interest in u.s. export promotion policy .

congress may exercise export promotion authority in a number of ways , including through oversight , authorization , and funding of federal export promotion programs .

the 112 th congress may choose to examine a number of issues related to federal government efforts to expand u.s. exports .

this report discusses and analyzes ( 1 ) u.s. export trends to provide context ; ( 2 ) federal export promotion efforts , with a focus on the nei ; and ( 3 ) policy issues raised for congress by such activities .

for information on the specific federal government agencies involved in supporting u.s. exports , their budgets , and activities , see crs report r41495 , u.s. government agencies involved in export promotion: overview and issues for congress , coordinated by shayerah ilias .

the united states , like most countries , maintains programs to assist its companies to sell goods and services abroad .

federal government agencies perform a wide variety of functions that contribute to export promotion .

key agencies involved in u.s. export promotion efforts include the department of agriculture ( usda ) , department of commerce , export - import bank ( ex - im bank ) , overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) , small business administration ( sba ) , department of state , trade , and development agency ( tda ) , office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) , and department of the treasury .

in addition , state and local agencies and non - governmental agencies are involved in export promotion .

federal agencies may work with non - federal actors to promote exports .

a combination of congressional mandates and executive branch actions have directed u.s. export promotion efforts .

most recently , such activity has been focused through the national export initiative ( nei ) , the obama administration's plan to double u.s. exports by 2015 to $3.14 trillion , to generate and support u.s. jobs .

president obama introduced this national goal in the 2010 state of the union address and formalized it in executive order 13534 , which stated that the nei shall be an administration initiative to improve conditions that directly affect the private sector's ability to export .

the nei will help meet my administration's goal of doubling exports over the next 5 years by working to remove trade barriers abroad , by helping firms — especially small businesses — overcome the hurdles to entering new export markets , by assisting with financing , and in general by pursuing a government - wide approach to export advocacy abroad , among other steps .

the nei introduced a new level of coordination of federal export promotion activities .

it established a president's export promotion cabinet to ensure that export promotion is a high priority for all relevant agencies .

members of the export promotion cabinet include the nine key secretaries or directors of agencies having a role in export promotion that are a part of the previously established trade promotion coordinating committee ( tpcc ) , an interagency taskforce chaired by the department of commerce that has been charged with coordinating the export promotion and financing activities of federal agencies and proposing an annual unified budget proposal on federal trade promotion activities .

the export promotion cabinet is to coordinate with the tpcc in order to "operationalize" the nei .

the executive order also reestablished the president's export council ( pec ) , the chief private - sector advisory committee on international trade .

the five key components of the nei are to ( 1 ) improve advocacy and trade promotion efforts on behalf of u.s. exporters ; ( 2 ) increase access to export financing ; ( 3 ) reinforce efforts to remove barriers to trade , such as through free trade agreements ( ftas ) ; ( 4 ) enforce trade rules ; and ( 5 ) pursue policies to promote strong , sustainable , and balanced growth at the global level .

in september 2010 , the export promotion cabinet submitted a report to the president containing recommendations on implementing the nei in these five components .

the cabinet proposed recommendations in eight priority areas of the nei , which are outlined in executive order 13534: ( 1 ) enhance export assistance to small - and medium - sized enterprises ( smes ) ; ( 2 ) promote federal resources currently available to assist exports by u.s. companies ; ( 3 ) ensure effectiveness of u.s. trade missions ; ( 4 ) ensure effectiveness of u.s. commercial advocacy efforts ; ( 5 ) increase the availability of export financing to smes ; ( 6 ) promote balanced and strong macroeconomic growth ; ( 7 ) improve market access for u.s. exporters by opening new markets , reducing trade barriers , and enforcing u.s. trade agreements ; and ( 8 ) develop a framework for promoting services trade .

table 2 shows agencies identified in the report that may play a key role in implementing the recommendations .

the cabinet noted four general themes that apply to the recommendations: ( 1 ) strengthening interagency information - sharing and coordination ; ( 2 ) leveraging and enhancing technology to reach potential exporters and provide u.s. businesses with the tools necessary to export successfully ; ( 3 ) leveraging combined efforts of state and local governments and public - private partnerships ; and ( 4 ) having unified goals for tpcc member agencies to support the nei's implementation .

the growing interest in federal export promotion activities raises a number of key issues for the 112 th congress .

congress may choose to examine the activities that constitute government export promotion , as well as their goals and priorities ; the economic justifications for and against federally supported export assistance ; efforts to measure the effectiveness of export promotion activities ; and proposals to reorganize the export - related functions of federal government agencies so as to enhance the effectiveness of export promotion .

export promotion remains a debated topic with many unresolved questions facing congress .

the 112 th congress may approach the issues raised by u.s. export promotion policy in a number of ways .

among its range of options , congress could conduct oversight hearings on the effectiveness of the nei and the role of individual federal government agencies involved in export promotion ; examine , and possibly renew or revise , the authority of federal agencies with export promotion functions , such as ex - im bank and opic ; review appropriations for federal agencies and programs related to export promotion , through which congress could examine the allocation of resources to fulfill various u.s. export promotion goals and priorities ; and introduce legislation related to export promotion issues , such as legislation concerning the organizational structure for federal export promotion activities or coordinating mechanisms among federal agencies involved in export promotion .

the 112 th congress has introduced a number of pieces of legislation related to export promotion , including the following .

h.r .

2987 ( berman ) would require the tpcc to review the proposed annual budget of each federal agency before it is submitted to the omb and the president when assessing the federal export promotion and financing budget ; require the government - wide strategic plan for federal trade promotion efforts developed by the tpcc to take into account recommendations from a representative number of u.s. exporters , including smes and u.s. workers ; direct the president to issue an executive order and regulations necessary to provide the tpcc with the authority to carry out its duties and to implement the strategic plan ; require the secretary of commerce to conduct an assessment once every five years on overseas markets with the greatest potential for increasing u.s. exports and to redeploy the u.s. and foreign commercial service based on the assessment ; and to amend the foreign service act of 1980 to require each chief of mission to develop a plan for effective diplomacy to remove or reduce obstacles to u.s. exports .

h.r .

2988 ( berman ) would require the secretary of commerce to establish a public directory for foreign buyers to identify u.s. manufacturers and service providers prepared to export clean and efficient energy and environmental products and services ; require the secretary of commerce to establish a governmental database on foreign sales opportunities in clean and efficient energy and environmental products and services ; require the secretary of commerce to monitor and evaluate u.s. export promotion activities with respect to clean and efficient energy and environmental products and services ; and require the gao to submit reports to congress comparing the effectiveness of u.s. export promotion activities with respect to clean and efficient energy and environmental products and services with those of other major trade competitors ; h.r .

2072 ( miller ) and s. 1547 ( johnson ) would both reauthorize ex - im bank through fy2015 .

the bills differ to some degree on the changes that they would make to ex - im bank's authority and activities .

h.r .

2762 ( manzullo ) would reauthorize opic through fy2015 .

imperfect information supporters of government export promotion programs contend that imperfect information ( such as a lack of awareness of export opportunities , information on how to export , or availability of export financing ) , has caused u.s. firms ( especially smes ) to export below their efficient level .

an important assumption behind this argument is that u.s. firms would seek to boost their level of exports if they had better information on export markets , and that overseas demand for u.s. exports would increase if foreign buyers were more aware of u.s. products .

it is further assumed that imperfect information has prevented firms from becoming more active in providing export services or has made the costs for such services prohibitive .

for example , some contend that smes often have difficulty obtaining export financing ( such as loans , insurance , and guarantees ) , or must pay "high costs" for such services , due to the perceived "high risks" of exporting by banks and other financial institutions .

this implies that if better information about the actual risks ( and potential benefits ) of providing export financing existed in the market , more banks would be involved in providing such financing , and the charges for such services to exporters would be substantially lower .

another argument for government involvement in promoting exports is that the government may be the most efficient institution for collecting , evaluating , and disseminating information to firms on foreign market trends , new trade opportunities , and guidelines on how to export .

the resources available to the federal government afford it certain economies of scale in the collection and dissemination of trade information .

private - sector firms , especially smes , may not have the resources to obtain such information on their own .

in addition , the information provided by the government may help firms respond more efficiently to changes in the market , such as increased overseas demand for various commodities produced by u.s. firms .

spillovers and industrial policy another possible justification for government involvement in promoting exports is that certain products or technologies may have significant spillover effects on other parts of the economy .

such spillovers could include the development and diffusion of new technology throughout the economy , an improvement in a nation's terms of trade , growth in other related industries , an increase in productivity , and the creation of high - paying jobs .

government intervention , such as export promotion , to ensure the development and growth of such industries is often referred to as "industrial policy. .

such a policy would be more concerned with boosting exports of certain products than increasing the overall level of exports .

for example , countries may offer tied aid , "concessional" below - market financing provided by a donor government to induce the borrower to purchase equipment from suppliers in the donor's country , to acquire market share in target countries , or to promote strategic sectors .

proponents of industrial policy argue that , in some instances , firms may fail to produce the desired level of "critical products," absent government involvement , because the value of such products to society may not be reflected adequately in the market , and hence may not be recovered fully by the developing firm .

for example , firms generally will be motivated to develop new technology only if it is perceived that doing so will boost company profits .

the benefits of such technology on the economy as a whole , however , may not be reflected in the prices of such products in the market .

that is , firms will be unable to obtain through the market system ( prices ) the benefits such products provide through spillovers to other sectors of the economy .

this implies that the benefits ( value ) such products provide to the economy as a whole may far outweigh the benefits that can be obtained by the producer ( through prices ) ; hence the market failure .

as a result , firms may be less likely to develop and market such products or technology .

this market failure may occur especially in cases where the development of high - technology products requires substantial investment in r&d .

firms may be concerned that investments may not be recovered fully after the product is marketed because other firms may be able to acquire the results of the r&d at little or no cost .

in addition , firms may be concerned about the uncertainties of being able to recover potentially large investments for the development new products through future sales .

government intervention is intended to help firms capture a larger share of the benefits resulting from spillover effects to ensure the development of "critical" or "key" products and technologies .

under an industrial policy , government export promotion programs would be used to help "critical" or "key" industries , mainly high technology , expand into overseas markets .

an important assumption behind this theory is that the resulting foreign demand for such products would enable the key industries to increase production , leading to economies of scale and other efficiency gains obtained from "learning by doing" and specialization .

these gains would enable firms to achieve lower production costs and could lead to the development of "important" new products and innovations .

the development of such products and innovations would enable other sectors of the economy ( through spillover effects ) to realize significant efficiency gains as well .

it is assumed that the economic growth generated from these efficiency gains would be greater than the amount of government subsidy used to support the key industries , thus resulting in net benefits to the economy .

imperfect competition and strategic trade policy closely related to the concept of industrial policy is the theory of "strategic trade policy," which holds that , under certain circumstances , the government can help influence which products will yield a comparative advantage for a nation's firms and hence can affect an economy's composition , patterns , and terms of trade .

strategic policy differs somewhat from industrial policy in that a strategic policy is essentially a "predatory" practice based on the presumption that a nation's welfare can be improved at the expense of another's , while an industrial policy does not necessarily seek to improve national welfare at the expense of other nations .

in addition , while an industrial policy attempts to "rectify" market failures , a strategic trade policy seeks to take advantage of them .

a strategic trade policy assumes that government intervention can increase world market shares for certain industries by inducing foreign firms to reduce output , withdraw from the market , or refrain from entering the market .

as a result , domestic firms would be able to obtain "higher than normal returns" to production ( or rents ) , the sum of which would be greater than the level of subsidies provided to targeted firms .

if successful , a strategic trade policy would improve a nation's terms of trade by increasing the value of its exports and thereby increasing the level of imports it can obtain through trade .

for example , some policy analysts have called for a strategic u.s. trade policy to focus on boosting exports of high - technology products , which are high - growth industries for the united states .

during the 1990s , the united states had a positive trade balance in advanced technologies products , in contrast to the overall trade deficit in u.s. merchandise trade .

however , this surplus in trade in advanced technology goods turned into a deficit in 2002 , and u.s. imports of advanced technology products have exceeded exports of such goods .

some experts maintain that a focus on such products will boost u.s. industrial competitiveness in the global marketplace .

theoretically , in order for a strategic trade policy to be successful , several assumptions must generally prove valid .

the government is in the best position ( as opposed to free market forces ) to identify "strategic industries" and can implement policies ( such as subsidies , trade promotion , etc. ) .

effectively for their development and growth .

imperfect competition exists within the international market in which there are only a few producers , due to high barriers to entry , and hence firms which are able to gain early market entry will be able to obtain higher than normal returns ( rents ) .

firms within this market have the ability to affect prices , and are influenced strongly by the actions of their competitors .

as a result , government assistance ( export promotion ) to domestic firms will induce foreign firms to exit the market ( due to a realization that they would be unable to compete against firms which have government backing ) or will cause them to minimize their level of production and market share .

other foreign governments will not attempt to provide similar assistance to their firms or will not retaliate against such policies .

the returns to the economy realized by such a policy will be greater than their costs .

this assumes that imperfect competition exists due to economies of scale and steep learning curves that enable firms to continue to lower costs as production increases .

government subsidies to domestic firms lower their costs and allow them to expand production and gain a larger market share at the expense of foreign competitors .

a critique of export promotion policies and programs opponents of government export promotion programs argue that market distortions caused by imperfect information are minimal and do not warrant government intervention .

they contend that u.s. firms generally are producing for export the level of goods and services demanded in the international market as determined by supply and demand conditions , access to world markets , and macroeconomic forces ( principally exchange rates ) .

as a result , they argue that export promotion programs will have little effect on the ability of firms to sell products overseas .

critics of trade promotion programs further argue that the availability and prices of export services ( including financing ) simply reflect supply and demand for such services in the market , and thus contend that there is no "shortage" of export financing or services .

if prices charged by firms providing export services were "unusually high" or offered returns that were greater than other types of services in the economy , then other firms would attempt to enter the export services market , driving down prices .

in fact , opponents argue , the existence of some government export promotion programs impedes greater involvement by private - sector firms in the provision of export services .

according to this view , the provision of government assistance to exporters at little or no charge lowers the demand ( and prices ) of export promotion services in the private sector , and hence discourages greater private - sector involvement .

while opponents of strategic trade and industrial policies agree that the government , under certain circumstances , may be able to influence the growth and development of individual industries , they question whether the benefits of such policies to targeted firms will exceed their costs to society .

many also question the ability of the state , rather than market forces , to provide the most efficient allocation and use of scarce economic resources .

for example , many economists argue that , while such policies may assist certain industries , they may harm the economy as a whole by causing resources to be drained away from other important industries , making them less productive and competitive .

in addition , the government could be wrong in its choice of strategic or key industries , which may prove inefficient , incapable of competing internationally , or unsuccessful in providing the anticipated returns to the economy .

a related concern is that political pressures , rather than economic considerations , could play a significant role in choosing and supporting industries , hence leading to government support of inefficient firms .

finally , many economists warn that the use of government assistance by nations to promote strategic or key industries could undermine international support for free trade .

in the long run , this trend could lead to subsidy wars among nations , resulting in greater economic distortions , a reduction in international trade , and declining world living standards .

however , such risks may be mitigated by the existence of international trade rules through the world trade organization ( wto ) and the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) to counter export - related subsidies .

