the qualifications required to hold the office of u.s .

senator or representative to congress are established and set out within the u.s. constitution .

these constitutional qualifications are the exclusive qualifications for congressional office , and may not be changed or added to by congress , nor may these qualifications be added to or changed unilaterally by a state .

there are only three "positive" standing qualifications for the office of u.s .

senator and representative: age — a representative to congress must be at least 25 years old ; a senator must be at least 30 years old .

citizenship — a representative must be a citizen of the united states for at least seven years ; a senator must be a citizen of the united states for at least nine years .

inhabitancy — a person elected to the house or senate must be an "inhabitant" of the state from which chosen "when elected. .

although there may have been some credible minority argument concerning the ability of congress or the states individually to set additional or different qualifications for federal office from those set out in the constitution , it is now well - settled that the qualifications established in the u.s. constitution are the exclusive qualifications for federal office ( and are not merely "minimum" qualifications ) .

the constitutional history and case law demonstrate that such constitutional qualifications are fixed and may not be changed , added to , or subtracted from by congress , nor by the state legislatures ( other than by an amendment to the u.s. constitution ) .

the u.s. constitution , at article i , section 5 , clause 1 , expressly delegates to each house of congress the authority to judge the qualifications for office of its own members: "each house shall be the judge of the elections , returns , and qualifications of its own members.... " as noted by authorities on parliamentary democracies and the constitution , since congress is an independent , separate , and co - equal branch of government , it would not be consistent with its status or functions , nor with the separation of powers principles generally , for a different branch of the government , such as the judiciary , to determine the legislature's make - up: the propriety of each house being the judge of these matters is very obvious .

no power external to the house could decide them without an intrusion upon the question of its organization , which would be fatal to its freedom and independence .

the right of the house , as a body , to determine upon the right of each member to a place in that body is so obvious that it needs no comment .

the power of election is vested , as we have seen , in the constituency under the laws of the states ; but whether that constituency have elected qualified persons , and whether the officers holding the election have made proper returns , is left to the house in order to prevent intrusion of persons disqualified or not duly elected upon their deliberations .

justice joseph story explained the purpose behind the constitutional authority to judge the elections and returns of each house's own members: it is obvious that a power must be lodged somewhere to judge of the elections , returns , and qualifications of the members of each house composing the legislature ; for otherwise there could be no certainty as to who were legitimately chosen members , and any intruder or usurper might claim a seat , and thus trample upon the rights and privileges and liberties of the people .

.. .

if lodged in any other , than the legislative body itself , its independence , its purity and even its existence and action may be destroyed , or put into imminent danger .

the courts have thus indicated that the house or the senate , respectively , and not the courts , would be the proper forum for a challenge concerning the qualifications of one to be a member of congress .

the supreme court in barry v. cunningham , for example , stated that , "the senate [has the] sole authority under the constitution to judge of the elections , returns and qualifications of its members ..." and "to render a judgment which is beyond the authority of any other tribunal to review. .

in seville v. elizalde , the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit found the following: we are cited no cases , and we find none , in which the federal courts have ever been asked to determine the qualifications of a member of congress .

apparently , it has been fully recognized that that power is lodged exclusively in the legislative branch .

in a case concerning a challenge to the results of a congressional election , then - judge scalia writing the opinion of the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit , found that the court need not rely on the "amorphous and partly prudential" political question doctrine to abstain from ruling on the matter .

the court found that since the judging of the elections , returns , and qualifications of its own members is textually committed in the constitution to congress , the court "simply lack[s] jurisdiction to proceed": it is difficult to imagine a clearer case of "textually demonstrable constitutional commitment" of an issue to another branch of government to the exclusion of the courts ... than the language of article i , section 5 , clause 1 that "[e]ach house shall be the judge of the elections , returns and qualifications of its own members. .

the provision states not merely that each house "may judge" these matters , but that each house "shall be the judge" ( emphasis added ) .

the exclusion of others – and in particular others who are judges – could not be more evident .

hence , without need to rely upon the amorphous and partly prudential doctrine of "political questions," [citations omitted] we simply lack jurisdiction to proceed .

the congressional precedents interpreting the constitutional qualifications of age , citizenship , and inhabitancy , when such questions have arisen with regard to the seating of a member - elect , provide the guidelines for examining the constitutional qualifications .

modern precedents and decisions in the house or senate on determining "qualifications" are fairly rare , in part because of the clarification by the supreme court in 1969 in powell v. mccormack delineating congress's authority to judge only the express constitutional "qualifications" for office ( and whether one is "duly elected" ) , and because modern communications , investigative reporting , and extensive media coverage , as well as more sophisticated party vetting processes , make it more likely that an actual disqualifying condition ( such as a candidate's age or lack of citizenship ) would be revealed before actual nominations by a major political party are made .

in addition to the three standing "positive" qualifications for congressional office in the u.s. constitution — age , citizenship , and inhabitancy in the state when elected — there are certain "disqualifications" that are based on constitutional provisions .

although the federal constitution establishes the terms of federal offices and the qualifications of candidates eligible for those federal offices ( and neither congress nor any state unilaterally may alter them ) , and each house of congress remains the final judge of the elections and qualifications of its own members , the states have the express , primary authority to administer the elections for federal congressional offices that are held within their borders .

under the express constitutional authority of the states to regulate the "times , places and manner" of elections , the states may promulgate regulatory and administrative provisions over the mechanics and procedures of elections for federal offices held within their states .

this procedural and administrative authority extends to such things as the form of the ballots , voting procedures , counting votes and certifying winners , the nominating process , and may extend to reasonable requirements for a candidate's name to appear on the ballot , that is , so - called "ballot access" requirements for major party , new party , and independent candidates .

legitimate "ballot access" rules are generally promulgated by states to prevent the proliferation of frivolous candidates , ballot overcrowding and voter confusion , election fraud , and to facilitate generally proper election administration .

various "ballot access" procedures , including filing requirements , filing deadlines , a show of qualifying support by new or minor party or independent candidates , "sore loser" laws and other restrictions on cross - filing , have been found generally to be within the state's purview to "regulate[ ] election procedures " to serve the state interest of "protecting the integrity and regularity of the election process ... ," and when they are found to be within the state's administrative authority over elections , they would be deemed to be not impermissible additional qualifications for federal office even though they create certain procedural hurdles or requirements which a candidate must overcome .

the supreme court has generally distinguished impermissible additional qualifications for congressional office — such as term limits or prohibitions on candidacy of convicted felons — from permissible ballot access rules by the "purpose" and "effect" of such restrictions .

for example , the court noted that the purpose and effect of state - imposed term limits is "to prevent the election of incumbents" by barring them from the ballot .

the "purpose" and "effect" of prohibited additional qualifications to office will thus often involve absolute barriers or significant disadvantages to a class of persons based on their status , as opposed to procedural hurdles or limitations which may involve either a legitimate showing of support by independent or new party candidates , or those which will require a choice made by and within the control of the candidate as an avenue to the general election ballot .

states generally provide differing routes to the general election ballot for independent or new party candidates for congress , as opposed to major party candidates nominated by the major political parties .

major party candidates who are nominated , for example , at a party convention or caucus might , under state law , be placed on the general election ballot "automatically" when certified as the nominee by that political party ; while independent candidates must often meet petition requirements to be placed on the ballot involving the gathering of a particular number of signatures based on an absolute number required , or a percentage of the electorate or voting age population .

even when one is a candidate for the nomination of a major political party in a primary election , the state may routinely require that such candidate garner a particular number of signatures to appear on the primary ballot .

the petition - signature requirements for congressional candidates to appear on the ballot in various states have been challenged on both first amendment and fourteenth amendment grounds .

that there may be differing requirements for ballot access depending on whether one is the nominee of a major political party , a minor or new party , or an independent candidate , is not necessarily constitutionally impermissible under either the first or the fourteenth amendments as long as such methods do not "unfairly or unnecessarily burden" new , minor party , or independent candidates or their political supporters .

as noted by the supreme court , "the state has the undoubted right to require candidates to make a preliminary showing of substantial support in order to qualify for a place on the ballot , because it is both wasteful and confusing to encumber the ballot with the names of frivolous candidates. .

when such signature gathering petition requirement was challenged as an impermissible additional qualification to office , the federal court upheld the statute by similarly finding such requirement to be a reasonable "ballot access" procedural or administrative provision which sought to require and assure a modicum of public support to be on the ballot to prevent the overcrowding of the ballot with fringe or frivolous candidates .

certain states have statutory provisions that have become known as "sore loser" laws .

"sore losers" have been described by one u.s. court of appeals as follows: "'sore losers' are candidates who lose a major party primary but insist on running on a minor party ticket" or as an independent in the general election .

the laws in several states now prohibit one who has run and lost in a primary , from obtaining a place on the ballot in the general election as an independent or as a candidate of another party .

in early state litigation , in 1902 , a minnesota statutory scheme preventing an unsuccessful congressional candidate at a primary election from having his name printed on the general election ballot as an independent for the same congressional office was upheld against a challenge that it created an additional qualification to office , as long as the candidate could run in a write - in campaign .

similarly , in 1934 , a nebraska supreme court ruled that a candidate who was defeated in the primary election for the office of governor could not by petition have his name printed on the general election ballot even for another office ( that of u.s .

senator ) , finding that the statutory scheme preventing those defeated at the primary from being on the ballot in the general election did not create an additional qualification for congressional office .

in the only case found voiding a "sore loser" law's application to a congressional candidate , the north dakota supreme court in 1942 ruled that the state statute was inapplicable to congressional candidates on the basis that it impermissibly created an additional qualification for congressional office .

the clear trend in litigation in federal courts has been favorable to state "sore loser" laws as a species of "ballot access" provisions that help states maintain the integrity of the nominating and election process by preventing "interparty raiding," carrying "intraparty feuds" into the general election , limiting "unrestrained factionalism," ballot clutter , and voter confusion .

in williams v. tucker , a three - judge federal district court upheld the provisions of the pennsylvania election code which worked to require a candidate to choose between a primary nomination or an independent petition route to the general election , and which barred both state and federal candidates who lost in the primary election from running again in the general election as independent candidates .

the court in williams v. tucker relied significantly on the supreme court decision and reasoning in storer v. brown , in justifying certain state regulations on the nomination , ballot , and general election procedures .

the court there found that the laws in question , "which have the combined effect of preventing a candidate defeated in the primary from obtaining a position on the general election ballot as the candidate of a political body , do not for this reason violate the first amendment or the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment. .

the reasoning of the courts in upholding the "sore loser" laws against first and fourteenth amendment challenges would appear to be similar reasoning that would apply in upholding such ballot access regulations in challenges based on "additional qualifications" arguments , that is , in the words of the u.s. court of appeals for the 6 th circuit , that the "sore loser statute ... was a 'reasonable , nondiscriminatory restriction justified by ... [the state's] important regulatory interests of preventing extended intraparty feuding , factionalism and voter confusion.' .

in california , the statutory scheme upheld by the supreme court in storer v. brown , supra , worked to prevent a ballot position to an independent candidate not only if that candidate had run in and been defeated in a primary election of a political party ( a so - called "sore loser" provision ) , but also if that person had "voted in the immediately preceding primary" or "had a registered affiliation with a qualified political party at any time within one year prior to the immediate preceding primary election. .

this so - called "disaffiliation" requirement , along with the "sore loser" provision , were found by the supreme court to be ballot access provisions that furthered important and compelling state interests: a candidate in one party primary may not now run in that of another ; if he loses in the primary , he may not run as an independent ; and he must not have associated with another political party for a year prior to the primary .

.. .

the direct primary in california is not merely an exercise or warm - up for the general election but an integral part of the entire election process , the initial stage in a two - stage process by which the people choose their public officers .

it functions to winnow out and finally reject all but the chosen candidates .

the state's general policy is to have contending forces within the party employ the primary campaign and primary election to finally settle their differences .

the general election ballot is reserved for major struggles ; it is not a forum for continuing intraparty feuds .

the provision against defeated primary candidates running as independents effectuates this aim , the visible result being to prevent the losers from continuing the struggle and to limit the names on the ballot to those who have won the primaries and those independents who have properly qualified .

the people , it is hoped , are presented with understandable choices and the winner in the general election with sufficient support to govern effectively .

section 6830 ( d ) ( supp .

1974 ) carries very similar credentials .

it protects the direct primary process by refusing to recognize independent candidates who do not make early plans to leave a party and take the alternative course to the ballot .

it works against independent candidates prompted by short - range political goals , pique , or personal quarrel .

it is also a substantial barrier to a party fielding an "independent" candidate to capture and bleed off votes in the general election that might well go to another party .

... california apparently believes with the founding fathers that splintered parties and unrestrained factionalism may do significant damage to the fabric of government .

the federalist , no .

10 ( madison ) .

in a somewhat similar vein as the disaffiliation laws , the supreme court upheld a minnesota statute which prohibits , as do the laws of many other states , a candidate from appearing on the ballot as the candidate of more than one political party , often referred to as "fusion" candidacies .

while the court noted some potential burden on the first and fourteenth amendment rights of association and speech of a political party and its supporters in such anti - fusion laws , the court found the burdens to be "not severe," as the laws "do not restrict the ability of the new party and its members to endorse , support , or vote for anyone they like," nor do they "directly limit the party's access to the ballot. .

as such , the court found that the state's interests "to reduce election - and campaign - related disorder," and the interests put forward by the state of "avoiding voter confusion , promoting candidate competition ( by reserving limited ballot space for opposing candidates ) , preventing electoral distortions and ballot manipulations , and discouraging party splintering and 'unrestrained factionalism,'" were sufficient state interests promoted by this ban .

filing fee requirements for federal candidates are , as a general matter , permissible for the state to impose to cover administrative costs of elections .

in biener v. calio , the u.s. court of appeals found that filing fees required by the parties in a primary election administered by the state for a political party were not considered to be an additional qualification because this was not one of those types of qualifications "that were inherent in the candidate. .

it should be noted , however , that significant filing fees , when not reasonably connected to a state's legitimate interest , such as to cover administrative costs , have been struck down ( for example , a filing fee for u.s .

senator of 6% of a year's salary for that office ) as a violation of the equal protection component of the fourteenth amendment , as it "restricts the exercise of the franchise through a classification based on wealth ... ," and was not shown to be "reasonably necessary to the accomplishment of legitimate state objectives. .

laws in certain states have been characterized as "resign to run" laws because they bar partisan political activity by current state officials , including a prohibition on campaigning for partisan elective office while a state official , or being a candidate or holding another public office during one's tenure , and would require that a state officer resign his or her office to run in a campaign for another office , including congressional office .

federal law currently has a provision which also generally bars employees in the executive branch of government from being candidates in a partisan election , thus requiring , in effect , that such employees resign from federal service before being candidates in a partisan election .

although some earlier cases had found that the state resign to run laws were a violation of the qualifications clause as an additional qualification to congressional office , more recent cases have found such provisions to be a legitimate regulation of the conduct of public officials , and not , in any event , an absolute disqualification of the person to be elected .

in a case dealing with the federal hatch act's restriction on current postal workers running for congressional office , the u.s. court of appeals for the third circuit found in 2003 that the law did not add an additional qualification to congressional office: the act allows a citizen a choice .

it does not disqualify any individual from running for public office , but rather provides for the removal or suspension from public employment of any federal employee who runs "for the nomination or as a candidate for election to a partisan political office. .

5 u.s.c .

§7323 ( a ) ( 3 ) .

this distinction , between laws that bar potential candidates from running for elected office and laws that bar potential candidates from continuing to work for state or federal governments ( so - called "resign to run" laws ) , is significant for the purpose of the qualifications clause .

the former "imposes additional qualifications on candidates and therefore violates the qualifications clause , while the latter category is constitutionally acceptable since it merely bars state officeholders from remaining in their positions should they choose to run for federal office. .

states laws , similar in effect to the federal hatch act , which have barred running for congress while a state judge , or as any state official , have also been upheld in federal court as not violating the qualifications clause .

most states have statutory provisions which bar or restrict "dual candidacies" in their elections , that is , statutory provisions which prohibit an individual from appearing on the ballot for more than one office in the same election .

some of the state statutory provisions exempt ̶ and therefore allow – one to be a candidate for president and for another office at the same time , while other provisions might apply only to dual candidacies for state and local offices , but not federal .

however , in many cases the dual candidacy restrictions of a state would prohibit one who is running , for example , for a state or local office or for president or vice president from being on the ballot as a candidate for the u.s. senate or house of representatives .

no case law has been found which has struck down any of the numerous state provisions barring dual candidacy on the ground that it adds an additional qualification for federal office .

rather , when a state provision barring multiple candidacies was upheld ( against first amendment and fourteenth amendment challenges ) , the court found that the provision was a reasonable "ballot access" limitation which sought to prevent voter confusion , helped to eliminate ballot overcrowding , and promoted restrictions and prohibitions on dual office holding .

the court's justification for upholding the statute against first and fourteenth amendment challenges may be relevant to potential challenges based on "additional qualification" arguments , since the public policy reasons cited by the court to uphold the ballot restriction are consonant with , and nearly identical to , those in cases upholding certain state restrictions and limitations as legitimate , administrative "ballot access" provisions as opposed to impermissible additional qualifications for office .

since ( under dual office holding prohibitions ) an individual could generally not hold two elected offices simultaneously , such a ballot restriction would diminish the need for and expense of a future "special election" to fill a vacancy if the individual's candidacies were successful for both offices .

in the interests of good election administration and associated public policy goals , therefore , the dual candidacy restriction may work to diminish the probability of "electing a vacancy" — which would leave the citizens of the state or district without representation for a period of time , and would require a future special election ( in which , historically and traditionally , fewer citizens participate than in general elections ) .

in a somewhat similar manner as the "sore loser" laws , "disaffiliation" rules , and the resign - to - run laws , the dual candidacy prohibition , rather than having the purpose or effect of excluding an entire category of candidates because of their status ( that is , because of some characteristic that was "inherent in the candidate" ) , would appear to have the effect of requiring a candidate to make a choice within the candidate's control to effectuate the state's legitimate public policy purposes .

