given the central role of electric power in the nation's economy , and the importance of coal in power production , concerns have been raised about the cost and potential impact of numerous regulatory actions that would impose new requirements on coal - fired power plants .

in the summer of 2010 , for example , the edison electric institute ( eei ) , which represents the nation's investor - owned electric utilities , prepared a chart , "possible timeline for environmental regulatory requirements for the electric utility industry," which is reproduced here as figure 1 .

using color - coded categories , the chart identified rules under development at the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) and depicted a schedule for development and implementation of the rules between 2008 and 2017 .

the rules identified by eei were: the cross - state air pollution rule , and its predecessor , the clean air interstate rule ( identified as "cair / transport" on the timeline ) , which would establish cap - and - trade programs for utility emissions of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides ; maximum achievable control technology emission standards for mercury and other hazardous air pollutants , a rule generally referred to as the "utility mact" ( "hg / haps" on the timeline ) ; national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) for ozone , sulfur dioxide , nitrogen dioxide , and particulate matter ( "ozone," "sox / nox," and "pm / pm 2.5 " on the timeline ) ; regulation of greenhouse gas emissions ( "co 2 " on the timeline ) ; cooling water intake regulations ( "316 ( b ) " on the timeline ) ; clean water effluent guidelines ( identified under "water" on the timeline ) ; and coal combustion waste management rules ( "ash" or "ccbs management" ) .

eei subsequently produced a report , potential impacts of environmental regulation on the u.s. generation fleet , which concluded that new epa regulations would cause the unplanned retirement of 17 to 59 gigawatts ( gw ) of coal - fired electric capacity ( 5.4% to 18.8% of the current coal - fired total of about 315 gw ) by 2015 , and would require incremental capital expenditures of $85 billion to $129 billion .

eei is not the only group to have focused on epa's prospective regulations .

the american legislative exchange council ( alec ) picked up eei's chart , added to it the separate epa rules that will affect industrial and commercial boilers , and labeled it "epa's regulatory train wreck. .

the national mining association also refers to "epa's regulatory train wreck" in materials that it distributes , and the north american electric reliability corporation ( nerc ) , in an october 2010 special reliability assessment , concluded that implementation of four epa rules could result in a loss of up to 19% of fossil - fuel - fired steam capacity in the united states by 2018 , with the potential for "significantly deteriorating future … system reliability. .

in addition to these , a large number of other analyses have been prepared by other policy and research groups ; some are similarly critical of epa's rules , while others counter or rebut the criticisms .

many of these reports are identified below in appendix b .

the "train wreck" charts and related studies have been widely circulated on capitol hill , where they have stimulated concern .

several bills aimed at reducing the regulatory burden or requiring additional analyses of the combined rules' impacts have been introduced , as have proposals to modify or delay implementation of specific epa rules .

as discussed below in "legislation," as of august 2011 , three of these bills had passed the house .

opponents of these bills maintain that regulation of the affected plants is overdue .

coal - fired power plants are major sources of pollution ; many are decades old ; and regulation of their emissions , effluent , and waste has lagged that of other industries .

virtually all the analyses agree that coal will continue to play a substantial role in powering electric generation for decades to come .

epa , for example , in the utility mact ria , concluded that coal - fired generation will be roughly the same in 2015 as it was in 2008 , despite the impact of the mact and other rules .

by 2030 , the agency projects that 43% of the nation's electricity will still be powered by coal .

 ( the current level is 45%. ) .

eei projected that coal will be responsible for 36% to 46% of electricity generation in 2020 , depending on the scenario .

there will be retirements of coal - fired capacity , however , as all of the analyses conclude .

the number of these retirements , and the role of epa regulations in causing them , are matters of dispute .

the most extreme scenario in eei's analysis showed 76 gw of coal - fired capacity retirements by 2020 ( a little less than 25% of current capacity ) as a result of the regulations it analyzed .

as noted in the discussion of the individual regulations , in many cases eei's analysis assumed regulations far more stringent than epa actually proposed .

the units that would retire are the least economic and / or those currently operating with minimal pollution controls .

as noted in figure 5 , there are 110 gw of coal - fired plants ( about one - third of all coal - fired capacity ) that began operating between 1940 and 1969 , and two - thirds of these plants do not have scrubbers .

these are the prime candidates for retirement .

in many cases , these older plants are not base - load plants , so their significance as a percentage of coal - fired generation is less than one might assume from adding up their nominal capacity .

in a presentation to congressional staff , sue tierney , a former assistant secretary of energy , presented data showing that the pre - 1970 units operating without emission controls are in use only 41% of the time .

epa's modeling confirmed that the plants likely to be retired are older , smaller , and less frequently used: the agency concludes , for example , that under the mact rule the average unit to be retired will be 51 years old , with an average capacity of 109 mw ( versus 278 mw for units that will continue operation ) , and has operated only 56% of the time .

some of these units will be replaced by new capacity , of which some will be coal - fired , but most replacements are likely to be natural gas combined cycle units .

even before the advent of the "train - wreck" rules , very few coal - fired plants were being built .

as shown in figure 6 , since 1990 , more than 80% of new capacity has been natural gas - fired .

these plants are highly efficient ; they are cost - competitive with coal ; and they emit no so 2 , no mercury , and no other hazardous air pollutants .

without scrubber sludge to manage , they also do not need to meet effluent guidelines .

natural gas - fired power plants also have an advantage with regard to greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions: for the same amount of electric generation , they emit only half the ghgs of coal - fired units .

in the last two years , gas has enjoyed a price advantage , as well .

as one analyst notes: since most of america's utilities have the ability to employ natural gas fired power plants in lieu of coal fired power plants when natural gas is priced advantageously , utilities have been ramping up natural gas consumption and reducing their usage of coal .

with the price of central appalachian ( capp ) coal currently trading at $73 per ton , up from $60 per ton for much of last year , a recent study by credit suisse ( cs ) indicates that natural gas prices would need to rise to approximately $6.30 per mcf [thousand cubic feet] before coal and natural gas trade at parity for electricity generation .

gas is currently trading at around $4.50 per mcf , with futures contracts through 2014 generally trading below $6.00 .

is there a train wreck coming for coal - fired power ? .

the answer depends on the individual facility .

older , smaller , less efficient units already face a train wreck .

in 2010 , 48 of them with a combined capacity of 12 gw were retired , according to one source .

another source identifies 149 coal - fired units with a combined capacity of 19.7 gw whose retirement has been announced or implemented in the past few years .

in recent weeks , as utilities weigh the cost of retrofitting and operating their older units , more retirements have been announced .

but this does not mean that the newer ( post - 1970 ) coal - fired facilities that have invested in pollution controls over the years will be shuttered .

most of them already comply with many of the proposed rules , or if not , they can do so with modest modifications to their pollution control equipment .

a train wreck for this group seems unlikely .

in between the two ends of the spectrum are facilities that are efficient enough or play a sufficiently vital role in meeting regional demand that the economics likely would justify their retrofit .

for these facilities , the key questions are whether there will be sufficient time to act , and whether the reliability of the electric grid will be affected as they are taken off - line for modification .

congress has shown a great deal of interest in the forthcoming epa power plant rules and related administration activities , with both proponents and opponents of epa action circulating "dear colleague" letters and hearings held or scheduled by several house and senate committees .

legislation to prevent or delay epa action has passed the house , and more legislation is considered likely .

some recent proposals are broad in nature , targeting epa generally or a lengthy list of specifics , while others focus more narrowly on individual rules or actions .

one such broad bill is h.r .

2401 , the transparency in regulatory analysis of impacts on the nation ( train ) act of 2011 .

it would establish a panel of representatives of federal agencies to report to congress by august 2012 on the cumulative economic impact of a number of listed epa rules , guidelines , and actions concerning clean air and waste management .

the house energy and commerce committee approved this bill on july 13 .

similar legislation introduced in the senate , s. 609 , the comprehensive assessment of regulations on the economy act of 2011 , would direct the department of commerce to form a panel to review the cumulative energy and economic impacts of specific rules proposed or finalized by epa or expected soon .

both bills would cover rules discussed in this report .

impetus for this type of legislation is the widely expressed concern that when epa analyzes impacts of individual regulations , it does not consider costs imposed by multiple rules taking effect more or less simultaneously .

another bill , h.r .

1872 ( the employment protection act of 2011 ) would require epa to consider the impact on employment levels and economic activity prior to issuing a regulation , policy statement , guidance , or other requirement , implementing any new or substantially altered program , or issuing or denying any clean water or other permit .

companion senate legislation is s. 1292 .

even before the start of the 112 th congress , house republican leaders signaled that house committees would scrutinize epa's rulemaking decisions , including by withholding funding for prospective rules and de - funding previously promulgated rules .

this was demonstrated when the house passed h.r .

1 , a full - year continuing appropriations resolution for fy2011 , in february .

as passed by the house , the bill contained more than 20 provisions restricting or prohibiting the use of appropriated funds to implement various regulatory activities under the epa's jurisdiction — including many discussed in this report .

 ( on march 9 , the senate failed to approve the house - passed bill and subsequently also did not agree to a substitute text ( s.amdt .

49 ) that contained different funding levels and generally omitted the epa regulatory provisions in the house - passed bill. ) .

final legislation that provided full - year appropriations for epa ( p.l .

112-10 ) did not include the restrictive provisions in the house - passed bill .

subsequently , many of these same provisions were included as general provisions in legislation providing fy2012 appropriations for epa ( h.r .

2584 ) , which the house considered in july but took no final action on before congress recessed in early august .

as reported by the house appropriations committee , h.r .

2584 contains policy provisions that would , for example , prohibit epa from spending appropriating funds to propose or promulgate rules for greenhouse gas emissions from stationary sources ; to modify the pm naaqs ; to finalize or implement the cooling water intake rule ; or to propose or implement a coal combustion ash rule .

the bill also includes a provision similar to h.r .

2401 , described above .

several bills concerned with specific rules discussed in this report also have been introduced .

the house approved legislation to restrict epa authority and to repeal a dozen epa regulatory actions dealing with greenhouse gases ( h.r .

910 ) on april 7 .

in the senate , an amendment identical to h.r .

910 ( s.amdt .

183 ) failed on a vote of 50-50 .

as discussed elsewhere in this report ( appendix a ) , epa's january 2011 veto of a cwa permit for a west virginia surface coal mining project has been very controversial , including in congress , and raised questions about adequate coal supplies for power plants .

in the 112 th congress , legislation has been introduced to remove epa's veto authority from the cwa ( h.r .

517 ) , and a number of other bills to modify or clarify this portion of the law also have been introduced ( h.r .

457 / s. 272 , h.r .

468 / s. 960 , and h.r .

2018 ) .

a subcommittee of the house transportation and infrastructure committee held hearings on these issues in may , and on july 13 , the house passed h.r .

2018 .

several provisions in this bill would limit epa's authority to provide oversight of states' implementation of the cwa ; it would allow the agency to veto a section 404 permit only with concurrence of the state where the subject discharge originates .

as passed , the bill also includes a provisions similar to h.r .

1872 , described above ; it would require epa to consider economic impacts before promulgating any clean water rule , or issuing or denying a clean water permit .

also in the 112 th congress , two bills have been proposed that would prohibit ccw from being regulated under subtitle c of rcra — h.r .

1391 ( the recycling coal combustion residuals accessibility act of 2011 , or the rccra act ) and h.r .

1405 .

on june 21 , 2011 , a house energy and commerce committee subcommittee approved h.r .

1391 .

beyond congress , some state legislatures also have taken interest in epa's regulatory activity .

in february , the american legislative exchange council issued a report identifying a number of strategies that states could use to oppose epa's actions: adopting resolutions , conducting enhanced legislative review of state regulations , and enacting bills to assert state sovereignty .

resolutions critical of epa's actions have been introduced in several state legislatures this year .

eei , nerc , and other recent reports describe scenarios and potential impacts of epa rules , including projected need for additional power plant capacity or potential reliability problems , that depend on a number of assumptions such as the stringency of the rules or expected tight compliance deadlines , many of which differ greatly from what epa has actually proposed or promulgated .

also , because most of the reports try to look collectively at epa rules , to the extent a proposed or promulgated rule differs from some of these assumptions , it can be difficult to separate out one rule's projected impacts from the report's overall conclusions about multiple rules .

some of the reports project impacts on power plants and electricity supply nationwide , some project impacts on a regional basis .

in reality , evaluating regulatory impacts , compliance costs , and possible retirement decisions depends on facility - specific considerations — micro , not macro .

utilities and states will be affected differently .

rules when actually proposed or issued may well differ enough that investment or retirement decisions look entirely different .

technology options available to a unit or plant depend on the specific rule , and compliance costs may be less than projected .

even some units with high assumed control costs , or others that look to be marginal economically , may install controls and continue to operate .

many utilities have already installed technology needed to comply with new rules ; for them , costs will be minimal: epa said that , with regard to the most expensive proposed rule , the utility mact , more than half of the coal - fired units fall in this category .

the eei and nerc reports did not account for the fact that plants' compliance costs may be less because of investments already made in pollution control equipment .

frequently overlooked in analyses of epa regulations are the benefits to public health and the environment that will occur , benefits that for the most part are difficult to monetize .

epa does estimate benefits of individual rules , while acknowledging that it is challenging to quantify benefits due to data limitations and uncertainties in approaches used to value benefits .

the costs of the rules may be large , but , in most cases , the benefits are larger , especially estimated public health benefits .

neither the eei nor the nerc report addresses benefits .

although much of the current critical attention to epa's regulations has focused on rules affecting power plants , especially coal - fired power plants , the rules discussed here are only part of epa's statutory mandate and regulatory agenda , and there are controversies about many of these other rules , as well , such as a mact rule to control toxic air pollutants from commercial and industrial boilers and several clean water act rules concerning water quality standards and permits .

further , concerns about impacts of epa rules have been raised by a range of individual companies and trade associations representing regulated entities beyond the electric utility sector , such as agriculture , chemical manufacturers , water utilities , and others .

several other conclusions bear repeating: the studies sponsored by industry groups ( eei and nerc ) were written before epa proposed most of the rules whose impacts they analyze , and they assumed that the rules would impose more stringent requirements than epa proposed in many cases .

of the regulations so far proposed , the utility mact , which will set standards for power plant emissions of mercury and other hazardous air pollutants , appears to be the most expensive .

epa's analysis concluded that it will impose annual costs of $10 billion to $11 billion annually other rules that industry expected to impose major costs now appear less likely to do so .

the cooling water intake rule , for example , proposes a less costly , more flexible regulatory option than eei and nerc anticipated .

further , nerc believes that few coal - fired egus will be affected by this rule , which will have greater impact on older , oil - fired units .

the coal combustion waste rule has been delayed , with no deadline for promulgation .

for coal - fired plants , the primary impacts will be on units more than 40 years old that have not , until now , installed state - of - the art pollution controls .

many of these plants are inefficient , and are being replaced by more efficient combined cycle natural gas plants .

lower prices for natural gas and recent increases in its projected availability may reduce the impact of the proposed rules on electric utilities and consumers , although they may lead to more retirements of coal - fired units .

there is a substantial amount of excess generation capacity at present , due in part to the recession and also due to the large number of natural gas combined cycle plants constructed in the last decade , muting reliability concerns .

finally , several other points regarding the timing of implementation of epa rules are worth underlining: many proposed and "pre - proposal" rules linger for years without being promulgated ; thus , many of the epa actions described here may not be finalized or take effect for some time .

they may also be substantially altered before they become final ( i.e. , before sources of pollution actually are affected by control requirements ) , as a result of the proposal and public comment process , and / or judicial review .

although epa generally announces a schedule under which it plans to propose and promulgate rules , experience suggests that proposal and promulgation may take longer than estimated , particularly in cases that do not have court - ordered deadlines .

even court - ordered dates for proposal or promulgation may change .

it is not uncommon for epa to request extensions of time , often due to the need to analyze extensive comments .

promulgation of standards is not the end of the road .

virtually all major epa regulatory actions are subjected to court challenge , frequently delaying implementation for years .

as noted earlier , many of the regulatory actions described here are the result of courts remanding and / or vacating rules promulgated by previous administrations .

in many cases , epa rules must be adopted by states to which the relevant program has been delegated .

moreover , many states require that the legislature review new regulations before the new rules would take effect .

for many rules , actions by states may be more significant than what epa does , because the caa , cwa , and rcra allow states to adopt more stringent requirements .

for example , epa's cooling water intake proposal does not mandate installation of costly closed - cycle cooling systems at all existing power plants .

at the same time , an epa rule does not preclude states from imposing such a mandate , as has occurred and is occurring in several locations ( eg , new york , california , delaware , and new jersey ) .

standards for stationary sources under the air , water , and solid waste laws are generally implemented through permits , which would be individually issued by state permitting authorities after the standards take effect .

when finalized , a permit would generally include a compliance schedule , typically giving the permittee several years for installation of required control equipment .

existing sources generally will have several years following promulgation and effective dates of standards , therefore , to comply with any standards .

in short , the road to epa regulation is rarely a straight path .

there are numerous possible causes of delay .

it would be unusual if the regulatory actions described here were all implemented on the anticipated schedule , and even if they were , existing facilities would often have several years before being required to comply .

unable to account for such factors , which will vary from case to case , timelines that show dates for proposal and promulgation of epa standards effectively underestimate the complexities of the regulatory process and overstate the near - term impact of many of the regulatory actions .

appendix a .

regulatory actions affecting mountaintop removal mining epa and other federal agencies ( the office of surface mining and reclamation , in the department of the interior ; and the u.s. army corps of engineers ) are developing a series of actions and regulatory proposals to reduce the harmful environmental and health impacts of surface coal mining , including a practice called mountaintop removal mining , in appalachia .

these actions would not affect electric power plants directly , and thus were not covered by eei nor nerc in their studies .

thus , crs did not include these regulations in the discussion of the "train wreck" issues in the body of this report .

nevertheless , numerous critics of epa have included epa , corps of engineers , and interior department actions in what they term a "war on coal. .

the actions , announced in a june 2009 interagency memorandum of understanding , are intended to tighten regulation and strengthen environmental reviews of permit requirements under the cwa and the surface mining control and reclamation act ( smcra ) .

also in june 2009 , epa and the army corps signed a specific agreement detailing criteria that will be used to coordinate and expedite review of pending cwa permit applications for surface coal mining operations in appalachia .

the agencies are conducting detailed reviews of 79 permit applications to evaluate the permits in order to limit environmental impacts of the proposed activities .

this review is proceeding slowly .

in june 2010 , the army corps suspended the use of a particular cwa general permit for surface coal mining activities in appalachia and proposed a rule to prohibit its use entirely ; a finalized rule , expected in 2012 , would apply more stringent cwa rules to these coal mining operations .

in april 2010 epa released an interim guidance memorandum that seeks to clarify the agency's tightened requirements for surface coal mining in appalachia .

the guidance will be applied as a framework for epa's approval of all pending and future reviews of permits to dispose of coal mining waste and other types of appalachian surface coal mining discharges that are authorized by the cwa .

among other items , the interim guidance sets strict numeric limits on conductivity levels in waters affected by mining activities .

conductivity is a measure of the level of salinity in water associated with discharges of selenium and total dissolved solids that are associated with coal mining wastes .

based on recent scientific literature , epa has concluded that conductivity above certain levels in appalachian streams presents a reasonable potential to harm stream biota .

conductivity , and its use in assessing coal mining impacts on water quality , has become a focus of debate .

according to epa , the 2010 interim guidance is not intended to bring a complete halt to surface coal mining in appalachia , but to force the industry to adopt practices that will minimize harmful impacts .

environmental groups support the guidance document and epa's use of conductivity to assess water quality impacts , but industry groups have been highly critical , asserting that the science linking conductivity to water quality impairment is uncertain and that acceptable numeric levels are arbitrary .

lawsuits challenging the guidance have been brought by the states of kentucky and west virginia , as well as individual coal companies and trade associations .

in january 2011 , a federal judge who is hearing one of the challenges denied industry's request to block implementation of the guidance , but also denied the government's request to dismiss the case .

epa is working on revised guidance that incorporates public comments , scientific reviews , and experience of implementing the 2010 guidance .

final guidance had been expected by april 1 , but its release has been delayed by interagency review .

in addition , in november 2009 , the department of the interior's office of surface mining ( osm ) issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking ( anpr ) describing options to revise a smcra rule , called the stream buffer zone rule , which was promulgated in december 2008 .

the obama administration identified the 2008 rule , which exempts so - called valley fills and other mining waste disposal activities from requirements to protect a 100-foot buffer zone around streams , for revision as part of the series of actions concerning surface coal mining in appalachia .

osm identified a broad set of regulatory options that it is considering for revisions to the 2008 rule , ranging from formally reinstating the previous rule with small conforming changes , to requiring stricter buffer zone requirements for mountaintop mining operations on steep slopes .

osm officials have been working on developing a new rule , with the goal of releasing a proposal by early 2011 , but none has yet emerged .

in addition , epa and osm have pledged to strengthen oversight of state cwa and smcra permitting , regulation , and enforcement .

finally , epa has used cwa authority to veto a permit for a surface coal mining operation in west virginia , after determining that the activity will have an unacceptable adverse effect on wildlife and fishery resources .

epa's veto has been very controversial , in part because it involves the rare action of cancelling a permit previously issued by the army corps .

coal industry groups and those representing manufacturing and other sectors have been highly critical , many saying that to revoke an existing permit creates huge uncertainty about whether water quality permits would be rescinded in the future , producing a ripple effect beyond the coal industry .

epa argues that the veto , while highly unusual , is justified because the project involves unacceptable environmental damages .

viewed broadly , the administration's combined actions on surface coal mining displease both industry and environmental advocates .

the additional scrutiny of permits , more stringent requirements , and epa's veto of a previously authorized project have angered the coal industry .

at the same time , while environmental groups support the veto and related actions , many favor even tougher requirements .

critics assert that collectively the administration's activities and initiatives concerning surface coal mining in appalachia are needlessly delaying important projects , thus costing jobs and hurting the nation's energy security .

while these actions do not directly affect power plants , they have the potential of doing so indirectly , if they effectively limit or restrict coal supplies .

none of these actions are discussed in either the eei or nerc analysis .

appendix b. bibliography of analytic reports growing interest in the impact of epa regulation on fossil - fuel power plants , especially coal - fired plants , has generated a large number of analytic reports by policy and advocacy groups using varying assumptions and analytic approaches that reach varying conclusions .

many of these reports were issued prior to proposal or promulgation of a rule .

north american electric reliability corporation , 2010 special reliability scenario assessment: resource adequacy impacts of potential u.s. environmental regulations , october 2010 , http: / / www / nerc.com / files / epa_scenario_final_v2.pdf .

icf international , potential impacts of environmental regulation on the u.s. generation fleet , final report , prepared for edison electric institute , january 2011 , http: / / www.pacificorp.com / content / dam / pacificorp / doc / energy_sources / integrated_resource_plan / 2011irp / eeimodelingreportfinal - 28january2011.pdf .

metin celebi , frank graves , gunjan bethla , et al. , the brattle group , potential coal plant retirements under emerging environmental regulations , december 8 , 2010 , http: / / www.brattle.com / _documents / uploadlibrary / upload898.pdf .

national economic research associations , proposed catr + mact , prepared for american coalition for clean coal electricity , may 2011 , http: / / www.americaspower.org / nera_catr_mact_29.pdf .

dan eggers , kevin cole , yang y .

song , and linlin sun , credit suisse , impact of epa rules on power markets , september 2010 , http: / / epw.senate.gov / public / index.cfm ? .

fuseaction= files.view& filestore_id= b42de70d - b814-4410-831d - 34b180846a19 .

also see dan eggers , credit suisse , implications of epa policy , april 2011 , http: / / www.fbcinc.com / eia / presentations / eggers_04.26.11.pdf .

wood mackenzie , "long - term viability of many u.s. coal plants at risk," september 10 , 2010 , http: / / www.woodmacresearch.com / cgi - bin / corp / portal / corp / corppressdetail.jsp ? .

oid= 2178098 .

fbr capital markets , coal retirements in perspective — quantifying the upcoming epa rules , december 13 , 2010 , http: / / jlcny.org / site / attachments / article / 388 / coal1.pdf .

hugh wynne , francois d. broquin , and saurabh singh , bernstein research , black days ahead for coal: implications of epa air emissions regulations for energy & power markets , july 21 , 2010 , http: / / grist.s3.amazonaws.com / eparegs / bernstein%20-%20black%20days%20ahead%20for%20coal%20-%2007%2021%2010.pdf .

there also have been a number of recent analytic rebuttals to these reports: michael j. bradley , susan f. tierney , christopher e. van atten , et al. , ensuring a clean , modern electric generating fleet while maintaining electric system reliability , august 2010 , http: / / www.mjbradley.com / documents / mjbaandanalysisgroupreliabilityreportaugust2010.pdf and summer 2011 update , june 2011 , http: / / www.mjbradley.com / documents / mjba reliability report update june 7 2011.pdf .

university of massachusetts political economy research institute , james heintz , heidi garrett - peltier , ben zipperrer , new jobs – cleaner air , employment effects under planned changes to the epa's air pollution rules , february 2011 , http: / / www.ceres.org / resources / reports / new - jobs - cleaner - air .

susan f. tierney and charles cicchetti , the results in context: a peer review of eei's "potential impacts of environmental regulation on the u.s. generation fleet ," summary report , may 2011 , http: / / www.supportcleanair.com / resources / studies / file / tierney - and - cicchetti - eei - peer - review - summary - may - 2011.pdf .

world resources institute , response to eei's timeline of environmental regulations , november 2010 , http: / / pdf.wri.org / factsheets / factsheet_response_to_eei_timeline.pdf .

[author name scrubbed] , economic policy institute , a lifesaver , not a job killer , epa's proposed "air toxics rule" is no threat to job growth , epi briefing paper , june 14 , 2011 , http: / / w3.epi - data.org / temp2011 / briefingpaper312 ( 2 ) .pdf .

jennifer macedonia , joe kruger , lourdes long , and meghan mcguinness , bipartisan policy center , environmental regulation and electric system reliability , june 13 , 2011 , http: / / www.bipartisanpolicy.org / sites / default / files / bpc%20electric%20system%20reliability.pdf daniel j. weiss , valeri vasquez , and stewart boss , "mercury falling , many power plants already have equipment to slash mercury , toxic contamination," june 21 , 2011 , http: / / www.americanprogress.org / issues / 2011 / 06 / mercury_falling.html .

