s ince the 1970s , policymakers have increasingly used the tax code to promote energy policy goals .

long - term energy policy goals include providing a secure supply of energy , providing energy at a low cost , and ensuring that energy production and consumption is consistent with environmental objectives .

a range of federal policies , including various research and development programs , mandates , and direct financial support such as tax incentives or loan guarantees , promote various energy policy objectives .

this report focuses tax incentives that support the production of or investment in various energy resources .

through the mid - 2000s , the majority of revenue losses associated with energy tax incentives have resulted from provisions benefitting fossil fuels .

at present , the balance has shifted , such that the bulk of federal revenue losses associated with energy tax provisions are from incentives for renewable energy production and investment .

while costs associated with energy tax policy have shifted towards incentives that promote renewable energy , the majority of domestic energy produced continues to be from fossil energy resources .

this has raised questions regarding the value of energy tax incentives relative to production , and the relative subsidization of various energy resources .

this report provides background information that might be useful as congress continues to evaluate current energy tax policy .

specifically , the report presents a comparison of the cost of tax incentives associated with fossil and renewable energy resources , relative to amount of energy produced using each type of resource .

the report also reviews other analyses that compare the cost of energy tax incentives relative to production , across different types of energy technologies .

although the numbers in this report may be useful for policymakers evaluating the current status of energy tax policy , it is important to understand the limitations of this analysis .

this report evaluates energy production relative to the value of current energy tax expenditures .

it does not , however , seek to analyze whether the current system of energy tax incentives is economically efficient , effective , or otherwise consistent with broader energy policy objectives .

further , analysis in this report does not include information on federal spending on energy that is not linked to the tax code .

the following sections estimate the value of tax incentives relative to the level of energy produced using fossil and renewable energy resources .

before proceeding with the analysis , some limitations are outlined .

the analysis itself requires qu antification of energy production and energy tax incentives .

once data on energy production and energy tax incentives have been presented , the value of energy tax incentives can be evaluated relative to current levels of energy production .

other studies have examined federal financial support ( eg , "subsidies" ) across various energy resources .

some of this research is similar to what has been presented thus far , in that it examines federal financial support relative to energy produced across different energy sources .

using an alternative approach , other research has compared the subsidization of different energy resources using effective tax rates ( see appendix b for an overview of effective tax rate studies ) .

in recent years , the energy information administration ( eia ) has released studies providing analysis of energy and electricity production subsidies .

in this work , the eia defines subsidies to include spending and tax expenditure provisions .

on the spending side , the eia includes direct expenditures that result in payments to energy producers or consumers as well as energy - related federal research and development ( r&d ) funding .

the eia analysis also includes certain energy - related federal loan guarantees and federal electricity support programs in their tabulation of federal energy subsidies .

on the tax side , the eia study includes tax expenditures .

the analysis presented earlier focuses exclusively on energy subsidies provided through the tax code , and does not examine spending - side energy subsidies .

in contrast to the eia studies , the earlier analysis includes section 1603 grants in lieu of tax credits as a tax - related provision .

eia lists the section 1603 grants in lieu of tax credits as a direct expenditure .

to estimate energy subsidies per unit of electricity production across different energy resources , the eia employs the following methodology .

first , the eia defines electricity production that is supported by federal subsidies .

next , the analysis examines all energy subsidies , categorizing these subsidies into those that support electricity production and those that support other uses of energy .

the analysis then allocates electricity - related energy subsidies by fuel type .

using this information on electricity production and federal subsidies , the eia is able determine the share of electricity or energy attributable to a specific fuel , relative to the share of federal financial support received by that fuel .

the results of eia's analyses covering 2013 , 2010 , and 2007 are summarized in table 4 , table 5 , and table 6 respectively .

coal continues to be the largest fuel source for electricity and receives a relatively small share of federal financial support .

in 2013 , 39.0% of generation was from coal , while coal received 6.0% of federal financial incentives .

in 2010 , 44.9% of generation was from coal , while coal received 10.0% of the total federal financial support for electricity production .

in 2007 , 47.6% of generation was from coal , while 12.7% of total federal financial support for electricity was provided to coal .

the shares of electricity produced using natural gas and petroleum liquids has been trending up in recent years , increasing from 22.5% in 2007 , to 25.0% in 2010 , to 28.0% in 2013 .

the share of federal financial support for electricity produced using natural gas and petroleum liquids was 3.4% in 2007 , 5.5% in 2010 , and 4.0% in 2013 .

the share of electricity produced using nuclear has remained stable between 2007 and 2013 , ranging between 19.4% and 19.6% .

between 2010 and 2013 , the estimated share of federal financial support decreased substantially .

the share of federal financial assistance for electricity going to nuclear decreased from 21.0% to 10.0% between 2010 and 2013 .

there were subsidy costs for nuclear loan guarantees in 2010 , but not in 2013 , which explains this decline .

both the share of electricity produced using renewables and the share of federal financial support for electricity supporting renewables increased between 2007 and 2013 .

in 2007 , 8.8% of electricity generated came from renewable resource .

by 2010 , this share had increased to 10.3% , and by 2013 , to 13.1% .

in 2007 , 14.9% of federal financial support for electricity went to renewables .

in 2010 , this figure was 55.3% .

in 2013 , 72.0% of federal financial support for electricity supported renewables .

the increase in the share of federal financial support for renewables is largely due to the section 1603 grants in lieu of tax credits program .

taxpayers that otherwise would have been eligible for the production tax credit ( ptc ) , and would have received this tax credit over 10 years , may now choose to claim one - time lump sum grants .

investment tax credit ( itc ) - eligible taxpayers , including solar , may also claim section 1603 grants .

the eia studies also evaluate subsidies and support for energy that is not related to electricity production .

eia estimates that in 2013 , $5.2 billion of the $29.3 billion in total energy - related subsidies supported fuels used outside the electric - power sector .

non - electricity - related energy subsidies support fuels in the transportation sector , as well as primary end - use consumption or energy in the residential , commercial , and industrial sectors .

table 7 , table 8 , and table 9 summarize eia's findings on energy subsidies relative to energy production for energy not related to electricity production .

most of the fuel production that is used outside of the electricity sector is natural gas and petroleum liquids ( 81.7% in 2013 ) .

the share of federal financial support for energy not related to electricity production going to natural gas and petroleum liquids fell increased between 2010 and 2013 , from 20.7% to 31.8% .

the overall value of these subsidies fell , however , from $2.2 billion to $1.7 billion .

overall , federal financial incentives for energy not related to electricity production declined between 2010 and 2013 , from $10.4 billion to $5.2 billion .

much of the decrease in federal financial incentives for non - electricity fuels between 2010 and 2013 can be explained by the expiration of certain incentives for biofuels ( specifically , ethanol ) .

federal financial support for non - electricity biomass and biofuels was $7.6 billion ( 73.2% of federal financial support for non - electricity fuels ) in 2010 and $2.3 billion ( 44.7% of federal financial support for non - electricity fuels ) in 2013 .

over this same time period , the share of non - electricity fuels produced from biomass or biofuels increased from 3.87 quadrillion btu to 4.15 quadrillion btu , with the share of non - electricity energy production attributable to biomass or biofuels declining more than a percentage point , from 10.9% to 9.5% , over the same time period .

although the results of the eia study are not directly comparable to the analysis of federal tax support across different energy resources presented above , similar patterns emerge .

most federal financial support for energy , through the tax code or otherwise , supports renewables .

the majority of energy produced comes from fossil fuels .

despite recent reductions in incentives for biofuels , a large share of federal financial incentives for fuels not related to electricity production continued to go to biofuels in 2013 .

however , this type of analysis does not indicate whether the distribution of federal financial support across various energy resources is consistent with energy policy goals .

energy policy may be designed to be consistent with certain national security , environmental , or economic objectives that might require that the distribution of federal financial support for energy not be aligned with the distribution of energy production across various energy resources .

the majority of energy produced in the united states continues to come from fossil energy sources .

in recent years , the majority of energy tax incentives have served to benefit renewable energy resources .

the data presented in this report illustrate that , relative to production levels , federal financial support for renewable energy exceeds support for fossil sources of energy .

however , since the primary tax provisions supporting renewables have expired , tax - related support for renewables has fallen in recent years , and is projected to continue to decline .

variation in the amount of federal financial support relative to energy produced across energy resources may be consistent with various environmental or economic objectives .

for example , tax incentives designed to reduce reliance on imported petroleum may be consistent with energy security goals .

tax incentives that promote renewable energy resources may be consistent with certain environmental objectives .

energy tax incentives can also be used to support emerging technologies and encourage commercialization of high - risk innovations .

while subsidy per unit of production or subsidy relative to production level calculations may provide a starting point for evaluating energy tax policy , a complete policy analysis might consider why the level of federal financial support might differ across various energy technologies .

comparing energy production to energy tax incentives: 2009 and 2010 while the proportion of primary energy production attributable to certain energy resources changes slowly over time , there are often substantial changes in the estimated value of energy - related tax incentives for certain types of energy resources from year to year .

for example , in 2009 , 77.4% of energy - related tax incentives benefitted renewables ( table a - 1 ) .

by 2010 , the share of energy - related tax incentives attributable to renewables had declined to 68.1% ( see table a - 2 ) .

the primary reason for this decline is that in 2009 , "black liquor" qualified for fuels - related tax incentives .

thus , the tax expenditure estimate for tax credits for alcohol fuels was substantially higher in 2009 ( $6.5 billion ) than in 2010 ( $0.1 billion ) .

annual changes in the estimated cost of energy - related tax incentives can result in substantial year - to - year changes in the proportion of energy - related tax incentives attributable to various energy resources .

the value of total tax incentives for renewables excluding hydro - electric power is less than the total value of tax incentives when those available for hydro - power are included .

however , the difference is small .

jct estimates that in 2010 , the tax expenditures for qualified hydropower under the ptc are less than $50 million .

during 2010 , two awards totaling $88,000 were paid to hydropower facilities under the section 1603 grant program .

hydropower has also received less in creb financing than was awarded to solar and wind technologies .

during 2010 , the tax expenditure for crebs was an estimated $0.1 billion across all technologies .

an alternative method for evaluating the value of energy tax incentives across technologies: the effective tax rate approach another way to measure the relative subsidization of various energy resources is to use an effective tax rate approach .

effective tax rates , in the context presented below , are used to evaluate how the tax system affects incentives for capital investment .

lower effective tax rates on capital investment can promote investment in certain sectors .

the remainder of this section summarizes the results of a 2010 study analyzing energy - related tax incentives and investment .

this study uses the 2007 tax code to evaluate its impact on the inventive to invest in different types of energy capital .

as was the case with the eia study presented earlier , the effective tax rate analysis here does not incorporate energy tax policy changes under arra .

nonetheless , this analysis highlights the incentives for investment created by provisions in the tax code related to energy investment and production .

what is an "effective" tax rate the effective tax rates measures the impact of the tax system on investment decisions .

in the context of this report , an effective tax rate is defined as .

in this equation , is the real before - tax return on the marginal investment and r is the real return paid to investors after taxes .

assume that investors require an after - tax rate of return of 6% for a given investment .

assume next that a project must have a real before - tax rate of return of 9% to cover taxes , depreciation , and payments to investors .

under these conditions , the effective tax rate would be 33% .

negative effective tax rates indicate that the tax code is actually subsidizing investment to the point where taxpayers are willing to accept a before - tax rate of return that is less than the after - tax rate of return for an investment .

effective tax rates provide a single measure for the impact of the tax system on capital investments .

thus , there are many provisions in the tax code that can affect effective tax rates .

in the energy sector , depreciation rules , investment and production tax incentives , and tax rules specific to the oil and gas sector are all important in the calculation of effective tax rates .

effective tax rates for energy - related capital investments effective tax rates in the energy sector suggest that the tax code provides greater incentives for certain types of energy - related capital investments .

in 2007 , the tax code created the largest incentive for capital investment in solar thermal energy generation facilities .

in 2007 , solar benefitted from a 30% investment tax credit as well as five - year accelerated depreciation .

the 2007 effective tax rate for capital investments in solar thermal was estimated at - 244.7% ( see table b - 1 ) .

wind , which benefitted from the production tax credit ( ptc ) as well as five - year accelerated depreciation , was estimated to face an effective tax rate of - 163.8% .

these effective tax rates suggest that the tax code creates strong incentives for direct capital investment in wind and solar energy resources .

overall , the effective tax rates for renewables and nuclear are substantially lower than the effective tax rates for coal and gas .

empirical evidence suggests that energy - related investments may in fact be influenced by tax incentives .

metcalf ( 2010 ) finds that investment in wind capacity is "strongly influenced by tax policy. .

provisions in the tax code may distort investment decisions for other types of energy resources .

the effective tax rate for capital investment in nuclear electric generation ( - 99.5% ) also provides strong investment incentives .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 ; p.l .

109-58 ) introduced a production tax credit for new commercial nuclear reactors .

despite these incentives , new nuclear facilities have been slow to develop .

various tax incentives available to the oil and gas industry also influence effective tax rates on oil and gas investment .

effective tax rates on investments made by non - integrated oil and gas firms are lower than for integrated firms .

the primary reason for this difference is that non - integrated producers are able to fully expense intangible drilling costs ( idcs ) and are able to take advantage of percentage depletion .

integrated producers can only expense 70% of idcs and must claim cost rather than percentage depletion .

