the purpose and scope of this crs report is to provide a succinct overview with analysis of the major issues in the u.s. policy on taiwan .

taiwan has been of significant security , economic , and political interest to the united states .

while the united states does not diplomatically recognize taiwan , it is an important autonomous actor in the world .

today , 22 countries including the vatican have diplomatic relations with taiwan as the republic of china ( roc ) .

in what many observers consider as a model democracy , taiwan's 23 million people enjoy self - governance with free , multi - party elections .

after the presidential election in 2008 that ushered in taiwan's second transfer of power from one party to another , the united states congratulated taiwan as a "beacon of democracy. .

taiwan is a major recipient of u.s. arms sales .

in 2013 , taiwan was the 12 th - largest u.s. trading partner and the 7 th - largest export market for u.s. agricultural products .

taiwan ranked in 20 th place among top countries sending visitors to travel to the united states .

with active congressional involvement , the united states has played critical roles in taiwan's economic development , political liberalization from an authoritarian dictatorship to a dynamic democracy , self - defense against the people's republic of china's ( prc's ) military threats , and preservation of international space .

overall , u.s. policy seeks to support security , political , and economic interests that involve peace and stability , the status quo in the taiwan strait , taiwan's efforts to maintain international space , democracy , and human rights in taiwan , and u.s. businesses in taiwan .

as a critical concern , the united states has interests in the ties or tension across the taiwan strait , which affect international security ( with potential u.s. intervention ) , the u.s. - taiwan relationship , and u.s. - prc cooperation .

the cross - strait relationship has grown closer since the 1980s .

when james lilley arrived as the u.s. representative in taipei in 1982 , he was one of the first officials to encourage cross - strait economic ties as the driver in a trend toward greater peace and security .

indeed , closer economic engagement gradually has increased regular contacts and reduced tension across the taiwan strait .

u.s. support for taiwan has posed challenges to u.s. engagement with the prc , though washington and beijing have advanced an overall cooperative relationship since the 1970s .

as washington has engaged with both taipei and beijing , long - standing issues for policy have included how to balance u.s. relations with taiwan and with the prc , and also how to balance maintaining the relationship with taipei in its own right as opposed to approaching taiwan as part of washington's relationship with beijing .

for decades , taipei has harbored fears about whether beijing's cooperation with washington has occurred at the expense of taiwan's interests .

u.s. policy seeks a cooperative relationship with a rising prc , which opposes u.s. arms sales and other official dealings with taiwan as interference in its internal affairs in unifying with taiwan as a part of china .

in an apparent contradiction , beijing also seeks its preferred u.s. policies to influence taiwan .

however , taiwan considers itself a sovereign country .

as taiwan shifted from an authoritarian political system , u.s. policy has been mindful of respecting its democracy .

after the kuomintang ( kmt ) party's ma ying - jeou became president in taiwan in may 2008 , he promptly resumed the dialogue across the taiwan strait after its suspension for a decade .

the prc had accused his predecessor , the democratic progressive party's ( dpp's ) chen shui - bian , of pushing for de jure independence of taiwan .

the resumption of the cross - strait dialogue resulted in even closer economic engagement between taiwan and the prc as well as a reduction of tension , which was welcomed by the united states .

this situation afforded u.s. policy opportunities to strengthen the u.s. - taiwan relationship and / or shift attention to seek greater cooperation from beijing .

president ma ying - jeou has sought u.s. support , including arms sales , for taiwan's stronger position to sustain cross - strait talks .

one view has stressed that the united states and taiwan needed to strengthen their relationship to pursue u.s. interests .

another approach has stressed that the new era of cross - strait engagement allowed for improved u.s. ties with a rising china and that taiwan has pursued its own interests in engaging with the prc .

in any case , washington and taipei have put more efforts into their respective relations with beijing , while contending that they have pursued a parallel , positive u.s. - taiwan relationship .

on october 4 , 2011 , the house foreign affairs committee held a hearing on "why taiwan matters. .

assistant secretary of state for east asian and pacific affairs kurt campbell testified that the united states sought a strategic "rebalancing" ( or "pivot" ) of comprehensive priorities to focus more on the asia - pacific region .

he stated that "a critical part of that overarching strategy is building a comprehensive , durable , and unofficial relationship between the united states and taiwan. .

campbell stressed that "the bedrock of that relationship is our security relationship. .

he called the tra one of the most important acts of "legislative leadership" and foreign policy in u.s. history .

he recognized that the tra stipulates that the united states must maintain the capacity to resist coercion , maintain peace and stability , and provide necessary defense articles to taiwan .

he acknowledged that the administration must "consult actively on capitol hill. .

campbell also reaffirmed that the six assurances as well as the tra and three u.s. - prc joint communiques form the foundation of u.s. policy on taiwan .

overall , some salient issues for policy include the following: how might congress exercise its roles in u.s. policy on taiwan ? .

how might congress maintain momentum in strengthening u.s. - taiwan cooperation ? .

is the administration adhering to the tra in making available defense articles and defense services to enable taiwan to maintain a sufficient self - defense capability ? .

how effectively is the administration encouraging taiwan to strengthen its self - defense , including by increasing the defense budget ? .

how effectively is the administration encouraging taiwan to support u.s. interests in peace and prosperity , including in u.s. alliances and cross - strait ties ? .

is the administration effectively encouraging taiwan to play a helpful , peaceful , and stabilizing role in maritime disputes in the east and south china seas ? .

should the united states also support taiwan's observership status ( if not membership ) in international organizations , such as the world health organization ( who ) , international civil aviation organization ( icao ) , and u.n .

framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) ? .

should u.s. policy allow or encourage more senior officials from taiwan to visit and encourage expanded communication with taiwan's president ? .

should policy allow u.s. flag and general military officers to visit taiwan ? .

how should the united states support transparent , fair , and impartial rule of law , elections , and freedom in taiwan , while respecting taiwan's democracy ? .

how can washington urge taipei to contribute more in weapons nonproliferation , counter - piracy , foreign aid , and other areas of international security ? .

what is taiwan's role in the u.s. comprehensive strategy for rebalancing priorities toward the asia - pacific ( so - called "pivot" to the pacific ) ? .

should there be another taiwan policy review after the last review in 1994 ? .

should the united states press taiwan to notify the cross - strait economic cooperation framework agreement ( ecfa ) of 2010 to the world trade organization ( wto ) and pay more attention to benefits for u.s. companies ? .

how can u.s. officials induce taiwan to further reduce its trade and investment barriers in order to boost bilateral commercial ties ? .

with resumption of talks under the 1994 u.s. - taiwan trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) after they were in limbo for years due largely to taiwan's restrictions on u.s. beef , what should be u.s. priorities to deepen bilateral economic ties ? .

why hasn't taiwan removed restrictions on u.s. pork ? .

should the united states seek to negotiate a free trade agreement ( fta ) or bilateral investment agreement ( bia ) , and / or support taiwan's efforts to join regional trade negotiations , such as the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) ? .

should taiwan's growing economic dependence on the prc be of concern to u.s. and taiwan policy makers , and if so , what is the best way for taiwan to further diversify its economic partners ? .

ties or tension across the taiwan strait affect international security ( with potential u.s. intervention ) .

congressional oversight has been concerned with support for u.s. interests , particularly respect for taiwan's democracy .

since their first direct talks in 1992 , taiwan and the prc have negotiated through quasi - official organizations: the strait exchange foundation ( sef ) in taipei and the association for relations across the taiwan strait ( arats ) in beijing .

in discussing practical issues in initial contact , the two sides agreed to disagree on the meaning of "one china" with the verbal formulation of "one china , different interpretations. .

to taipei , "china" is the roc .

to beijing , "china" is the prc .

however , years later , the cpc and kmt shifted to contend that they reached a "1992 consensus. .

the dpp has disputed that there was a "consensus" and has argued that any understanding was reached between two political parties without a democratic mandate .

the two sides of the taiwan strait ambiguously talk about their "cross - strait" ( rather than "domestic" or "international" ) relationship .

with a population of only 23 million people , taiwan has evolved to become a highly developed , dynamic , and g lobally competitive economy .

taiwan's gross domestic product ( gdp ) on a purchasing power parity ( ppp ) basis was $929 billion , making taiwan the world's 18 th - largest economy ( after australia ) .

taiwan's per capita gdp on a ppp basis ( a common measurement of living standard s ) was $39,700 , larger than that of japan and south korea , and about three - quarters the size of u.s. living standards .

taiwan is a major innovator and producer of information and communications technology ( ict ) , broadly defined as computer hardware and software ; telecommunications ; and other knowledge - based industries .

according to the taiwan government , taiwan's companies are the world's second - largest producers of ict goods , although 83.3% of taiwan ict products are produced outside taiwan — mainly in the prc .

numerous surveys have identified taiwan as a major leader in global technology .

for example: a businessweek survey of the 100 best performing global ict companies in 2009 listed 10 taiwan firms , 4 of which were among the world's top 10 ict firms .

the world bank's 2014 index of doing business , which attempts to measure business regulations and their enforcements in 189 economies , ranked taiwan 16 th in terms of the ease of doing business there .

according to the world bank's knowledge economy index ( kei ) , which attempts to measure and rank a country's ability to generate , adopt , and diffuse knowledge , taiwan ranked 13 th out of 145 economies in 2012 .

according to the world economic forum's ( wef's ) , global competitiveness report 2013-2014 , taiwan ranked 12 th out of 148 economies .

the world economic forum's ( wef's ) global information technology report for 2013 ranked taiwan 10 th out of 144 economies in terms of preparedness to leverage ict advances for measures of the preparedness of an economy to use ict to boost competitiveness and well - being .

the heritage foundation's 2014 index of economic freedom ranked taiwan as the 17 th out of 178 economies .

h.j.res .

109 ( royce ) , to approve the proposed agreement on peaceful uses of nuclear energy .

h.r .

419 ( ros - lehtinen ) , taiwan policy act of 2013 , to strengthen the u.s. - taiwan relationship .

h.r .

772 ( faleomavaega ) , to promote peaceful and collaborative resolution of the south china sea dispute .

h.r .

1151 ( royce ) / p.l .

113-17 , to direct the secretary of state to develop a strategy to obtain observer status for taiwan at the triennial international civil aviation organization assembly .

h.r .

1960 ( mckeon ) , national defense authorization act for fy2014 .

see p.l .

113-66 .

h.r .

3470 ( royce ) , taiwan relations act affirmation and naval vessel transfer act of 2014 .

on april 7 , 2014 , the house agreed by voice vote to the bill , which added h.res .

494 as section 101 .

h.r .

3979 ( barletta ) / p.l .

113-291 , ndaa for fy2015 .

h.r .

4435 ( mckeon ) , ndaa for fy2015 .

see h.r .

3979 / p.l .

113-291 .

h.r .

4495 ( forbes ) , asia - pacific region priority act .

h.con.res .

29 ( mccaul ) , to express the sense of congress that the united states should resume normal diplomatic relations with taiwan .

h.con.res .

46 ( andrews ) , to urge the government of taiwan to grant former president chen shui - bian medical parole to ensure that he receives the highest level of medical attention .

h.con.res .

55 ( garrett ) , to express the sense of congress that taiwan and its 23,000,000 people deserve membership in the united nations .

h.res .

185 ( bentivolio ) , taiwan travel act , to declare that it should be u.s. policy to encourage visits between the united states and taiwan at all levels .

h.res .

494 ( royce ) , to affirm the importance of the tra ( on its 35 th anniversary ) .

see h.r .

3470 .

h.res .

704 ( forbes ) , to reaffirm the strong support of the u.s. government for freedom of navigation and other internationally lawful uses of sea and airspace and peaceful diplomatic resolution of outstanding territorial and maritime claims and disputes .

h.res .

714 ( faleomavaega ) , to reaffirm the peaceful and collaborative resolution of maritime and jurisdictional disputes in the south china sea and east china sea .

s. 12 ( coats ) , naval vessel transfer act of 2013 , inter alia , to authorize the transfer by sale of four excess perry - class frigates to taiwan .

s. 579 ( menendez ) , to direct the secretary of state to develop a strategy to obtain observer status for taiwan at the triennial international civil aviation organization assembly .

s. 1197 ( levin ) , national defense authorization act for fy2014 .

see p.l .

113-66 .

s. 1683 ( menendez ) / p.l .

113-276 , to provide for the transfer of naval vessels to certain foreign recipients .

s. 2410 ( levin ) , ndaa for fy2015 .

s.j.res .

31 ( menendez ) , to approve the proposed agreement on peaceful uses of nuclear energy .

s.res .

167 ( menendez ) , to reaffirm the strong u.s. support for the peaceful resolution of territorial , sovereignty , and jurisdictional disputes in the asia - pacific maritime domains .

s.res .

412 ( menendez ) , to reaffirm the strong u.s. support for freedom of navigation and other lawful uses of the sea and airspace , and diplomatic resolution of territorial and maritime claims .

