the importance of a successful aerospace industry to the united states economy has been repeatedly acknowledged by president obama and members of his cabinet , many members of congress , and by all concerned with the competitive fortunes of the u.s. aircraft manufacturing industry .

the u.s. aerospace industry is highly competitive and global in scope .

numerous u.s. firms manufacture a wide range of products for civil and defense purposes .

in 2010 , the value of aerospace industry shipments was estimated at $171 billion , of which civil aircraft and aircraft parts accounted for approximately half ( $85 billion ) of all u.s. aerospace shipments .

in 2010 , the u.s. aerospace industry exported nearly $78 billion in products , of which $67 billion ( or 86% of total exports ) were civil aircraft , engines , equipment , and parts .

the only u.s. manufacturer of large civil aircraft is boeing .

civil aircraft engines are manufactured by general electric ( ge ) in partnership with safran ( of france ) and by pratt & whitney .

numerous firms manufacture sections and parts of the airframe , as well as original equipment for both domestic and foreign airframe manufacturers .

the u.s. trade surplus ( net exports ) in aerospace products in 2010 was $43.6 billion — higher than for any other manufacturing industry .

in 2010 , the aerospace sector employed 477,000 workers , of which 228,400 were engaged in the manufacture of aircraft , 76,400 in the manufacture of engines and engine parts , and 97,600 in the manufacture of other parts and equipment .

according to the international trade administration ( ita ) , "more jobs in the united states were supported by exports of u.s. aerospace products than of any other manufacturing or service industry. .

a major issue for policymakers is whether the united states can sustain its preeminent position in aerospace , given the intentions of numerous foreign manufacturers to enter the small commercial jet aircraft segment by 2016 .

that segment accounts for nearly half of commercial aircraft revenues and for more than 60% of commercial aircraft deliveries .

some industry participants and analysts have recently suggested that the two dominant manufacturers of large civil aircraft , boeing and airbus , now face a new and significant group of competitors that are ready to challenge the incumbents for a potentially significant share of the market for small commercial jets .

currently that market is almost wholly owned by the boeing 737 and airbus a320 families of jets .

in boeing's 2010 annual report , w. james mcnerny , jr. , chairman , president , and ceo of boeing , writes: at boeing commercial airplanes , we must prepare now for increasing global competition .

aircraft manufacturers in several countries are poised to challenge us for a share of the market where we have been competing solely against eads / airbus .

these emerging competitors see the same massive economic opportunity in commercial airplanes and related services that we do over the next 20 to 30 years .

on june 20 , 2011 , the opening day of the 2011 paris air show , the president of boeing commercial airplanes , jim albaugh , announced "the days of the duopoly with airbus are over. .

albaugh was referring to long - standing dominance that boeing and airbus have held over the commercial jet aircraft business and , in particular , to the 90-220 seat aircraft segment that has seemingly come into play with the entry of competitors from brazil , canada , china , russia , and japan .

tom enders , the chief executive officer of airbus , agreed in part , saying "the duopoly is over in the 100 to 150 seat aircraft segment because that is where the new entrants ... want to be — so that doesn't mean the duopoly is over in the entire range of products. .

enders also mentioned that he doubted that there was room for six competitors and that "we think sooner or later there will be some consolidation. .

if the small commercial jet segment is about to enter a new competitive phase , there is no evidence that the dominance of airbus and boeing over large ( or wide - body ) aircraft or very large ( or super - jumbo ) aircraft will face a similar challenge anytime soon .

the small commercial jet segment represents a significant share of u.s. aerospace manufacturing sector output ( see text box above for a discussion of aircraft types ) .

in 2010 , boeing delivered 462 aircraft , of which 376 ( 81% ) were boeing 737s .

boeing also reported that it booked 486 net 737 orders in 2010 , and had a firm order book of 2,186 737s as of december 31 , 2010 .

boeing's rival , airbus , delivered 510 aircraft , of which 401 ( 79% ) were a320s .

airbus booked 416 net orders for the a320 family and had an order backlog of 2,418 a320 airplanes .

boeing and airbus will likely face intense and determined competitors that see an opportunity to manufacture large civil aircraft in the 90 – 220 seat range .

however , with the exception of embraer's 190 and 195 e - jets , none of the new competitors have yet to build any of the planes that they claim will be superior to boeing and airbus products .

both boeing and airbus recognize the possibility that one or more aircraft manufacturers may succeed in building planes that will compete with the boeing 737 and the airbus a320 families .

boeing's jim mcnerny has to do little more than look at airbus — a company formed in 1970 by three european governments to ensure that a previously fragmented european aerospace industry would survive — to recognize that additional competitors have the potential to fundamentally change the global aircraft manufacturing industry .

but history has not been kind to a market crowded with suppliers of commercial jet aircraft .

boeing and airbus are the dominant producers of narrow - body commercial transport aircraft 90-220 seats ) .

two other aircraft manufacturers , bombardier and embraer , are the dominant producers of regional jets ( rjs , which are defined as having fewer than 90 seats ) and also manufacture narrow - body aircraft .

the entry of new competitors into both the rj and narrow - body markets could result in a much higher level of competition for both the dominant rj manufacturers ( bombardier and embraer ) and the dominant narrow - body manufacturers ( airbus and boeing ) .

all of the new entrants are almost certain to face a number of hurdles that will determine whether they succeed , go back to the drawing board , or exit large commercial aircraft manufacturing .

chinese , russian , and japanese manufacturers have not previously built commercially competitive large civil aircraft , and canada's bombardier and brazil's embraer have primarily manufactured regional jets , albeit with considerable success .

the complexities that aircraft integrators , such as boeing and airbus , have faced with various aircraft development programs ( including recent programs such as the airbus a380 and a350 and the boeing 787 ) would be sufficient to sink all but the strongest aerospace companies .

however , because some of the new entrants into the large civil aircraft sector are state - owned and - controlled companies ( i.e. , russia's united aircraft corporation and china's commercial aircraft corporation of china ) that are funded by the government , commercial considerations may be less important during the development phase of the russian and chinese commercial aerospace projects .

one of the major market drivers for new narrow - body and rj aircraft is projected high demand for efficient narrow - body aircraft in markets that are expected to grow rapidly during the next 20 years , especially in asia and latin america .

the other major driver is the anticipated retirement of many of the airplanes in the current narrow - body fleet .

expected high demand for aircraft has attracted additional manufacturers , especially those that have the technical capacity to build such planes or those who possess a rapidly growing market for these , such as china and potentially india .

some of the new entrants have programs to build rjs that seat 70-90 passengers , but they could reasonably be expected to build larger aircraft in the not too distant future .

others are developing narrow - body aircraft that their manufacturers expect will compete head - to - head with the boeing 737 and airbus a320 families of narrow - body jets .

the manufacturers of the new aircraft claim their planes will deliver substantially greater fuel efficiency than current versions of the 737 or a320 families , although it remains to be seen if the new planes will actually do so .

several of the entrants to the narrow - body and rj markets are well established aircraft manufacturers or are producers of major sections of airframes for others .

the established firms include bombardier ( canada ) , embraer ( brazil ) , and mitsubishi heavy industries ( mhi ) ( japan ) .

others , such as united aircraft corporation ( uac ) ( russia ) and commercial aircraft corporation of china ( comac ) ( china ) , are new firms that reflect a reorganization of existing state - owned aerospace ( defense and commercial ) manufacturing resources by russia and china .

their intent is to create industries that are viable international competitors .

both uac and comac will produce rjs and narrow - body aircraft in cooperative partnerships with western suppliers ( see table 1 ) .

with the entry of additional competitors , the major producers of narrow - body airplanes ( boeing / airbus ) and rjs ( bombardier / embraer ) will potentially face disruptive competition .

all of the newcomers will have to build market share quickly if their airplanes are to achieve viability .

bombardier and comac have signed a partnership agreement and are developing complementary , but non - overlapping , narrow - body airplanes that will seat 100-149 passengers ( bombardier ) and 156-190 passengers ( comac ) .

this partnership may pose the most serious challenge to the boeing / airbus narrow - body franchise if comac and bombardier are able to gain a significant share of the fast - growing chinese market — a market that both boeing and airbus intend to contest .

embraer , which had considered and rejected stretching its 190 / 195 e - jet ( 98-122 seats ) , may also decide to build a larger narrow - body airplane , especially if china , russia , and japan move into embraer's core rj market .

embraer is considering the development of a new larger airplane , but has not yet announced whether it will proceed , a decision that may ultimately depend on boeing's plans and schedule for developing a replacement aircraft for the 737 .

boeing and airbus are , at present , the premier manufacturers of large civil aircraft of all sizes , but the importance of narrow - body aircraft to both companies cannot be overstated .

according to boeing's forecast for 2011-2030 , narrow - body jets are expected to account for about 60% of all sales and about 47% of all revenues during the period .

although the two companies have , in recent years , sold roughly equivalent numbers of narrow - body planes , the projected demand for 23,330 narrow - body airplanes through 2030 suggests that the market may be theirs to lose if they do not keep ahead of the competition or if they are not capable of producing enough airplanes to meet their customers' demands .

airbus has announced that it will upgrade the a320 family by 2015 , offering two new models of high efficiency engines .

airbus has announced that it does not intend to develop a replacement for the a320 until the mid - 2020s .

on july 20 , 2011 , boeing followed airbus' lead and announced that it would re - engine the 737 rather than replace it with a new small aircraft by 2020 .

neither company appears to take competition ( with each other or with newcomers ) for granted , but both companies appear to believe the risks that the newcomers are willing to assume will be greater than those that should taken by market leaders with strong reputations for building commercial aircraft .

boeing and airbus , with complete access to the latest aerospace technologies , may believe that they can learn from the experience of the newcomers without compromising safety , their overall competitiveness , or their ability to deliver a plane within a time - frame necessary to remain competitive .

the decision to develop ( or "launch" ) a new airplane exposes commercial aircraft builders , jet engine manufacturers , and a host of other suppliers to very high levels of risk .

throughout the twentieth century , most firms made losing bets on aircraft and exited the commercial market entirely .

various types of risk are associated with aircraft development , including a manufacturer's ability to access capital markets to bring a plane to market ; to deliver a plane that meets the performance requirements that were promised to launch customers ; to deliver the plane in a timely manner ; to attract sufficient customer demand to recover launch costs and earn a profit ; and to anticipate the response of competitors .

the boeing 737 and airbus a320 families of airplanes ( see figure 1 for an illustration of the various models in the airbus a320 family ) overwhelmingly define the narrow - body , single - aisle market .

sales of 737s and a320s provide the bulk of orders and earnings for both boeing commercial airplanes ( bca ) , based in renton , wa , and airbus sas , based in toulouse , france .

these companies have been the sole competitors for the large commercial aircraft market since boeing and mcdonnell douglas merged in 1997 .

boeing is the sole u.s. producer of large commercial aircraft .

unlike many other manufacturers of aircraft , boeing and airbus are the only companies that produce a complete range of mainline commercial aircraft ( small narrow - body to very large aircraft ) .

the boeing company and eads , airbus' parent company , are also major international defense aerospace contractors .

the brazilian aerospace company , embraer , produces the 190 and 195 e - jets , which competes with smaller narrow - body planes by airbus ( the a318 ) and boeing ( the 737-600 series ) .

large civil aircraft are typically used for 25 years or more before being sold to cargo fleets , non - scheduled carriers , or to foreign airlines that lack the resources to buy newer equipment .

some narrow - body passenger aircraft , including the dc - 9 , have flown in u.s. airline fleets for up to 40 years .

the first boeing 737s ( the 100 and 200 series ) were delivered in december 1967 — or 43 years ago .

because of the longevity of commercial aircraft , manufacturer's must consider the entire life - cycle of the plane and the likelihood that there will continue to be a market for the jet for more than enough years to cover the development costs of the plane .

airlines use aircraft intensively for many years and incur various operating costs that play a critical role in measuring aircraft performance .

costs include salaries , wages , and benefits ; fuel and oil ; maintenance materials and repairs ; landing fees and other rentals ; depreciation and amortization ; aircraft rentals ; and other expenses .

according to southwest airlines' most recent annual report , "except for changes in the price of fuel , changes in operating expenses for airlines are largely driven by changes in capacity , or [available seat miles] asms. .

the demand for commercial aircraft changed in significant ways during the last decade in response to a number of exogenous events , including 9 / 11 and the shock experienced by the aerospace industry as a whole ; the deep recession of 2008-2009 ; and fuel costs that have generally been rising since 2004 .

since 2008 , the volatility of fuel prices have caused significant problems for the airline industry ( see figure 2 ) .

during a five - month period in 2008 , airlines were buffeted by crude oil spot prices that peaked at $147 / barrel ( bbl. ) .

before falling below $35 / bbl .

again in april 2011 , the refiner acquisition cost of a barrel of crude oil rose to approximately $112 , or nearly $28 higher per barrel than the year before .

the 2008 and 2011 spikes in fuel costs , associated with oil prices greater than $100 per barrel , is part of what spurred airlines to increase load factors by reducing the number of available seats miles ( i.e. , retiring or parking aircraft ) ; reduce excess network capacity by reducing the number of scheduled flights and discontinuing service to some cities ; eliminate formerly profitable 50-seat regional jets from many routes ; increase ticket prices and impose "ancillary fees" for baggage and numerous other services ; and retire many older aircraft and demand more fuel - efficient replacements .

airlines have constrained capacity by grounding many older planes and reducing the number of flights from 11.6 million per year in 2005 to 10.1 million per year in 2010 .

for the period between 1978 , the year airlines were deregulated , and 2002 , system - wide ( domestic and international ) load factors for all u.s. airlines averaged 64.5% .

between 2003 and 2010 , load factors rose dramatically from 73.5% to 82.1% — the highest levels ever achieved .

together with the consolidation that has occurred within the airline industry and the numerous fees that airlines are using to boost revenues , the outlook for the industry has improved .

although maintenance , repair , and overhaul ( mro ) spending generally amounts to less than 10% of total annual operating expenses , long lasting assets , such as airframes and engines , require ongoing maintenance and repairs , as well as overhauls as planes age .

over the course of an aircraft's lifespan , engines account for 46% of maintenance , repair , and overhaul ( mro ) spending , while airframes account for the rest .

total global mro spending was $42.6 billion in 2010 .

many older airliners are being retired , including the boeing 737-300 / 400 / 500 series ( also called the "737 classic" series ) that seats 122-159 passengers depending on the specific model and seating configuration ) , the md - 80 / 90 series , the dc - 9 , and older model airbus a320s .

at the same time , the economics of regional jets have also changed .

with high fuel prices , once profitable 50-seat rjs have become money - losers and airlines have shifted to larger aircraft .

figure 3 provides a chart that shows the average stage length ( left axis of chart ) of narrow - body mainline jets and wide - body jets and operating cost per asm ( casm ) ( right axis of chart ) .

in figure 3 , the single - aisle narrow - body planes with the shortest average stage length usually have higher operating costs per available seat mile ( casm ) .

the age of the plane also plays a role .

the dc - 9s , some of the oldest planes , have the highest cost per available seat mile , followed by the "737 classic" series .

the federal aviation administration ( faa ) and major aircraft companies produce an annual 20-year forecast for the aviation industry and markets .

these forecasts consider numerous factors that weigh on the market for commercial aircraft , including carrier schedules , passenger load factors , average aircraft size , the average length of flights ( or stages , which involve one take - off and one landing ) , airspace and airport capacities , fuel costs , and different rates of growth of various regions of the world economy , among many other variables .

the various segments of the industry interact in a complex manner and there are many unknowns that can quickly undercut the accuracy of any forecast .

nevertheless , forecasts guide planners as they make very large investment decisions about the production and purchase of aircraft , infrastructure development , air traffic control modernization , and regulation .

the forecasts provide guidance both to the private sector and to policymakers .

the range of narrow - body models produced by both boeing and airbus are designed to complement almost any fleet and , in some cases , comprise the entire fleet ( eg , southwest: 737s ; virgin america: a319s and a320s ; ryanair: 737s ) .

during the 2000-2010 period , more than 11,000 narrow - body units were delivered or on backlog .

because demand for narrow - body airplanes was so strong , production at boeing and airbus did not slump during the 2008-2009 recession .

from 2000 through 2010 , boeing 737 orders averaged 395 per year .

in 2010 , boeing 737 deliveries numbered a record 376 planes .

according to boeing , "the 737 program currently produces 31.5 airplanes per month and expects to go to 35 per month in early 2012 , 38 per month in second quarter 2013 and then to 42 per month in the first half of 2014. .

with boeing 737 backorders of 2,101 airplanes as of may 31 , 2011 , it would take boeing nearly 5.6 years ( until the end of 2016 ) to deliver the current backlog of orders at current rates .

at the end of may 2011 , airbus had backorders of 2,420 of the a320 family of aircraft and had also announced that it would gradually increase production of the a320 to 42 per month .

the most recent order from american airlines and an anticipated order from delta air lines may raise production levels at both companies by as much as 20 additional planes a month .

in most forecasts , increased demand for new planes is expected to be boosted by the continued growth of low cost carriers ( lccs ) , by the rapid growth of emerging markets , and by continued market liberalization ( access and deregulation ) .

through 2029 , new airplane demand is expected to double , with 56% of deliveries supporting the expansion of air service in growing markets , and 44% of new airplanes replacing older , less efficient airplanes .

boeing projects that replacement of existing aircraft will result in 85% of the fleet having been delivered after 2010 .

boeing , airbus , and embraer forecasts vary significantly .

airbus projects a rosier outlook for very large jets ( a380s and 747s ) than does boeing: 1,740 deliveries versus 720 .

at a 2011 list price of us$375.3 million per a380 and about us$201 million per boeing 747-8 / 9 , the additional sales by airbus and boeing for very large aircraft could amount to about $300 billion ( at current's prices ) if each aircraft maker each sold half of the additional 1,020 large jets forecast by airbus ; boeing projects that large aircraft sales will amount to $220 million .

airbus , boeing , embraer , and bombardier all project strong demand in the single - aisle , narrow - body category ( see figure 4 ) .

according to boeing 2010 – 2030 forecast , the number of narrow - body aircraft will more than double , rising from 12,100 to 27,750 , or from 62% of the total airplane fleet in 2010 to 70% in 2029 ( see figure 5 ) .

boeing estimates that the market value of narrow - body aircraft sales will amount to $1.95 trillion , or 48% of the $4.0 trillion market for commercial aircraft in 2030 .

the single - aisle , narrow - body aircraft segment of the market is directly affected by larger and smaller aircraft programs , which influence investment decisions and competition among aircraft manufacturers .

manufacturers carefully consider their use of capital , labor , and engineering and manufacturing resources , and prioritize their projects accordingly .

the ongoing or potential programs of competitors also receive scrutiny .

a manufacturer that is developing a new plane will probably not take on additional projects that cannot be handled with available resources unless it believes it must do so to gain a competitive edge or to protect its market .

in the case of the boeing / airbus rivalry , there has been a willingness by both companies to pursue strategic goals that have involved attempts to outflank or pre - empt market segments .

this has frequently led both companies to take on multiple projects to maintain parity or gain a competitive edge , with the two companies frequently producing similar families of planes .

this strategy is not new: douglas aircraft , lockheed , and boeing earlier fought similar battles in the commercial sphere .

one of the consequences of the three - way competition was oversupply of "me too" aircraft , especially large aircraft , and , with the arrival of airbus , the exit of lockheed from commercial production and douglas aircraft's merger with mcdonnell , which effectively eliminated boeing's u.s. commercial rivals , but left it with a single , stronger european challenger that had strong political and financial support from the governments of france , germany , the uk , and spain .

an intense competition between boeing and airbus in large wide - body aircraft ( a380 / 747-8 and 787 / a350 ) absorbed significant resources during most of the last decade .

but competition in the very large , large , and medium aircraft market segments has been a normal pattern for companies that manufacture advanced commercial aircraft .

the drivers of these programs are rising fuel prices , strong demand for more efficient , quieter , and less polluting aircraft , and growing demand for air travel .

whether the boeing / airbus competition in the wide - body market has had any overall effect on their narrow - body aircraft programs is arguable .

some airlines have pressed boeing to develop a replacement for the 737 that incorporates the technologies that are used on the boeing 787 ( composite materials , newer flight deck technologies , new wing designs , and improved engines , among other features ) .

however , boeing's experience with production delays , supplier delays , cost overruns , and technical problems in the 787 program has resulted in estimated cost overruns of at least $12 billion more than boeing's initial target development cost of $5 billion .

whether these technologies can be adapted to smaller planes at a cost that airlines could absorb is a significant part of debate over the futures of both the 737 and a320 programs .

bombardier cseries .

the bombardier cseries jet is the only mainline plane currently in development that specifically targets the 100-149 seat market .

it will come in two versions that cover the alleged gap ( or current lack of demand ) : the cs100 will seat between 100 and 125 passengers and the cs300 will seat between 125 and 145 passengers .

bombardier claims that the cs100 enter into service in 2013 and the cs300 will enter service in 2014 .

bombardier's 2011-2030 forecast for the 100-149 seat commercial jet market calls for 7,000 deliveries over the next 20 years , with the retirement of 3,000 ( 57% ) of the current 100-149-seat fleet .

the total fleet of 100-149 seat jets is projected to grow from 5,200 units in 2010 to 9,200 by 2030 .

bombardier's competitors in the cs100 ( 100-125 seats ) segment include the airbus a318 and a319 and embraer's 190 and 195 aircraft .

at a future date , it may also include a stretched russian - built sukhoi superjet 100 .

comac c919 .

the comac c919 is frequently compared to the airbus a320 , possibly because airbus has been assembling a320s and a319s in china since 2008 , in partnership with avic .

comac , which was spun off from avic in 2008 , has signed agreements with a number of u.s. and european suppliers of airframe parts , engines , and various systems that will be critical to the success of the program .

cfm international will assemble leap - x engines for the c919 in china .

ge is also participating in a joint venture with avic to develop avionics for the c919 .

whether the plane will achieve the efficiencies that comac has promised is an open question: reports that designers have had trouble with the plane's weight have apparently caused some of the major chinese airlines to hold back on orders .

the big three chinese - owned airlines — china southern , air china , and china eastern — apparently limited their exposure to 20 aircraft each .

according to a recent study by the rand corporation , "the 'big three' each committed only to purchasing five c919s," with soft options for the other 45 planes .

the apparent hesitation of central - government owned airlines to purchase aircraft built by a state - owned company is due , according to rand , to an unwillingness to "take on more exposure to a program they regard as risky. .

general electric's leasing arm , general electric commercial aviation services ( gecas ) has ordered 10 planes , as has the leasing subsidiary of the china development bank .

uac / irkut ms - 21 .

the three - version ( 150 , 180 , and 210 seats ) ms - 21 aircraft has been described as "russia's great hope for the revival of its civil aircraft industry. .

the ms - 21 , which the company expects to cost $6.3 billion to develop , is scheduled to enter service in 2016 .

the russian government is funding 40% of the ms - 21's development costs , with the remainder coming through loans , and from irkut's parent company , the government - owned uac .

according to the ms - 21 chief designer and project director , andrei matveyev , the aircraft will include 40% composite content ( including a composite wing ) , weigh 15% less , and achieve 25% improved fuel efficiency over current comparable boeing or airbus aircraft .

pratt & whitney will supply engines , which will also power the a320neo ( as one of two available engine options for that plane ) , the bombardier cseries , and the mitsubishi regional jet .

irkut also has numerous u.s. partners supplying various systems for the ms - 21 .

to date , 146 firm orders and 39 options have been placed for the ms - 21 , with 50 orders from aeroflot , 50 orders from a malaysian leasing company , and 46 orders from russian leasing companies .

embraer .

the embraer 190 e - jet has 98-114 seats , while the larger embraer 195 e - jet has 108-122 seats .

the first delivery of the e - 190 was made in 2005 and the e - 195 in 2006 .

both planes are comparable to small mainline jets and , together with the embraer 170 / 175 e - jets , were designed specifically to fill what embraer executives believed to be a gap in the 70-120 seat jet market .

the embraer e - jets represented a sharp departure from the rjs on which embraer had built its reputation .

embraer used the e190 and e195 to beat bombardier to market with a product that upstaged regional jets of comparable size .

by the end of 2010 , 266 e - 190s had been delivered to low - cost carriers , u.s. legacy airlines , and foreign airlines , with a firm order backlog of 157 planes .

during the same period , 61 e - 195s were delivered , with a firm backlog of 41 planes .

embraer's chief competitor , bombardier , delivered its first 100-seat crj - 1000 regional jet ( a stretched crj - 900 ) in december 2010 .

as of january 2011 , bombardier had delivered 9 crj - 1000s and had firm orders for another 40 .

whether the bombardier cseries will lead embraer to develop a larger plane is uncertain at this point .

nevertheless , some have speculated that embraer could develop a new plane in response to bombardier's challenge to embraer's e - jet series .

sukhoi superjet 100 .

the first sukhoi sj100 was delivered to armavia , an armenian airline , on april 19 , 2011 , and was almost immediately placed in service .

the superjet 100 has a capacity of 86-103 passengers , depending on its seating configuration .

after - sales support for the sj100 will be provided by superjet international , a joint venture formed by sukhoi and the italian firm alenia aeronautica .

alenia owns 51% and sukhoi 49% of the joint venture .

alenia also has a 25% stake in sukhoi civil aircraft co. , the manufacturer of the sj1000 .

the purpose of sji is to provide the all important in - service support that airlines depend on .

sji provides pilot training , technical training for maintenance staffs , and operates spare parts warehouses for the sj100 program .

according to aviation week and space technology , "commercial services also will test whether the program can deliver the promised in - service support , of which many customers are skeptical , given the poor reputation of russia's aerospace industry in this regard. .

comac arj21 .

a new chinese regional jet , the arj21 ( a 90-seat rj ) , which is being manufactured by comac in partnership with bombardier , is based on the mcdonnell - douglas md - 90 .

all of the comac arj21's major subsystems were sourced to north american and european suppliers .

the project has experienced a number of delays and delivery slipped from 2010 to 2011 .

the arj21 was originally an avic project , but was transferred to comac when the latter assumed responsibility for commercial aircraft development .

it is not clear whether regional jets will remain a focus for comac , because most forecasts do not anticipate much growth in the chinese rj market .

large regional jet .

one regional aircraft , the japanese mitsubishi regional jet ( dubbed the "mrj" ) ( a 70-90 seat plane ) , appears to be primarily aimed at the bombardier / embraer rj duopoly .

the decision by airbus and boeing to put new high efficiency engines on their planes will provide airlines with upgraded products that have a reputation for dependability .

although bombardier , comac , and irkut are building narrow - bodies that represent a more radical departure from the 737 and a320 , their programs are inherently riskier and have not yet demonstrated that the promised benefits can be delivered .

many airlines may decide to stay with aircraft that they know .

it is too soon to know whether the newcomers will succeed .

bombardier and embraer have established themselves as successful aircraft manufacturers and the chinese appear to be determined to build a civil aviation industry that competes directly with boeing and airbus .

whether the russians will succeed in building civil aircraft capable of competing in international markets remains to be seen .

for now , the real competition is between boeing and airbus .

neither company appears likely to walk away from the segment of the commercial aviation industry that accounts for almost half of revenues .

although the boeing / airbus duopoly in small commercial jets is clearly under challenge , it is not obvious that the civil aircraft market is large enough to sustain as many as five additional competitors .

nevertheless , all of the challengers to the boeing / airbus duopoly believe that their ability to compete in the narrow - body segment will be critical to the creation of successful domestic aerospace industries .

it is clear that the united states , the european union , russia , china , japan , brazil , and canada all consider the aerospace to be commercially and militarily strategic .

