since the united nations ( u.n. ) was established in 1945 , congress has demonstrated a continued interest in u.n. system development assistance .

thirty - two u.n. funds , programs , agencies , departments , and offices play a role in international development .

these entities , which are referred to by many as the u.n. development system ( unds ) , conduct development - related activities in 180 countries with expenditures estimated at $14.7 billion per year .

the united states generally supports these activities ; it is often among the top donors to unds entities and serves on various u.n. executive boards and other governance mechanisms .

the united nations estimates that in 2009 , the united states contributed $1.306 billion to u.n. development - related activities , more than any other country .

congress appropriates funds to several u.n. entities involved in development , and as such has demonstrated an ongoing interest in unds efforts , including: the role and efficiency of the u.n. system , and multilateral assistance as a whole , in international development ; the u.n. system's effectiveness in providing development assistance at the country level ; and the level of u.s. funding of such activities , most recently in light of the global financial crisis , economic recession , and calls to reduce the u.s. budget deficit .

these issues have been discussed individually , as well as in the broader context of u.n. system reform , u.s. and international efforts to achieve the millennium development goals ( mdgs ) , and u.s. foreign aid reform .

this report discusses the origins and evolving role of the unds and its perceived strengths and weaknesses .

it examines the current unds structure , including country , regional , and global activities , as well as funding levels and trends .

it also discusses congressional perspectives , obama administration policy , and current unds reform efforts .

in addition , it analyzes possible challenges and policy issues related to u.n. development assistance efforts , including: lack of system - wide data collection and sharing mechanisms — the unds lacks a central mechanism for collecting and disseminating information about its activities .

consequently , donors , host governments , and in some cases u.n. entities themselves , do not have a full picture of the range of activities occurring in the countries where they operate .

many contend that this leads to a lack of coordination and duplication within the unds .

moreover , it makes it more difficult for donors , recipient governments , and the u.n. system to identify gaps and areas for improvement .

competition among and within u.n. system entities — many in the development community debate the impact of competition among u.n. entities on overall unds efforts .

generally , experts agree that competition can benefit u.n. development activities by encouraging organizations to improve the quality of their services .

at the same time , some have questioned whether the decentralized nature of the u.n. system creates an environment where u.n. entities act in their own best interest rather than that of the host government or of the unds as a whole .

the impact of different funding flows on unds activities — non - core ( or earmarked ) funding has become the largest source of development - related expenditures in the unds .

some experts are concerned that such funding may limit the degree to which host countries are involved in the design of programs in their countries .

some also worry that an increase in non - core funding , which is often unpredictable , may impact the ability of organizations to fund their mandates and missions and could affect long - term planning .

others , however , argue that non - core funding allows donors to contribute to activities in sectors and countries that align with their development priorities and therefore encourages donor participation .

the 32 u.n. entities that comprise the unds include seven secretariat offices or departments , nine specialized agencies , nine funds and programs , five regional commissions , and two additional u.n. bodies .

 ( see appendix a for a list of these u.n. entities by type and primary funding source. ) .

the unds aims to help countries achieve social and economic progress by undertaking or supporting a range of operational and normative development activities — including technical assistance , setting and facilitating technical standards and norms , providing forums for intergovernmental cooperation and policy - sharing , advocacy and awareness raising , and research and data collection .

these activities are guided by the priorities of the national governments as well as by various international laws , norms , and standards such as treaties , u.n. resolutions and decisions , and the mdgs .

for the past several decades , the international community has repeatedly acknowledged the need to improve u.n. development efforts through enhanced coordination and substantive reform .

various expert panels , commissions , and u.n. secretaries - general have made recommendations on how to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the unds .

many of their proposed reforms have been markedly similar , calling for more integrated planning and budgeting systems , strengthening coordination at the country level , and harmonizing the activities of u.n. specialized agencies .

in 1966 , for example , the u.n. development program ( undp ) commissioned a study of the capacity of the united nations development system ( capacity study ) , which found that "at the country level capacity suffers because the u.n. development system is not presented in an integrated fashion. .

it recommended that governments and the united nations take steps to address lack of governance , coordination , interagency competition , and administrative barriers within the unds .

in 2006 , nearly 40 years later , then - u.n. secretary - general kofi annan appointed a high - level expert panel on system - wide coherence to evaluate u.n. system development activities .

the panel found that u.n. development assistance was "fragmented and weak," contributing to inefficiencies and duplication across the u.n. development system , particularly at the country level .

the similarities between the high - level panel's observations and those made decades earlier in the capacity study illustrate the continued challenges to institutional reform faced by the u.n. system and governments , including the united states , as they try to improve unds efficiency and effectiveness .

despite what many view as the slow pace of development reform , u.n. member states and the u.n. secretary - general have made incremental efforts to improve the unds .

in 1997 , for example , secretary - general annan established the u.n. development group ( undg ) to help coordinate the activities of u.n. entities that play a role in development .

in 2006 , at the recommendation of the high - level panel on system - wide coherence , u.n. member states established the delivering as one ( dao ) initiative , which aims to enhance coordination and coherence among u.n. agencies at the country level by consolidating all u.n. entities into one building with one budget and management structure .

dao , which is generally supported by the obama administration , has been implemented as a pilot program in several countries with varied degrees of progress .

in 2009 , the last year for which data are available , development - related activities represented almost half ( 41% ) of total u.n. system - wide contributions .

as illustrated in figure 1 , while a large number of u.n. entities are engaged in such activities , only a handful account for the bulk of these efforts .

in 2008 , four entities — undp , the u.n. children's fund ( unicef ) , world health organization ( who ) , and food and agriculture organization ( fao ) — accounted for more than two - thirds of all development - related activities .

undp alone accounted for 37% of all u.n. development expenditures .

unds activities focus on a number of sectors including health , gender , science and technology , and social development .

as demonstrated in figure 2 , unds's areas of focus have gradually shifted during the last two decades .

since 1993 , activities focused on health have declined from 31% to 25% , while those focusing on agriculture have decreased from 14% to 6% .

at the same time , activities related to gender and social development have each increased by 6% .

the unds is funded by donor contributions to individual u.n. entities .

donors include governments , intergovernmental organizations , ngos , private organizations , and individuals , among others .

total government contributions to u.n. system development - related activities in 2009 was $14.2 billion .

approximately one - third of these contributions were in the form of core resources .

the top five government donors were the united states ( $1.3 billion ) ; japan ( $804.6 million ) ; the netherlands ( $796.9 million ) ; the united kingdom ( $743.9 ) ; and norway ( $695.2 million ) .

funding mechanisms for unds entities vary depending on their governance and structure .

for instance , u.n. funds and programs such as undp , unfpa , unicef , and un women rely primarily on voluntary contributions from donors .

payment of contributions are up to each individual country ; no country is legally obligated to contribute to these programs .

u.n. specialized agencies , such as ilo , who , wfp , and fao , however , rely on assessed contributions to their regular budgets .

payment of such contributions is one of the legal obligations accepted by a country when it joins an organization .

assessed contributions provide entities with a regular source of income for staffing and implementation of authorized programs .

the obama administration has expressed ongoing support for unds activities and multilateral cooperation as a whole .

in the state department's 2010 quadrennial diplomacy and development review , the administration stated that u.n. agencies and programs are "particularly critical [development] partners" with the united states , and emphasized that given the magnitude of u.s. assistance to multilateral organizations , the u.s. government must work to "improve operational cooperation with u.n. agencies" in new york and in the field , particularly in situations that involve complex emergencies that are u.s. priorities such as in afghanistan , haiti , pakistan , and sudan .

when discussing u.n. system development activities in u.n. forums , administration officials have consistently raised the importance of: achieving overall coherence at the country level , which includes enhancing and recognizing the important role of the u.n. resident coordinator , strengthening the individual capacities and coordination of u.n. entities , and supporting the concept of country ownership in the development process ; improving transparency and accountability through enhanced oversight , such as results - based budgeting and greater access to audit information to ensure that expenditures are accounted for and that programs demonstrate effective results ; and improving evaluation mechanisms to better demonstrate the effectiveness of unds activities to donors and host countries , and to provide mechanisms for organizations to measure their effectiveness .

the administration has also emphasized that u.n. entities need to continually update management practices to keep up with emerging development institutions that are "more nimble , transparent , and accountable. .

it generally supports u.n. system - wide coherence efforts , including the delivering as one ( dao ) pilot program , a country - specific pilot program that is part of broader u.n. member state efforts to improve u.n. system - wide coherence .

notably , the administration has emphasized many of these same issues in efforts to improve u.s. bilateral development agencies such as the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) .

each year , congress authorizes or appropriates u.s. contributions to unds entities and often seeks to influence u.s. policy within the united nations to further u.s. development and foreign policy objectives .

examples of legislative tools that members may use to seek influence or direct u.s. participation in the u.n. system include: passing "sense of the congress" resolutions ; confirming u.s. nominees for u.n. posts ; conducting oversight of u.n. programs or u.s. administration policies through hearings and investigations ; and funding , withholding , or placing limits on u.s. contributions to u.n. entities .

during the 111 th and 112 th congresses , members have introduced legislation linking u.n. system reforms to u.s. contributions , held hearings on issues related to u.n. system efficiency and effectiveness , and issued committee reports addressing aspects of u.n. system transparency , particularly related to undp .

u.s. contributions to unds entities are generally made in two ways: ( 1 ) assessed contributions , which are required dues at percentage levels established by the membership of each organization ; and ( 2 ) voluntary contributions , which finance special programs and offices created by the u.n. system and represent more than half of the total aggregated funds received by the u.n. system .

u.s. assessed contributions are funded through the department of state budget .

congress authorizes these funds in foreign relations authorization acts and appropriates the money in department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations legislation .

the regular assessed budgets of u.n. system organizations , including many in the unds , are included in the contributions to international organizations ( cio ) account .

u.s. voluntary contributions to unds entities are financed through the foreign assistance authorization and foreign operations appropriations legislation , primarily through the international organizations and programs ( io&p ) account .

io&p does not include voluntary contributions to the u.n. high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) , which has a different authorization and is funded through the migration and refugee assistance account .

the united nations estimates that in 2009 , the united states made $1.306 billion in development - related contributions to the u.n. system , more than any other country .

as shown in table 1 , in fy2010 the united states contributed over $450 million in resources to the four unds entities that account for over two - thirds of unds activities in 2008 — undp , unicef , fao , and who .

the following sections highlight two issues that might be of particular significance to the 112 th congress as it considers u.s. participation in and funding of the unds: ( 1 ) the impact of limiting u.s. contributions to u.n. system entities , and ( 2 ) the benefits and drawbacks of multilateral versus bilateral assistance .

over the years , u.n. member states , including the united states , have repeatedly recognized the need to improve the unds .

accordingly , they have implemented reforms that have generally been undertaken every 10 to 15 years , usually with mixed results .

during the last decade , some of these reform efforts , such as the establishment of the undg to coordinate unds activities , have demonstrated progress .

generally , however , experts agree that additional changes , some of which are discussed below , are needed for the current system to operate as efficiently and effectively as possible .

this section provides examples of two recent reform - related frameworks and activities that members of the 112 th congress may wish to take into account when considering u.s. funding of and participation in the unds: the general assembly's comprehensive policy reviews , which provide a foundation for unds reform efforts ; and the delivering as one ( dao ) initiative , a country - specific pilot program that is part of broader member state efforts to improve u.n. system - wide coherence .

as the 112 th congress considers u.s. participation in and contributions to the unds , it may take the following challenges and policy issues into account .

the 112 th congress may debate aspects of u.s. participation in and funding of the unds .

as highlighted in this report , issues range from the effectiveness of ongoing unds reform efforts , to the role of the u.n. system in the global development landscape , and to improving unds coordination and accountability at the country , regional , and global level .

as congress considers these challenges , other overarching issues may arise .

in recent years , many foreign aid experts have expressed concern regarding ongoing inefficiencies related to the overall organization , effectiveness , and management of u.s. foreign aid .

in particular , some have suggested that the united states should more effectively leverage u.s. funding for multilateral programs and institutions to influence country or program directions .

congress may wish to view u.s. participation in the unds in this broader context .

experts suggest that any debates regarding unds enhancement or reform should be viewed in the broader global development context .

as previously discussed , the rise of middle - income economies like brazil , india , and china as development donors and the increased role of multilateral donors such as the european union and world bank in development activities has altered the development landscape .

members of congress may also wish to consider the unds in the context of the g - 20's rise as the premier forum for international economic cooperation .

although its effectiveness moving forward is still being debated , the g - 20's increasing influence raises questions about the u.n. system's future role in development and , more broadly , global governance .

some experts have emphasized that u.n. development efforts may be undermined by a lack of focus .

for example , there are over 9,000 mandates in the u.n. system ; many argue that this makes it difficult for member states , and the u.n. system itself , to prioritize its development activities .

some have proposed that the unds tighten its focus by concentrating its activities on fragile states or countries emerging from conflict .

others , however , argue that focusing only on specific countries or situations undermines the united nations' universality .

to improve u.n. system development activities , some experts have recommended merging , eliminating , or creating new u.n. entities to streamline and unify u.n. system development activities .

others have suggested consolidating u.n. development activities under one central entity .

most agree , however , that in the near future u.n. member states are unlikely to implement the structural and organizational changes necessary for comprehensive and far - reaching reform .

this is due primarily to the decentralized nature of the u.n. system ; the autonomy of u.n. agencies , funds , and programs ; and disagreements among the united nations' 193 member states on the mandate and role of the u.n. development system .

with this in mind , congress may consider monitoring ongoing and incremental unds reform activities , including the comprehensive policy review ( cpr ) resolutions adopted by the general assembly and the implementation of the delivering as one ( dao ) initiative .

the future of dao , in particular , is uncertain .

although many u.n. member states , including the united states , appear to support the initiative , it is unclear whether it will continue beyond the current pilot phase .

more broadly , congress may wish to stay apprised of growing policy debates on the future of the u.n. development system in international development efforts , particularly in light of the global economic crisis , concerns about u.n. system effectiveness , and the emergence of new bilateral and multilateral donors .

in the united states , the role of the united nations in u.s. foreign assistance will likely remain a point of continuous debate for policymakers as they aim to balance domestic concerns and the recession on the one hand , with key foreign policy and development priorities on the other .

appendix a. u.n. development group membership appendix b. abbreviations appendix c. top recipients of unds funding , 200 .

