both house and senate bills competing to become the national defense authorization act for fy2012 contain a subtitle addressing issues related to detainees at the u.s .

naval station at guantanamo bay , cuba ( "guantanamo" ) , and more broadly , hostilities against al qaeda and other entities .

h.r .

1540 , which passed the house of representatives may 26 , 2011 , addresses "counterterrorism" matters in subtitle d of title x .

a companion bill in the senate , s. 1253 , was reported out of the armed services committee june 22 , 2011 , and addresses "detainee matters" in subtitle d of title x .

a second companion bill , s. 1867 , was reported out of the armed services committee on november 15 , 2011 , in an effort to resolve disputes over the detainee provisions that had kept s. 1253 from reaching the floor .

on december 1 , 2011 , the senate passed s. 1867 , as amended .

the senate subsequently passed h.r .

1540 , with the senate bill's provisions inserted in place of the original language .

differences between the house - and senate - passed versions of the bill will be considered in conference .

the white house has been critical of aspects of each bill , and has threatened to veto any legislation "that challenges or constrains the president's critical authorities to collect intelligence , incapacitate dangerous terrorists , and protect the nation. .

in particular , the administration has expressed strong opposition to any provision which mandates the military detention of certain categories of persons , limits executive discretion as to the appropriate forum to prosecute terrorist suspects , or constrains its ability to transfer detainees from u.s. custody .

this report offers a brief background of the salient issues , provides a section - by - section analysis of the relevant subdivisions of the house - and senate - passed bills , and compares the bills' approach with respect to the major issues they address .

at the heart of both houses' detainee provisions appears to be an effort to confirm or , as some observers view it , expand the detention authority congress implicitly granted the president in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

in enacting the authorization for use of military force ( p.l .

107-40 ) ( "aumf" ) , congress authorized the president to use all necessary and appropriate force against those nations , organizations , or persons he determines planned , authorized , committed , or aided the terrorist attacks that occurred on september 11 , 2001 , or harbored such organizations or persons , in order to prevent any future acts of international terrorism against the united states by such nations , organizations or persons .

many persons captured during subsequent u.s operations in afghanistan and elsewhere have been placed in preventive detention to stop them from participating in hostilities or terrorist activities .

a few have been tried by military commission for crimes associated with those hostilities , while many others have been tried for terrorism - related crimes in civilian court .

in 2004 case of hamdi v. rumsfeld , a majority of the supreme court recognized that , as a necessary incident to the aumf , the president may detain enemy combatants captured while fighting u.s. forces in afghanistan ( including u.s. citizens ) , and potentially hold such persons for the duration of hostilities .

the hamdi decision left to lower courts the task of defining the scope of detention authority conferred by the aumf , including whether the authorization permits the detention of members or supporters of al qaeda , the taliban , or other groups who are apprehended away from the afghan zone of combat .

most subsequent judicial activity concerning u.s. detention policy has occurred in the d.c .

circuit , where courts have considered numerous habeas petitions by guantanamo detainees challenging the legality of their detention .

rulings by the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit have generally been favorable to the legal position advanced by the government regarding the scope of its detention authority under the aumf .

it remains to be seen whether any of these rulings will be reviewed by the supreme court and , if such review occurs , whether the court will endorse or reject the circuit court's understanding of the aumf and the scope of detention authority it confers .

thus far , congress has not enacted any legislation to directly assist the courts in defining the scope of detention authority granted by the aumf .

the d.c .

circuit has , however , looked to post - aumf legislation concerning the jurisdiction of military commissions for guidance as to the categories of persons who may be subject to military detention .

in 2010 , the circuit court concluded that the government had authority under the aumf to detain militarily persons subject to the jurisdiction of military commissions established pursuant to the military commissions acts of 2006 and 2009 ( "mca" ) ; namely , those who are "part of forces associated with al qaeda or the taliban," along with "those who purposefully and materially support such forces in hostilities against u.s .

coalition partners. .

most of the persons detained under the authority of the aumf are combatants picked up during military operations in afghanistan or arrested elsewhere abroad .

many of these individuals were transported to the u.s .

naval station at guantanamo bay , cuba for detention in military custody , although a few "high value" guantanamo detainees were initially held at other locations by the cia for interrogation .

a u.s. - operated facility in parwan , afghanistan , holds an even larger number of detainees , most of whom were captured in afghanistan .

neither of these two detention facilities , however , appears to be considered a viable option for future captures that take place outside of afghanistan ; the current practice in such cases seems to be ad hoc .

in almost all instances , persons arrested in the united states who have been suspected of terrorist activity on behalf of al qaeda or affiliated groups have not been placed in military detention pursuant to the aumf , but instead have been prosecuted in federal court for criminal activity .

there were two instances in which the bush administration transferred persons arrested in the united states into military custody and designated them as "enemy combatants" — one a u.s. citizen initially arrested by law enforcement authorities upon his return from afghanistan , where he had allegedly been part of taliban forces , and the other a legal permanent resident alien who had never been to the afghanistan zone of combat , but was alleged to have been an al qaeda "sleeper agent" who was planning to engage in terrorist activities on behalf of the organization within the united states .

however , in both cases , the detainees were ultimately transferred back to the custody of civil authorities and tried in federal court when it appeared that the supreme court would hear their habeas petitions , leaving the legal validity of their prior military detention uncertain .

over the years , there has been considerable controversy over the appropriate mechanism for dealing with suspected belligerents and terrorists who come into u.s. custody .

some have argued that all suspected terrorists ( or at least those believed to be affiliated with al qaeda ) should be held in military custody and be tried for any crimes they have committed before a military commission .

others have argued that such persons should be transferred to civilian law enforcement authorities and be tried for any criminal offenses before an article iii court .

still others argue that neither a military nor traditional law enforcement model should serve as the exclusive method for handling suspected terrorists and belligerents who come into u.s. custody .

they urge that such decisions are best left to executive discretion for a decision based on the distinct facts of each case .

disagreement over the appropriate model to employ has become a regular occurrence in high - profile cases involving suspected terrorists .

in part as a response to the obama administration's plans to transfer certain guantanamo detainees , including khalid sheik mohammed , into the united states to face charges in an article iii court for their alleged role in the 9 / 11 attacks , congress passed funding restrictions that effectively barred the transfer of any guantanamo detainee into the united states for the 2011 fiscal year , even for purposes of criminal prosecution .

the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2012 ( "2012 minibus," p.l .

112-55 ) , extends this prohibition through the entirety of fy2012 .

additionally , several other legislative measures limiting executive discretion as to the transfer of guantanamo detainees were set to expire at the end of the 2011 fiscal year , but were extended beyond fy2011 via a series of continuing resolutions .

the blanket restriction on transfers into the united states effectively makes trial by military commission the only viable option for prosecuting guantanamo detainees for the foreseeable future , as no civilian court operates at guantanamo .

considerable attention has also been drawn to other instances when terrorist suspects have been apprehended by u.s. military or civilian law enforcement authorities .

on july 5 , 2011 , somali national ahmed abdulkadir warsame was brought to the united states to face terrorism - related charges in a civilian court , after having reportedly been detained on a u.s. naval vessel for two months for interrogation by military and intelligence personnel .

some have argued that warsame should have remained in military custody abroad , while others argue that he should have been transferred to civilian custody immediately .

controversy also arose regarding the arrest by u.s. civil authorities of umar farouk abdulmutallab and faisal shahzad , who some argued should have been detained and interrogated by military authorities and tried by military commission .

the administration incurred additional criticism for bringing civilian charges against two iraqi refugees arrested in the united states on suspicion of having participated in insurgent activities in iraq against u.s. military forces , although the war in iraq has generally been treated as separate from hostilities authorized by the aumf , at least insofar as detainee operations are concerned .

it appears likely that the 2012 ndaa will contain provisions addressing the disposition of persons apprehended by u.s. authorities in the conflict with al qaeda .

h.r .

1540 , as passed by the house of representatives on may 26 , 2011 , contains provisions that would reaffirm the conflict and define its scope ; impose specific restrictions on the transfer of any non - citizen wartime detainee into the united states ; establish stringent conditions upon the transfer or release of any guantanamo detainee to a foreign country ; and require that any foreign national who has engaged in an offense related to a terrorist attack be tried by military commission if jurisdiction exists .

shortly before h.r .

1540 was approved by the house , the white house issued a statement regarding its provisions .

while supportive of most aspects of the bill , the white house was highly critical of those provisions concerning detainee matters .

it threatened to veto any version of the bill that contains provisions that the administration views as challenging critical executive branch authority .

s. 1253 , as reported out of the senate armed services committee on june 22 , 2011 , would have authorized the detention of certain categories of persons and require the military detention of a subset of them ; regulated status determinations for persons held pursuant to the aumf , regardless of location ; regulated periodic review proceedings concerning the continued detention of guantanamo detainees ; and made permanent the current funding restrictions that relate to guantanamo detainee transfers to foreign countries .

after the white house and the chairs of the senate judiciary and intelligence committees objected to some of these provisions , senate majority leader reid delayed consideration of the bill pending a resolution of the detainee issues .

the senate armed services committee reported a new version of the bill , s. 1867 , on november 15 , 2011 , with revised detainee provisions .

the department of defense has also objected to the revised detainee provisions , and the white house reiterated its threat to veto any final bill that challenges or constrains the president's critical authorities with respect to handling terrorist suspects .

on december 1 , 2011 , the senate passed s. 1867 , with an amendment to clarify that a provision which affirmed the authority to detain persons captured in the conflict with al qaeda did not modify any existing authorities relating to the power to detain u.s. citizens or lawful resident aliens , or any other persons captured or arrested in the united states .

the senate thereafter amended h.r .

1540 to replace the original language with the provisions of s. 1867 .

differences between the house - and senate - passed versions of the bill will be considered in conference .

the following sections address the current status of u.s. policies and legal authorities with respect to detainee matters that are addressed in the house or senate versions of the fy2012 ndaa .

the first section addresses the scope of detention authority under the aumf as the administration views it and as it has developed in court cases .

the following section provides an overview of current practice regarding initial status determinations and periodic reviews of detainee cases .

the background ends with a discussion of recidivism concerns underlying current restrictions on transferring detainees from guantanamo .

the following sections summarize subtitle d of title x of h.r .

1540 , as passed by the house of representatives on may 26 , 2011 .

the senate bill s. 1867 covers "detainee matters" in subtitle d of title x .

the provisions are similar to the detainee provisions in s. 1253 , as reported out of the armed services committee in june , but some language was revised to address administration concerns .

s. 1867 was passed by the senate , as amended , on december 1 , 2011 .

a single amendment was made to the detainee provisions of the bill as had been reported out of committee , which clarified that the bill's affirmation of the legal authority to detain persons captured in the conflict with al qaeda did not modify any existing authorities relating to the power to detain u.s. citizens or lawful resident aliens , or any other persons captured or arrested in the united states .

the senate subsequently passed h.r .

1540 , with its original provisions stripped and replaced with the language of senate - passed s. 1867 .

section 1031 affirms that the aumf includes authority for the u.s. armed forces to detain "covered persons" as unprivileged enemy belligerents pending disposition under the law of war .

combining the express language of the aumf with the language the obama administration has employed to describe its detention authority in habeas litigation involving guantanamo detainees .

the bill defines "covered persons" in section 1031 ( b ) : ( b ) covered persons - a covered person under this section is any person as follows: ( 1 ) a person who planned , authorized , committed , or aided the terrorist attacks that occurred on september 11 , 2001 , or harbored those responsible for those attacks .

 ( 2 ) a person who was a part of or substantially supported al - qaeda , the taliban , or associated forces that are engaged in hostilities against the united states or its coalition partners , including any person who has committed a belligerent act or has directly supported such hostilities in aid of such enemy forces .

the earlier version of section 1031 contained in s. 1253 had included similar language defining "covered persons," but rather than "affirming" detention authority under the aumf , it directly authorized the armed forces to detain covered persons "captured in the course of hostilities authorized by the [aumf] as unprivileged enemy belligerents," and permitted their detention until "the end of hostilities against the nations , organizations , and persons subject to the [aumf]. .

the white house reportedly objected to the language "captured in the course of hostilities" because it could be read to limit detentions to those captured during military operations and not persons who are arrested under other circumstances .

section 1031 of senate - passed s. 1867 states that dispositions under the law of war "may include" several options: detention without trial until the end of hostilities authorized by the 2001 aumf ; trial by military commission ; transfer for trial by another court or tribunal with jurisdiction ; or transfer to the custody or control of a foreign country or foreign entity .

the provision uses the language "may include" with respect to the above options , which could be read as permission to add other options or negate any of the listed options .

section 1031 does not expressly clarify whether u.s. citizens or lawful resident aliens may be determined to be "covered persons. .

the corresponding provision of s. 1253 would have provided that such persons could be detained on the basis of conduct occurring within the united states only to the extent permitted by the constitution .

s. 1867 provides that nothing in section 1031 "is intended to limit or expand the authority of the president or the scope of the authorization for the use of military force. .

while s. 1253 seemed to endorse the detention of u.s. citizens and resident aliens ( to the extent such detention is constitutionally permissible ) , the revised provision of s. 1867 , as reported out of committee seemed tacitly to leave the application of the aumf to u.s. persons , in particular those arrested in the united states , in its currently unsettled position .

by removing the reference to "captured during the course of hostilities" and disavowing any intent to modify the detention authority exercised under the aumf , the committee - modified version appeared to be aimed at reinforcing the executive branch's view of its detention authority .

the potential application of section 1031 to u.s. citizens and other persons within the united states was the subject of significant floor debate .

an amendment that would have expressly barred u.s. citizens from long - term military detention on account of enemy belligerent status was considered and rejected .

ultimately , an amendment was adopted that added the following proviso to section 1031: nothing in this section shall be construed to affect existing law or authority relating to the detention of united states citizens or lawful resident aliens of the united states or any other persons who are captured or arrested in the united states .

this language is intended to make clear that section 1031 neither expands nor limits the executive's existing authority to detain u.s. citizens and resident aliens , as well as other persons captured in the united states .

such detentions have been rare and subject to substantial controversy , without achieving definitive resolution in the courts .

while the supreme court in hamdi recognized that persons captured while fighting u.s. forces in afghanistan could be militarily detained in the conflict with al qaeda potentially for the duration of hostilities , regardless of their citizenship , the circumstances in which persons captured in other locations may be subject to preventive military detention has not been definitively adjudicated .

section 1031 does not attempt to clarify the circumstances in which a u.s. citizen , resident alien , or person captured with the united states may be held as an enemy belligerent in the conflict with al qaeda .

as discussed supra , the circumstances in which a u.s. citizen or other person captured or arrested in the united states may be detained under the aumf have not been definitively adjudicated .

in restating the definitional standard the administration uses to characterize its detention authority , section 1031 does not attempt to provide additional clarification for terms such as "substantial support," "associated forces," or "hostilities. .

for that reason , it may be subject to an evolving interpretation that effectively permits a broadening of the scope of the conflict .

the revised provision in s. 1867 , however , does require the secretary of defense to brief congress on how the provision applies , including with respect to "organizations , entities , and individuals considered to be 'covered persons' under section 1031 ( b ) . .

this language may be read to require an ongoing accounting of which entities are considered to be "associated forces" or a description of what constitutes "substantial support. .

the administration has not voiced specific objections with respect to any of the language in revised section 1031 , although it believes codification of existing authorities is "unnecessary and poses some risk. .

it cautions that congress must be careful not to open a whole new series of legal questions that will distract from our efforts to protect the country .

while the current language minimizes many of those risks , future legislative action must ensure that the codification in statute of express military detention authority does not carry unintended consequences that could compromise our ability to protect the american people .

the provision that appears to have evoked the most controversy , section 1032 , generally requires at least temporary military custody for certain al qaeda members and members of "associated forces" who are taken into the custody or brought under the control of the united states as of 60 days from the date of enactment .

this provision does not apply to all persons who are permitted to be detained as "covered persons" under section 1031 , but only those captured during the course of hostilities who meet certain criteria .

it expressly excludes u.s. citizens from its purview , although it applies to u.s. resident aliens ( albeit with the caveat that if detention is based on conduct taking place within the united states , such detention is mandated only "to the extent permitted by the constitution of the united states" ) .

the mandatory detention requirement applies to covered persons captured in the course of hostilities authorized by the aumf , defining "covered persons" for its purposes as a person subject to detention under section 1031 who is determined ( a ) to be a member of , or part of , al - qaeda or an associated force that acts in coordination with or pursuant to the direction al al - qaeda ; and ( b ) to have participated in the course of planning or carrying out an attack or attempted attack against the united states or its coalition partners .

persons described above are required to be detained by military authorities pending "disposition under the law of war," as defined in section 1031 , except that additional requirements must first be met before the detainee can be transferred to another country .

accordingly , such persons may ( 1 ) be held in military detention until hostilities under the aumf are terminated ; ( 2 ) be tried before a military commission ; ( 3 ) be transferred from military custody for trial by another court having jurisdiction ; or ( 4 ) be transferred to the custody of a foreign government or entity , provided the transfer requirements establish ed in section 1033 of the bill , discussed infra , are satisfied .

section 1032 of s. 1867 differs from s. 1253 by applying to members of "associated forces" rather than "affiliated entities," adopting the language that has generally been used to define detention authority in court .

the provision further specifies that covered forces are ones that "act in coordination with or pursuant to the direction of al - qaeda. .

the omission of any express reference to the taliban in section 1032 seems to indicate that it need not be treated as a force associated with al qaeda unless its actions are sufficiently coordinated or directed by al qaeda .

a question might arise if an associated force acts largely independently but coordinates some activity with al qaeda .

would all of its members be subject to mandatory detention , or only those involved in units which coordinate their activities with al qaeda ? .

perhaps this determination can be made with reference to the specific attack the individual is determined to have attempted , planned , or engaged in .

under this reading , hypothetically , captured taliban insurgents suspected of involvement in efforts to dislodge local government officials could be turned over to the afghan government without undergoing the certification process in section 1033 ( so long as no al qaeda cooperation is suspected ) , while a taliban member of a unit engaged with al qaeda in planning an attack would be subject to mandatory detention and restrictions on transfer .

in any event , section 1032 would not apply to a "lone wolf" terrorist with no ties to al qaeda or any associated force .

what conduct constitutes an "attack ... against the united states coalition partners" is not further clarified .

it could be read to cover only the kinds of attacks carried out in a military theater of operations against armed forces , where the law of war is generally understood to permit the military detention of such persons .

this reading may be bolstered by the limitation of the provision to persons who are "captured during the course of hostilities. .

on the other hand , the term "attack" might be interpreted to apply more broadly to cover terrorist acts directed against civilian targets elsewhere , although the application of the law of war to such circumstances is much less certain .

it is unclear whether an effort to bring down a civilian airliner , for example , necessarily constitutes an "attack against the united states. .

the reference to the possibility that lawful resident aliens may be detained based on conduct taking place in the united states supports the broader reading of "attack. .

because the mandatory detention requirement is related to hostilities authorized by the aumf , it would not seem to apply to insurgents who carry out attacks against u.s. or coalition targets in iraq ( though it might be argued that the provision would apply to any perpetrators believed to be members of al qaeda or an associated force ) .

s. 1867 includes a new requirement for the president to submit to congress , within 60 days of enactment , a report describing the procedures for implementing the provision .

the submission is to include procedures for designating who is authorized to determine who is a covered person for the purpose of the provision and the process by which such determinations are to be made .

other procedures to be described include those for preventing the interruption of ongoing surveillance or intelligence gathering with regard to persons not already in the custody or control of the united states ; those for precluding implementation of the determination process until after any ongoing interrogation session is completed and for precluding the interruption of an interrogation session ; precluding application of the provision in the case of an individual who remains in the custody of a third country , where u.s. government officials are permitted access to the individual ; and providing for an exercise of waiver authority to accomplish the transfer of a covered person from a third country , if necessary .

it is not clear how these procedures will interact with those contemplated under section 1036 ( discussed more fully infra ) , which requires dod to submit to congress procedures for status determinations for persons detained pursuant to the aumf for purposes of section 1031 .

if the procedures required by section 1036 are meant to determine whether a person is detainable under the aumf as an initial matter ( as opposed to determining the appropriate disposition under the law of war ) , then it would seem necessary for that determination to take place prior to the procedures for determining whether a person's detention is required under section 1032 .

the bill does not appear to preclude the implementation of more than one process for making the determination that someone qualifies as a covered person subject to mandatory military detention , perhaps depending on whether the person is initially in military custody or the custody of law enforcement officials .

nor does it seem to preclude the use of a single procedure to determine whether a person is covered by section 1032 and the appropriate disposition under the law of war , which could obviate the necessity for transferring a person to military custody .

whatever process is adopted to make any of these determinations would likely implicate constitutional due process requirements , at least if the detainee is located within the united states , and would likely be subject to challenge by means of habeas corpus .

section 1032 does not prevent article iii trials of covered persons , although any time spent in military custody could complicate the prosecution of a covered defendant .

the obama administration is opposed to this provision , even as the language has been revised from s. 1253 .

secretary of defense leon panetta has expressed doubt that the provision offers any advantage to dod or to u.s. national security interests , predicting instead that it would restrain the executive branch's option to make effective use of all available counterterrorism tools .

moreover , secretary panetta objects to the provision's failure to clearly limit its scope to persons captured abroad ; complains that the qualification to "associated force" ( limiting mandatory detention to members of such groups that coordinate with or act under the direction of al qaeda ) unnecessarily complicates the department's ability to interpret and implement the restriction ; and views as inappropriate the possible extension of the transfer certification requirements of section 1033 to those covered by section 1032 who are not currently detained at guantanamo .

the white house strongly objects to section 1032 , calling it an "unnecessary , untested , and legally controversial restriction of the president's authority to defend the nation from terrorist threats" that would "tie the hands of our intelligence and law enforcement professionals. .

the administration expresses doubt that the committee revisions to the provision , in particular the procedural requirements to be designed to prevent the interruption of interrogations and other enhancements , will correct the fundamental problems it perceives: rather than fix the fundamental defects of section 1032 or remove it entirely , as the administration and the chairs of several congressional committees with jurisdiction over these matters have advocated , the revised text merely directs the president to develop procedures to ensure the myriad problems that would result from such a requirement do not come to fruition .

requiring the president to devise such procedures concedes the substantial risks created by mandating military custody , without providing an adequate solution .

as a result , it is likely that implementing such procedures would inject significant confusion into counterterrorism operations .

section 1033 continues for the fiscal year the restriction upon the use of military funds to transfer or release guantanamo detainees to foreign countries or entities , except when certain criteria are met .

these restrictions are largely similar to those contained in the 2011 ndaa and caa , which were initially set to expire at the end of the 2011 fiscal year , as well as those found in h.r .

1540 , which would only apply to funds authorized for fy2012 .

section 1033 would generally prohibit the expenditure of dod funds for any detainee transfer from guantanamo to a foreign country unless congress has received , not later than 30 days prior to the transfer , a certification by the secretary of defense , with the concurrence of the secretary of state and in consultation with the director of national intelligence , that the destination country or entity is not a designated state sponsor of terrorism or a designated foreign terrorist organization ; maintains control over any detention facility where the individual is to be housed ; is not facing a substantial threat to its ability to exercise control over the individual ; has taken or agreed to take effective measures to avert any threat the individual may pose to the united states , its citizens , or its allies ; has taken or agreed to take such actions as the secretary of defense determines are necessary to prevent the person from engaging in terrorism ; has agreed to share with the united states any information related to the individual or his associates , and any information relevant to the security of the united states , its citizens , or its allies .

these certification requirements largely mirror those found in the 2011 ndaa and caa ( though the interagency consultation requirements occurring prior to certification are different ) .

unlike h.r .

1540 , the senate bill would not also require the secretary of defense to certify that the receiving foreign entity agreed to permit u.s. authorities to have access to the transferred individual .

the certification is not necessary in the case of detainees who are being transferred pursuant to either a pretrial agreement entered in a military commission case prior to the date of enactment or a court order .

section 1033 also generally prohibits transfers from guantanamo to any foreign country or entity if there is a confirmed case of a detainee previously transferred to that place or entity who has subsequently engaged in any terrorist activity .

the prohibition does not apply in the case of detainees who are being transferred pursuant to either a pretrial agreement in a military commission case , if entered prior to the enactment , or a court order .

both the certification requirement and the bar related to recidivism may be waived if the secretary of defense determines , with the concurrence of the secretary of state and in consultation with the director of national intelligence , that alternative actions will be taken to address the underlying purpose of the measures , or that , in the event that agreements or actions on the part of the receiving state or entity cannot be certified as eliminating all relevant risks , that alternative actions will substantially mitigate the risk .

in the case of a waiver of the provision barring transfers anywhere recidivism has occurred , the secretary may issue a waiver if alternative actions will be taken to mitigate the risk of recidivism .

any transfer pursuant to a waiver must be determined to be in the national security interests of the united states .

not later than 30 days prior to the transfer , copies of the determination and the waiver must be submitted to the congressional defense committees , together with a statement of the basis for regarding the transfer as serving national security interests ; an explanation why it is not possible to certify that all risks have been eliminated ( if applicable ) ; and a summary of the alternative actions contemplated .

like the house - passed version of the 2012 ndaa , the senate bill's transfer restrictions generally apply to any "individual detained at guantanamo" other than a u.s. citizen or servicemember ( or detainees transferred pursuant to a court order or a military commission pretrial agreement ) .

this term appears broad enough in scope to cover foreign refugees brought to the migrant operations center at guantanamo after being interdicted at sea while attempting to reach u.s. shores .

whether section 1033 would be interpreted so broadly as to cover such persons remains to be seen .

the "requirements" of the section also apply to persons subject to mandatory detention under section 1032 , but not to all "covered persons" within the meaning of section 1031 ( who are not detained at guantanamo ) .

as previously discussed , the white house has expressed strong disapproval of the transfer restriction provisions contained in the house - passed version of the 2012 ndaa .

the department of defense likewise disapproves of the senate provision , although the secretary expressed gratitude that the provision was not made permanent ( as in s. 1253 ) .

section 1034 imposes a prohibition on the use of dod funds to construct or modify any facility in the united states or its territories or possessions to house any individual detained at guantanamo bay , as defined in the previous section , for the purposes of detention or imprisonment in the custody or under the control of the department of defense unless authorized by congress .

similar restrictions were contained in the 2011 ndaa and caa , and are also found in the 2012 minibus .

the funding limitation contained in section 1034 is also similar to one found in h.r .

1540 , including its limitation to the 2012 fiscal year ( s. 1253 would have made the restriction permanent ) .

as had been the case with similar restrictions enacted for prior fiscal years , the white house objects to the restrictions contained in section 1034 .

unlike most recent appropriations and defense authorization enactments ( as well as the house - passed version of the 2012 ndaa ) , the senate bill does not contain a provision prohibiting the transfer or release of guantanamo detainees into the united states .

the bill permits the transfer of guantanamo detainees into the custody of civilian law enforcement for purposes of criminal prosecution .

moreover , the bill does not bar executive authorities from releasing into the united states those guantanamo detainees who have been cleared of enemy belligerency status by administrative authorities or a reviewing court .

thus , the only bar to detainee transfers to the united states in the senate bill appears to be transfers from guantanamo for continued military detention , at least where facilities would need to be built or modified .

section 1035 addresses executive order 13567 , pertaining to detention reviews at guantanamo .

unlike h.r .

1540 , the senate bill does not seek to replace the periodic review process established by the order , but instead seeks to clarify aspects of the process .

section 1035 requires the secretary of defense , within 180 days of enactment , to submit to the congressional defense and intelligence committees a report setting forth procedures to be employed by review panels established pursuant to executive order 13567 .

the provision requires that these new review procedures clarify that the purpose of the periodic review is not to review the legality of any particular detention , but to determine whether a detainee poses a continuing threat to u.s. security ; clarify that the secretary of defense , after considering the results and recommendations of a reviewing panel , is responsible for any final decision to release or transfer a detainee and is not bound by the recommendations ; and ensure that appropriate consideration is given to a list of factors , including the likelihood the detainee will resume terrorist activity or rejoin a group engaged in hostilities against the united states ; the likelihood of family , tribal , or government rehabilitation or support for the detainee ; the likelihood the detainee may be subject to trial by military commission ; and any law enforcement interest in the detainee .

the administration objects to this provision because it shifts to the defense department the responsibility for what had been a collaborative , interagency review process .

section 1036 requires the secretary of defense , within 90 days of enactment , to submit a report to congressional defense and intelligence committees explaining the procedures for determining the status of persons detained under the aumf for purposes of section 1031 of the senate bill .

it is not clear whether the status determination "for purposes of section 1031" means determination of whether a detained individual is a "covered person" subject to section 1031 , or whether it is meant to refer to the disposition of such a person under the law of war , or to both .

in the case of any unprivileged enemy belligerent who will be held in long - term detention , clause ( b ) of the provision requires the procedures to provide the following elements: ( 1 ) a military judge shall preside at proceedings for the determination of status of an unprivileged enemy belligerent .

 ( 2 ) an unprivileged enemy belligerent may , at the election of the belligerent , be represented by military counsel at proceedings for the determination of status of the belligerent .

the requirements of this provision apply without regard to the location where the detainee is held .

it would appear to afford detainees held by the united states in afghanistan greater privileges during status determination hearings than they currently possess ( at least in circumstances where the united states intends to place them in "long - term detention," in which case the requirements of section 1036 ( b ) are triggered ) .

it is not clear what effect this provision would have upon detainees currently held at guantanamo , who were designated as "enemy combatants" subject to military detention using a status review process that did not fully comply with the requirements of section 1036 ( b ) .

further , it is unclear how the requirements of section 1036 would affect habeas challenges by guantanamo detainees .

it is possible , for example , that a habeas judge would stay a case while a guantanamo detainee sought to have a new status determination using the process established under section 1036 .

the implications that section 1036 would have upon persons held at guantanamo may depend upon whether the provision is interpreted to apply to all detainees in u.s. custody who are designated for long - term detention under the aumf ( possibly as a supplement to the periodic review process described under section 1035 ) , or only to persons who are subject to detention after the senate bill's enactment .

the provision does not explain , in the case of new captures , how it is to be determined prior to the status hearing whether a detainee is one who will be held in long - term detention and whose hearing is thus subject to special requirements , but "long - term detention" could be interpreted with reference to law of war principles to refer to enemy belligerents held for the duration of hostilities to prevent their return to combat , a permissible "disposition under the law of war" under sections 1031 and 1032 of the bill .

this reading , however , suggests that the disposition determination is to be made prior to a status determination , which seems counterintuitive , or that a second status determination is required for those designated for long - term detention .

captured unprivileged enemy belligerents destined for trial by military commission or article iii court , or to be transferred to a foreign country or entity would not be entitled to be represented by military counsel or to have a military judge preside at their status determination proceedings .

another possibility is that there is an assumption that more than one status determination will be held with respect to persons subject to long - term detention in order to change their disposition , that is , it may be decided to transfer them to another country or to prosecute them , in which case the decision need not involve a military judge or a right to counsel .

alternatively , the status review process required under section 1036 could be interpreted to apply only to those detainees who have already been determined to be subject to "long - term detention. .

under this reading , detainees who have not been designated by military authorities for long - term detention might have their status determined under the existing administrative review processes employed by the military , which would not be subject to the congressional notification requirement .

the white house has expressed disapproval of this provision , claiming that it establishes "onerous requirements [and] conflicts with procedures for detainee reviews in the field that have been developed based on many years of experience by military officers and the department of defense. .

section 1037 amends the mca to permit plea agreements in capital cases .

it is substantially similar to section 1033 of house - passed h.r .

1540 , except that it does not amend the mca to insert references to capital cases into the existing section 949i of title 10 , u.s. code .

