across the united states , about 27.5% of state and local government employees ( about 6.6 million persons ) work in positions that are not covered by social security .

coverage rates vary considerably across states .

congress made social security coverage mandatory , starting in july 1991 , for most state and local government employees who were not already covered by public pension plans .

under current law , public employees who have a pension plan , but who are not covered by social security , may hold a referendum on whether to elect social security coverage .

once social security coverage is provided , it generally cannot be terminated , and all future employees in covered positions are required to participate in social security .

proposals to mandate social security coverage for all state and local government employees hired in the future have been part of the social security policy debate for many years .

under such a proposal , all state and local government positions eventually would be covered by social security .

this report describes current law , provides some historical background , and discusses some of the potential advantages and disadvantages of mandating social security coverage for newly hired state and local government employees from a variety of perspectives .

social security coverage is extended to state and local government employees through "section 218 agreements" between a state and the social security administration ( ssa ) .

all states , as well as puerto rico and the virgin islands , have a voluntary section 218 agreement with ssa .

a state's section 218 agreement details which state and local government positions are covered by social security and medicare .

each state , as well as puerto rico and the virgin islands , designates a state social security administrator who is responsible for administering , preparing modifications for , and monitoring coverage of , its subdivisions under the state's section 218 agreement .

the administrator , who is a state employee , serves as a bridge between state and local public employers and ssa .

coverage under section 218 agreements differs greatly from state to state .

for example , within a state , teachers in one county may be covered under social security , whereas teachers in the neighboring county may not be covered .

the state social security administrator is the main resource for information about social security and medicare coverage and reporting issues for state and local government employers and employees .

section 218 agreements cover positions , not individuals .

if the government position is covered by social security and medicare under a section 218 agreement , then any employee ( current or future ) filling that position is subject to social security and medicare payroll taxes .

coverage is extended to groups of employee positions known as "coverage groups ; " coverage may not be extended on an individual basis .

various laws and regulations govern how coverage may be extended via employee referendums .

all states are authorized to use a majority vote referendum process , and 23 states also are authorized to use a divided vote referendum process created in 1956 ( see below ) .

most often , state governments allow their subdivisions ( eg , a school board ) to decide whether to hold a referendum on coverage .

generally , a section 218 agreement may be modified to increase , but not reduce , the extent of coverage .

with certain exceptions , once social security coverage is provided , it cannot be terminated , and all future employees in covered positions are required to participate in social security .

the 1935 social security act did not extend social security coverage to state and local government workers .

in 1950 , congress added section 218 to the social security act to allow all 50 states , puerto rico , and the virgin islands to elect social security coverage for certain state and local government employees .

in 1954 , congress extended voluntary coverage to employees who were already covered by pension plans , effective starting in 1955 , if a majority of employees who were members of a pension system voted in favor of social security coverage .

further amendments in 1956 permitted certain states to split state or local retirement systems into "divided retirement systems" based on groups of employees that voted for social security coverage and groups of employees that voted against social security coverage .

currently , 23 states are authorized to operate a divided retirement system .

until april 1983 , public employers could opt in and out of the social security program .

in 1983 , legislation prohibited public employees from withdrawing from the social security program once they are in it .

the state of california challenged the 1983 law , however the supreme court rejected california's arguments .

in 1984 , congress extended social security coverage to many groups that had not been covered previously , including many state and local government employees , members of congress , and federal civilian employees hired on or after january 1 , 1984 .

until 1984 , federal employees were not covered by social security , but instead participated in the civil service retirement system .

in 1990 , congress made social security coverage mandatory , starting in july 1991 , for most state and local government employees who are not covered by an alternative public pension plan .

across the united states , about 27.5% of state and local government employees ( about 6.6 million persons ) work in positions that are not covered by social security .

coverage rates vary considerably across the states , as shown in table 1 .

in 26 states , 90% or more of state and local government employees work in positions that are covered by social security .

in three states , more than 95% of state and local government employees are covered by social security: arizona ( 95.3% ) , new york ( 96.7% ) , and vermont ( 97.9% ) .

in two states , fewer than 5% of state and local government employees work in positions covered by social security: massachusetts ( 4.1% ) and ohio ( 2.5% ) .

states in which less than half of state and local government employees are in positions covered by social security include california ( 43.6% ) , colorado ( 29.1% ) , louisiana ( 27.9% ) , nevada ( 17.6% ) , and texas ( 47.9% ) .

about 70% of non - covered state and local government employees reside in seven states: california , colorado , illinois , louisiana , massachusetts , ohio , and texas .

almost half ( 48.4% ) of non - covered state and local government employees reside in three states: california , texas , and ohio .

mandatory social security coverage of newly hired state and local government employees has been recommended by recent deficit reduction groups .

for example , in november 2010 , the bipartisan policy center's debt reduction task force , co - chaired by former senator pete domenici and dr. alice rivlin , recommended that all newly hired state and local government employees be covered under the social security system , beginning in 2020 , to increase the universality of the program .

in addition , the bipartisan policy center recommended that state and local pension plans be required to share data with ssa until the transition is complete .

the bipartisan policy center noted that implementation should be delayed until 2020 to give state and local governments time to "shore up and reform their pension systems" pointing to the poor fiscal condition of state and local governments and the underfunding of public employee pensions .

similarly , in december 2010 , the national commission on fiscal responsibility and reform established by president obama recommended that all newly hired state and local government employees be covered under the social security system beginning in 2021 .

the commission noted that , as states face prolonged fiscal challenges and an aging workforce , maintaining separate retirement systems ( i.e. , outside of social security ) could pose risks for plan sponsors and participants .

in the commission's view , mandatory social security coverage could mitigate these risks , as well as a potential future bailout risk for the federal government .

in addition , the commission recommended that state and local pension plans be required to share data with ssa to improve the coordination of benefits for current workers who spend part of their careers working in state and local government positions .

the following discussion highlights some of the issues underlying potential advantages and disadvantages of mandatory social security coverage: the financial status of the social security system , benefit protections for workers and their families , the impact on states and localities that currently maintain pension systems outside of social security , and a broader social perspective .

the majority of state and local government employees are covered by social security ( 72.5% in 2008 ) .

proposals to mandate social security coverage for all state and local government employees hired in the future have been part of the social security policy debate for many years .

the underlying issues to consider in evaluating the potential advantages and disadvantages of mandatory social security coverage include social security's long - range financial status ; benefit protections for workers and their families ; the impact on states and localities that would be required to revise their public pension plans to incorporate a social security component ; and a broader social perspective .

