the price of crude oil rose sharply in 2007 and the first half of 2008 , sparking widespread concern about energy prices , their effect on the world economy , and consequences for household consumption .

prices then fell sharply between july and december , from a peak of $145 per barrel to just over $30 .

to some observers , fundamentals of the oil market and macroeconomic conditions provide an adequate explanation for these price movements — the financial crisis deepened in the summer of 2008 , leading to sharply reduced estimates of economic growth in much of the world and lowered projections of energy demand .

others , however , doubt that supply and demand conditions justified an 80% price plunge and argue that financial speculators had created artificially high prices .

figure 1 shows trends in u.s. regular retail gasoline prices since 1990 , as well as a predicted price based on the price of brent crude oil , a key benchmark in petroleum markets .

in 2011 and 2012 , crude oil prices again rose sharply , reviving the debate on whether oil price trends are mostly driven by speculation or by changes in supply and demand fundamentals .

economists and market regulators have not reached a consensus as to the causes of oil price movements in recent years .

a number of studies attribute volatility to such supply and demand factors as turmoil in oil - producing countries , reduced production in some major oil fields , and the growth of demand from china , india , and industrializing middle - income countries .

an interagency task force led by the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) found that "the increase in oil prices between january 2003 and june 2008 [was] largely due to fundamental supply and demand factors" and that "analysis to date does not support the proposition that speculative activity has systematically driven changes in oil prices. .

others , such as cftc commissioner bart chilton , have contended that oil price gyrations are likely the result of speculative trading .

a frequent argument has been that increasing investment flows from financial investors have affected prices .

some analysts have sharply criticized those claims .

one econometric analysis that incorporated oil supply and energy demand effects concluded that speculation did not explain increases in oil prices in the 2003-2008 period , although the study suggested that speculation may have played some role in previous oil price spikes .

on june 20 , 2011 , senator maria cantwell announced that the federal trade commission ( ftc ) had notified her that it had opened an investigation of anticompetitive practices in crude oil and petroleum product markets .

the ftc has conducted several prior analyses of oil , gas , and petroleum markets .

the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ; p.l .

110-140 ) gave ftc broader powers to prevent market manipulation in the wholesale petroleum industry .

in august 2009 , ftc issued a final rule on prohibitions on market manipulation , which became effective on november 4 , 2009 .

legislation before the 112 th congress ( s. 1200 ) would authorize and direct the cftc to take certain actions to reduce the volume of speculation in oil and related energy commodities .

this report provides background on futures and options markets for crude oil and presents data analysis of a possible relationship between market activities of speculative traders and oil prices .

the data presented in this report cannot explain causes of oil price movements , but are intended to provide a context for evaluating arguments about the impact of speculation .

a crude oil futures contract is an agreement to buy or sell 1,000 barrels of oil at some future date at a price set today .

thus , the contract gains or loses value as prices fluctuate .

a contract to buy oil ( called a long contract ) gains value if the price rises , because the holder is entitled to buy at the old , lower price .

conversely , a short contract requires the holder to sell at today's price , and gains value if prices fall , because the holder may sell at above the market price .

a long position in futures may be described as a bet that prices will rise ; a short position is a bet that they will fall .

each futures contract has a long and a short side — whatever one trader gains , the other loses .

hedgers use futures not to bet on the price , but to avoid price risk .

for example , a long contract in effect provides insurance to an oil refinery against an increase in the price of crude oil ; if prices rise , the firm will pay more for oil on the physical ( or "spot" ) market , but appreciation in the futures position offsets the price increase .

thus , the firm can use futures to lock in the price that prevailed when it entered into its position .

futures contracts and options on futures are traded on a number of exchanges around the world , linked to several different grades of crude oil .

the most popular crude oil contract is traded on the new york mercantile exchange ( or nymex , now part of the cme group , inc. ) .

the contract represents 1,000 barrels of west texas intermediate ( wti ) grade crude oil , deliverable at cushing , oklahoma .

although nymex wti contracts call for physical delivery of 1,000 barrels at the time the contract expires , in practice nearly all contracts are settled for cash , without either party taking or making delivery .

a trader may exit the market at any time by simply purchasing an offsetting position .

that is , the holder of a long contract purchases a short contract with the same expiration date — since his obligation is then to buy and sell the same commodity at the same time , his net exposure is zero , and he is said to be "evened up," or out of the market .

nymex offers an oil contract expiring each month through the end of 2016 .

most trading is in the contract expiring soonest , called the "near month. .

an identical wti crude contract trades on the ice futures europe exchange in london .

most trading on the futures exchanges is short - term .

many traders prefer to even out their positions before the close of trading each day in order to avoid overnight price risk .

some traders , however , take longer - term positions , either to hedge transactions expected to take place months or years in the future , or to speculate on long - term price movements .

the number of contracts outstanding at the end of the trading session is called the "open interest. .

the commitments of traders ( cot ) report published by the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) shows the open interest in futures and options on futures , broken down by several classes of market participant , distinguishing between commercial hedgers and speculators .

these data , though limited in important ways ( discussed below ) , are the best public source of information on the activity of speculators in the crude oil market .

cot data , usually published each friday in the late afternoon , reflect the open interest , or the number of contracts outstanding , as of close of trading on the previous tuesday .

thus , comparing week - to - week cot figures shows whether classes of traders have increased or decreased the size of their long , short , or spread positions .

the cot figures do not show how much trading has gone on during the week , or whether a position has been liquidated and then built back up , but simply offer a snapshot of positions at the market close on tuesday .

another significant limitation of cot data is that they do not cover swap contracts — another form of oil derivative contract not traded on exchanges .

thus , cot figures arguably cover only a subset of oil derivatives , all of which play a role in setting prices .

the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ) gave the cftc new regulatory authority over the swaps market .

in the future , cot reports may reflect swap positions , but the data surveyed in this report cover only exchange - traded futures and options on futures .

cot data show the aggregate positions of hedgers and several classes of speculators , as follows: producer / merchant / processor / user .

these are entities that predominantly engage in the production , processing , packing , or handling of crude oil and use the futures markets to manage or hedge risks associated with those activities .

swap dealers are entities that deal primarily in swaps for a commodity and use the futures markets to manage or hedge the risk associated with those swap transactions .

the swap dealer's counterparties may be speculative traders , like hedge funds , or traditional commercial clients that are hedging risk arising from their dealings in the physical commodity .

thus , swap dealer positions represent both hedging and speculation .

money managers , for the purposes of the cot reports , are registered commodity trading advisors ( ctas ) , registered commodity pool operators ( cpos ) , or unregistered funds identified by the cftc .

these traders , which include hedge funds , manage and conduct futures trading on behalf of clients .

other reportables .

every other reportable trader not placed into one of three categories above is put into the "other reportables" category .

these may include floor traders and exchange members who trade for their own accounts .

nonreportable positions include all traders whose holdings are below the 350-contract reporting threshold .

these may be hedgers or speculators .

table 1 shows the breakdown of open interest in crude oil futures and options , for nymex and ice futures europe wti crude contracts , as of may 24 , 2011 .

the data in table 1 suggest that speculators account for most of the open interest in crude oil contracts .

the long and short hedging positions of the "producer / merchant" category accounted for only 27.1% of open interest .

some observers believe that the limited presence of commercial hedgers itself indicates excessive speculation in the market .

the proportions by themselves , however , do not appear to explain recent oil price changes because they have been relatively constant since mid - 2006 , when the disaggregated cot data series begins .

indeed , the total level of open interest has been relatively constant since 2006 , as the data in figure 2 and figure 3 indicate .

thus , the data do not appear to support an argument that recent oil price spikes are the result of large , sudden inflows of speculative funds .

figure 2 and figure 3 plot total crude oil open interest against the price of oil between august 2007 ( when oil prices began to rise to their 2008 peak ) and may 2011 .

figure 2 ends on july 28 , 2009 ; figure 3 begins the following week .

figure 2 reports only nymex positions , whereas figure 3 shows the sum of nymex and ice futures europe positions ( which the cftc did not report earlier ) .

as noted above , the ice and nymex contracts are identical , so positions on the two exchanges have been added together .

while the total level of open interest appears to be more stable than the price of oil , the aggregate figures mask significant fluctuations in the size of positions held by different classes of traders .

figure 4 and figure 5 break down open interest positions for the various types of traders holding reportable positions .

the time periods covered are the same as in figure 2 and figure 3 .

figure 4 shows nymex positions ; figure 5 shows nymex plus ice .

even though the aggregate open interest fluctuates within fairly narrow bounds , the number of contracts held by particular classes of traders may change significantly , as figure 4 and figure 5 indicate .

for example , commercial hedgers' positions ( both long and short ) shrank significantly beginning in june 2008 , when oil prices neared their peak .

between june 10 and august 26 , 2008 , combined long and short positions of commercial hedgers fell by 49.7% .

meanwhile , the price of oil peaked at $145.32 per barrel on july 3 , 2008 , stood at $116.31 on august 26 ( when the size of hedgers' positions reached a low point ) , and ultimately bottomed out at $30.28 on december 23 , 2008 .

in another example , money managers' long positions averaged 211,000 contracts during the second quarter of 2010 , but increased by 46.4% to an average of 309,000 during the first quarter of 2011 , when there was a significant upswing in the price of oil .

are changes in futures positions statistically related to price changes ? .

is the relationship the same for different classes of traders ? .

the next section of this report examines how changes in crude oil futures and options positions correlate with changes in price .

correlation between changes in managed money positions and oil price movements , even with the introduction of control variables , does not show causation .

prices might rise because money managers buy , or trading decisions by money managers may reflect price changes .

to use the terminology of a classic study on hedging and speculation , are money managers driving the price of oil , or are they hitchhikers along for the ride ? .

interpretations on either side of the question are plausible .

the potential of money managers' trades to move prices does not necessarily raise any policy issue .

if some commodity trading advisors or hedge funds are better or faster than others at trading on new information , the effect should be to make pricing more efficient .

if too much "copycat" trading occurs , the market price may overshoot , but it is not clear why any such overshooting would not soon correct itself .

one study found that open interest positions are highly correlated with macroeconomic activity .

this might suggest that traders with better information on macroeconomic trends , which strongly influence energy demand , take more aggressive positions , which would then influence oil prices .

this interpretation suggests that speculative traders may have better information about market fundamentals , such as expectations of future economic growth , and thus help channel the effects of changes in current and future energy demand into market prices .

some argue that money managers who are not involved in the physical oil business trade on information that is not fundamental and that this distorts prices .

this effect would be exacerbated by copycat trading .

specifying which information is fundamental and which is irrelevant noise , however , is difficult .

experts may express opinions about what the fundamental price should be , given current supply and demand conditions , but a basic axiom of classical economics is that free markets do a better job of weighing information and determining prices than any group of experts .

on the other hand , asset markets can be susceptible to price bubbles , in which rising prices convince some traders that future prospects are rosier than previously thought .

some have contended that identifying asset bubbles before a readjustment to fundamental levels ( i.e. , a crash ) may be difficult .

even if some traders understood that asset values exceeded fundamental values , it might be impossible given financing constraints to exploit that information to a degree sufficient to prevent the formation of bubbles .

policy tools to address speculation that is viewed as excessive or destabilizing are generally blunt instruments .

it is possible to prohibit trading in derivative instruments based on oil ( or other energy commodities ) .

with the onion futures act ( p.l .

85-39 ) , congress enacted a ban on onion futures , which remains in force , although it is not clear that onion prices have become more stable as a result .

other policy options ( included in s. 1200 ) are steps to reduce the size of speculative positions , either by raising the costs of speculative trading or by limiting the number of contracts that speculators can hold .

these measures could certainly reduce the volume of speculative trading in oil , but it is not clear that the effect would be to lower prices , for two reasons .

first , the curbs would fall on short as well as long traders , making the net effect unpredictable .

second , oil is a global commodity , and a parallel futures market exists in london .

ice futures europe trades contracts based on u.s. oil , suggesting that oil speculation would continue despite any u.s. restrictions .

the regression results presented below show the correlation between changes in long and short positions held by money managers , swaps dealers , and commercial hedgers ( producer / merchants ) .

while producer / merchant long and short positions are uncorrelated with price changes when considered individually , they are jointly correlated with price changes .

moreover , producer / merchant traders' long and short positions strongly correlate with each other , as figure a - 1 shows .

this result is counterintuitive , since long and short hedgers face opposite price risks .

that is , when prices are rising , or expected to rise , long hedgers such as airlines or utilities would appear to have greater incentives to hedge the risk of further price rises , while short hedgers , such as oil companies , might be expected to reduce their hedging position to reap the full benefits of higher prices .

but in fact , long and short hedgers appear to change their positions in tandem , whatever the prevailing price trend .

 ( an example is discussed in the text: when oil prices peaked and began to fall in mid - 2008 , both long and short hedgers reduced the size of their positions. ) .

long and short positions for swap dealers and managed money traders , by contrast , are not strongly correlated .

the coefficient ( "coef. .

in column 2 ) shows the marginal ( i.e. , incremental ) effect of independent ( control ) variables on the dependent variable ( here , changes in the log crude oil price ) .

changes in logs are one way to calculate variables in percentage change terms .

for example , the regression results suggest that a 1% change in the euro / u.s .

dollar exchange rate results in a 1.08% increase in the oil price .

results for month variables , included as seasonal controls , and a constant term are not reported .

 ( see text for variable definitions and notes. ) .

