between 1985 and 2002 , several statutory budget controls were enacted to reduce the budget deficit .

chief among these were the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 and the budget enforcement act of 1990 .

the mechanisms included in these acts sought to supplement and modify the existing budget process , and also added statutory budget controls , in some cases seeking to require future deficit reduction legislation , and in some cases seeking to preserve deficit reduction achieved in accompanying legislation .

the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( known as the gramm - rudman - hollings act ; p.l .

99-177 ) created statutory deficit limits and a statutory mechanism to enforce the limits .

while congress was already using the congressional budget resolution as a way of setting and enforcing desired spending and revenue levels , the statutory deficit targets were created to address at least two limitations of the budget resolution .

first , although a budget resolution can act as a procedural limit on the enactment of new spending and revenue legislation , the new statutory deficit limits sought to limit not just new legislation , but also the effects of enacted revenue and spending laws .

second , whereas the levels in the budget resolution are enforced by points of order on the house or senate floor , the deficit targets were enforced by a mechanism that would require the president to order automatic spending cuts if deficit limits were breached .

continuing difficulties and concerns associated with deficit targets and the sequester mechanism prompted congress and the president to enact the budget enforcement act of 1990 ( bea ; p.l .

101-508 ) , which fundamentally revised the procedures under the 1985 gramm - rudman - hollings act .

like the earlier act , the mechanisms included in bea supplemented the existing budget process by adding statutory budget controls .

however , whereas gramm - rudman sought to use budget controls to force future deficit reduction legislation , bea sought to use budget controls to preserve the deficit reduction achieved in the accompanying reconciliation legislation .

further , the statutory controls included in bea sought to limit any new legislation that would increase the deficit .

the new law differed from gramm - rudman - hollings in that enforcement was not based on the effects of already enacted spending and revenue law .

bea replaced the focus on deficit targets under gramm - rudman - hollings with a two - pronged procedural approach to budgetary enforcement: the implementation of pay - as - you - go ( paygo ) procedures to control new direct spending and revenue legislation and discretionary spending limits to control the level of discretionary spending .

these procedures were enforced separately so that savings scored under one category could not be used to offset another .

for instance , savings in discretionary spending caps could not be used to offset increases in direct spending or reductions in revenues .

although bea amended and extended the deficit targets and sequestration enforcement procedures in the gramm - rudman - hollings , these deficit targets were to be adjusted to take account of revised economic and technical assumptions .

this meant that the deficit limits would not be breached as long as the discretionary spending caps and paygo procedures were adhered to .

under the gramm - rudman - hollings act , the deficit target for fy1991 was $64 billion , but did not require a sequester unless the deficit was projected to exceed $74 billion ( allowing for a $10 billion margin ) .

in its final sequestration report in october , omb estimated a deficit of $147.3 billion , requiring outlays for defense programs to be cut by $41.7 billion ( 34.7% ) and non - defense programs by $41.7 billion ( 31.6% ) .

faced with this looming sequester , in the fall of 1990 , president george h.w .

bush and congressional leaders agreed to a five - year , $500 billion deficit reduction plan that was the culmination of bipartisan budget summit negotiations between congressional and administration negotiators , occurring at andrews air force base .

this agreement was principally implemented through the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 .

h.r .

5835 was signed into law on november 5 , 1990 ( p.l .

101-508 ) .

title xiii of the act is referred to as the budget enforcement act of 1990 , or bea .

bea established statutory caps to limit discretionary spending .

these limits were divided into three categories for the first three years covered .

fy1991-fy1993 had three separate limits for new budget authority and outlays in the categories of defense , international , and domestic spending .

for fy1994 and fy1995 , there was to be a single limit on the total amount of discretionary budget authority and outlays for the year .

creating separate categories of spending limits demonstrated preferences , limited trade offs , and ensured predictability for specific types of spending .

while it took away some flexibility for future negotiation , appropriators and congress still had the authority to spend within the categories at their own discretion .

such spending limits were enforced by points of order under the budget act on the house and senate floor , as well as a sequestration process that required the president to cancel budget authority by a uniform percentage within the category in which a breach occurred .

in this way , the sequester was targeted to the spending which had caused a breach .

if a breach of discretionary spending limits occurred , a sequester would be issued at the end of session , although a sequester order could also be made within a session if supplemental appropriations increased spending above the spending cap during the current year .

enforcement of discretionary limits , therefore , could occur in various stages of the legislative process , from consideration on the floor to after enactment of all spending bills at the end of the year .

the discretionary spending limits could be adjusted to take into account changes in budgetary concepts and definitions , changes in inflation ( for fy1993 and fy1994 ) , changes in estimates of credit subsidy costs to allow for specified allowances , such as emergency appropriations , irs tax compliance funding , and debt forgiveness for egypt and poland .

such adjustments would be made three times per year: ( 1 ) in a sequestration preview report included in the president's annual budget submission ; ( 2 ) in a sequestration update report , issued in august ; and ( 3 ) in a final sequestration report , issued 15 days after the adjournment of congres .

while discretionary spending caps limited spending in appropriations bills , bea also created a p paygo procedure with the goal of requiring that the aggregate impact of all new direct spending and revenue legislation not increase the deficit .

any new legislation that would increase direct spending or decrease revenues would have to be offset by other legislation so that the net deficit would not be increased .

paygo did not seek to control the effects of any direct spending or revenue law already in effect .

paygo was to be enforced on an annual ( rather than a case by case ) basis .

the impact of new direct spending and revenue legation was recorded on a rolling paygo "scorecard" maintained by omb .

a violation would occur if the net effect of legislation enacted during the session ( when combined with any carryover paygo balance from previous years ) would result in a net increase in the deficit .

sequestration procedures , similar to those used under gramm - rudman - hollings , would be used to offset the amount of any net increase in that fiscal year or the previous fiscal year caused by the enactment of new direct spending or revenue legislation .

to ensure that all direct spending and revenue legislation was accounted for on the paygo scorecard , the budgetary effect of any such legislation enacted during a session , but after the final sequestration report had been issued , were to be recorded on the paygo scorecard in the following session .

funds designated as emergency spending were exempt from calculations .

the sequestration order would make cuts to all non - exempt direct spending programs .

programs exempt from sequestration included social security ( except for administrative expenses ) , and railroad retirement .

other programs were protected though not exempt from sequestration .

for example , reductions in medicare spending were limited to 4% and other special rules applied to specific programs .

as with gramm - rudman - hollings , this created a situation in which the enactment of new direct spending could potentially trigger sequestration that would reduce spending for programs that might not necessarily have grown or might have already been reduced through the legislative process .

further , effects of legislation to decrease revenues had the potential to trigger a sequester , and therefore make reductions to spending to effectively pay for those revenue decreases .

under bea , discretionary spending caps , paygo procedures , and deficit targets were enforced by separate sequestration procedures under a new timetable ( shown below ) .

as illustrated in figure 2 , bea included a revised timetable that spanned the entire year , as opposed to the three - month timeline for gramm - rudman - hollings .

under the new timeline , cbo and omb were each required to prepare three different sequestration reports ( preview reports , update reports , and final reports ) , each providing estimates regarding sequestration for each category .

any discrepancies between cbo and omb estimates were required to be explained in the final omb report .

unlike under the 1985 act , the president was not required to issue an initial sequestration report , only a final order implementing without revision the reductions specified in the omb report .

during the course of the session , omb was required to provide congress with omb's cost estimate for each budgetary measure within seven days of its enactment , to assist in monitoring compliance with discretionary spending limits .

cbo , under the direction of the house and senate budget committees , was responsible for scoring individual legislation before consideration for purposes of enforcement in the congressional budget process .

procedures for suspension in times of war or low economic growth were continued from the gramm - rudman - hollings act .

in 1993 , congress passed h.r .

2264 , the omnibus reconciliation act of 1993 ( obra 1993 ; p.l .

103-66 ) , which was projected to reduce the deficit over the five - year period of fy1994-fy1998 .

included in the act was an extension of discretionary spending caps and paygo procedures established in bea1990 .

president clinton signed obra 1993 into law on august 10 , 1993 .

to cover the period of the new budget agreement , the act extended paygo procedures though 1998 and established new discretionary spending caps for fy1996-fy1998 while retaining the existing caps for fy1994 and fy1995 .

in addition , the procedures for enforcing the spending caps and the paygo procedure were extended through fy1998 .

in july 1997 , congress completed action on two reconciliation bills: one dealing with direct spending and the other with revenues .

the reconciliation bill dealing with direct spending , the balanced budget act of 1997 , included a separate title on budget enforcement , which is referred to as the budget enforcement act of 1997 ( bea of 1997 ; p.l .

105-33 ) .

the bill was signed into law by president clinton on august 5 , 1997 .

the changes set forth in the bea of 1997 were intended to extend existing budget enforcement procedures to ensure compliance with the multi - year budget policies established in the legislation , preserving the deficit reduction achieved in the two reconciliation bills .

the bea of 1997 extended discretionary spending limits through fy2002 .

the discretionary spending limits were divided into three categories for fy1998 and fy1999: defense , non - defense , and crime reduction .

for fy2000 , there were two discretionary spending limits: one for crime reduction and one for all other discretionary spending .

for fy2001 and fy2002 , there was just one overall discretionary spending limit .

the bea of 1997 also extended the paygo procedures to apply to legislation enacted through fy2002 although the enforcement would continue through fy2006 to ensure that future impact of the legislation would be controlled .

the act also reset all existing pay - as - you - go balances to zero and excluded the savings stemming from the balanced budget act of 1997 and the revenue reconciliation act of 1997 from any paygo calculations to offset any future deficit increases .

the paygo procedures adopted in this act were effectively terminated in december 2002 by the enactment of h.r .

5708 ( 107 th congress ) , which set all paygo balances to zero to prevent the occurrence of a paygo sequester for fy2003 and thereafter .

the bill was widely supported in both the house and senate and was signed into law on december 2 , 2002 , by president george w. bush ( as p.l .

107-312 ) .

