the estimated 4.1 million barrels of oil released during the 2010 deepwater horizon oil spill is considered to be the largest accidental marine oil spill in the history of the petroleum industry and will have an impact on the natural resources of the gulf region for the foreseeable future .

under the oil pollution act of 1990 ( opa ) , federal , state , tribal , and foreign governments may seek compensation for the costs of restoring damaged natural resources from the parties responsible through the natural resource damage assessment ( nrda ) process .

under the nrda process , damages are assessed to restore the natural resources to their prior condition and to compensate the public for their lost use of these resources .

this report examines the nrda process under the opa in the context of the deepwater horizon spill .

in particular , this report describes the statutory requirements of opa , the nrda process under the implementing regulations , and developments in the gulf of mexico .

opa ( sometimes known as opa 90 ) applies to discharges of oil into the navigable waters of the united states , adjoining shorelines , and the exclusive economic zone of the united states .

it was enacted partially in response to the exxon valdez spill in 1989 , where liability was imposed primarily through the clean water act ( cwa ) .

opa amended the cwa and several other statutes imposing oil spill liability to create a unified oil spill liability regime , to expand the coverage of such statutes , increase liability , to strengthen federal response authority , and to establish a fund to ensure that claims are paid up to a stated amount .

several federal district courts have held that opa preempts other general maritime remedies .

the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) of the department of commerce oversees the nrda process under opa .

currently , noaa is involved in 13 other nrda oil spill cases in the gulf in addition to the bp spill .

although trustees are not obligated to follow noaa's nrda regulations , trustees have an incentive to comply with the regulations because of the rebuttable presumption accorded such determinations .

under the opa regulations , the trustees may take emergency restoration action before completing the nrda process , provided that ( 1 ) the action is needed to avoid irreversible loss of natural resources ; ( 2 ) the action will not be undertaken by the lead response agency ; ( 3 ) the action is feasible and likely to succeed ; ( 4 ) delay would result in increased damages ; and ( 5 ) the costs of the action are not unreasonable .

the regulations also provide that settlement for natural resource damages may occur at any time , if the terms of the settlement are adequate to satisfy the goal of opa and are "fair , reasonable , and in the public interest. .

under the opa regulations , the trustees are required to invite the responsible parties to participate in the nrda process "as soon as practicable" but not later than the delivery of a notice of intent to conduct restoration planning .

the regulations further state that the trustees and responsible parties should consider entering into binding agreements to facilitate their interactions and resolve any disputes .

once the responsible parties accept an invitation to participate , the trustees determine the scope of their participation in accordance with the regulations .

furthermore , the regulations allow trustees to take other actions to expedite the restoration of injured natural resources , including pre - incident planning and the development of regional restoration plans .

the trustees' work occurs in three steps: a preassessment phase , the restoration planning phase , and the restoration implementation phase .

these phases are discussed in detail below .

the nrda process has been successful in the past , but it has never been tested on such a large scale as the 2010 deepwater horizon oil spill .

in this case , more oil was spilled ; a greater geographic area is involved ; and more trustees are involved than in past spills .

the trustees may have difficulty agreeing on the assessment of damages , baseline conditions , the value of the damaged resources , and the proper method of restoring them .

if a unified restoration plan is sought , the trustees must make unanimous decisions on these issues , and then bp has the option not to accept the final restoration plan .

if bp rejects the trustees' plan , the trustees may sue bp under nrda to resolve these issues , extending the final conclusion , which could delay restoration of the natural resources .

