the united states has seen continued growth of electronic card payments ( and a simultaneous decrease in check payments ) .

from 2009 through 2012 , debit card transactions have outpaced other payment forms .

when a consumer uses a debit card in a transaction , the merchant pays a "swipe" fee , also known as the interchange fee .

the interchange fee is paid to the consumer's bank that issued the debit card , covering the bank's costs to facilitate the transaction .

prior to 2010 , the policy debate about interchange fees was motivated by concerns that the interchange fees received by banks were not being set by competitive market forces .

a competitive market arguably would drive down swipe fees , which would benefit merchants and ultimately consumers .

alternatively , debit card issuers and networks had argued that a percentage of the interchange fees were being rebated to consumers in the form of consumer reward programs that were also beneficial to merchants .

section 1075 of the consumer financial protection act of 2010 ( title x of p.l .

111-203 , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ) , known as the durbin amendment , authorizes the federal reserve board to mandate regulations to ensure that any interchange transaction fee received by a debit card issuer is reasonable and proportional to the cost incurred by the issuer .

the durbin amendment allows the federal reserve to consider the authorization , clearance , and settlement costs of each transaction when setting the interchange fee .

the durbin amendment allows the interchange fee to be adjusted for costs incurred by debit card issuers to prevent fraud .

by statute , debit card issuers with less than $10 billion in assets are exempt from the regulation , which means that smaller financial institutions may receive a larger interchange fee than larger issuers .

the durbin amendment also prohibits network providers ( visa , mastercard , etc. ) .

and debit card issuers from imposing restrictions that would override a merchant's choice of the network provider through which to route transactions .

on june 29 , 2011 , the federal reserve issued a final rule implementing the durbin amendment by regulation ii , which includes a cap on the interchange fee for large issuers .

the final rule went into effect on october 1 , 2011 .

h.r .

10 , the financial choice act of 2017 , would repeal the durbin amendment .

specifically , section 735 of the financial choice act would repeal section 1075 of the consumer financial protection act of 2010 .

on may 4 , 2017 , h.r .

10 was ordered to be reported by the house financial services committee .

this report begins with a description of the debit payments process and network pricing for the four - party system and the three - party system .

it summarizes the requirements of regulation ii , which implements the durbin amendment .

the report concludes with a discussion of some implications of regulation ii for merchants , consumers , and banks as well as with some recent observations .

this section outlines the four - party and three - party network systems prior to implementation of the durbin amendment .

the three - party system is explained for illustrative purposes , but implementation of the durbin amendment only applies to the four - party network where an interchange fee exists .

on june 29 , 2011 , the federal reserve issued regulation ii , a final rule , which capped the interchange fee received by large issuers ( with $10 billion or more in assets ) to 21 cents plus 0.05% of the transaction .

the federal reserve also allowed for a 1 cent adjustment if the issuer implements fraud - prevention standards .

regulation ii was implemented after the federal reserve conducted a survey in the form of public comments to obtain transaction cost information .

although some merchants argued that the federal reserve had set the interchange fee cap at a level higher than allowed by statue , the final rule was upheld .

regulation ii does not regulate the merchant discount fee charged to the merchant by the network provider or acquirer ; it only limits the amount of the merchant discount fee that can be remitted in the form of interchange fee revenue t o covered institutions .

consequently , a two - tiered interchange fee system exists , meaning that institutions exempted from regulation ii may receive revenues consistent with interchange fees set above the cap .

some network providers did agree to implement a two - tiered interchange pricing system .

the final rule also gives merchants the ability to route transactions to multiple network providers .

every issuer regardless of size is required to link with at least two unaffiliated network providers , thereby allowing merchants to choose the network provider with the lowest fees to process their debit card transactions .

mandatory compliance dates for network providers and issuers were october 1 , 2011 , and april 1 , 2012 , respectively .

economists have questioned the sustainability of a two - tiered interchange pricing system over time .

the ability to charge different prices for the same service usually occurs when the supplier of a service can separate its customers into different market segments .

by contrast , regulation ii separates the suppliers ( issuers ) of the same service into separate groups rather than the customers ( merchants ) .

because merchants now have more choice over the processing of debit transactions , network providers may be more responsive to merchant pressures to lower merchant discount fees instead of pressures by smaller issuers to remit higher interchange fees .

consequently , the increased competition for merchant business could undermine the two - tiered interchange system over time , resulting in lower debit interchange revenues for exempt issuers .

furthermore , if interchange revenues for smaller issuers were to decline over time , the losses could be material , especially if their processing costs are higher relative to those of large issuers .

hence , declining profit margins from this line of business could possibly result in greater financial distress particularly for depository institutions that are increasingly sensitive to noninterest or fee income .

numerous pricing arrangements among thousands of exempt institutions under $10 billion and data limitations increase the difficulty to monitor whether this trend is emerging .

debit card issuers covered by regulation ii had expected to lose interchange fee income under the regulated cap , but the evidence has been uneven particularly for those institutions that process large volumes of debit card operations .

some covered institutions initially experienced declines in debit interchange revenues shortly after rule implementation , but they have since seen some gradual increase over time , which is consistent with the reported growth of debit card transactions since 2009 .

by contrast , some covered institutions saw an initial increase in interchange revenues but have since seen some gradual decline over time .

generally speaking , the amount of interchange revenue also reflects the amount of transactions , which depends upon economic activity .

in other words , lower revenues that would have been anticipated in light of the interchange fee cap may have been offset by a rise in the quantity of debit transactions as the economy continued its recovery from the 2007-2009 recession .

hence , comparisons of the interchange revenues pre - and post - implementation of regulation ii are challenging because both the interchange fees and debit transactions likely changed simultaneously over the period .

many banks covered by the durbin amendment eliminated their debit card rewards programs after regulation ii's implementation ; however , this response eliminates one mode for attracting ( checking account ) deposits to fund loans .

offering checking accounts with direct deposit , automated bill paying , and debit card services help depository institutions attract customers that are likely to use additional financial products , including loans .

when customers use a variety of financial products and services , depository institutions may cross - subsidize their costs and financial risks more effectively .

hence , some financial institutions entered into partnerships with merchants sponsoring customer reward programs to help facilitate the attraction of deposits .

customers receive rewards for shopping with a particular merchant and paying for their purchases using electronic payment cards ( i.e. , credit , debit , or prepayment card ) associated with participating banks .

merchants that were paying fees above the regu lated interchange fee had expected to benefit from the rule .

evidence from a 2015 study , however , suggests that the regulation has had a limited and unequal impact in terms of reducing merchants' costs .

because algorithms consisting of multiple factors were used to set individual merchant discount fees prior to implementation of the final rule , the magnitude of influence associated with the interchange fee cap is less likely to be uniform across the vast array of merchant discount fees .

furthermore , whether any change in consumer prices occurred as a result of merchants rebating any lower merchant discount fee savings back to their customers is likely to be indeterminate .

merchant pricing strategies are generally designed to cover production costs , achieve marketing objectives , and increase profitability .

hence , the correlation strengths among changes in interchange fees , merchant discount fees , and consumer prices are difficult to isolate and observe .

over the long run , other factors aside from the allocation of swipe fee revenues would be expected to influence the structure of the payments system .

for example , technological developments over time may allow consumers to submit payments directly to other consumers or small businesses via alternative payment systems .

greater competition from nonbank institutions may result in fewer financial transactions being processed by u.s. banking institutions .

hence , interchange fee revenues generated for issuers belonging to four - party network systems are constantly susceptible to future financial market innovations .

