when congress passed the reciprocal trade agreements act ( rtaa ) of 1934 , it reflected an important transition in national trade policy away from "protectionism" toward greater "trade liberalization. .

this shift continues to be the dominant , but hardly uncontested , trade policy of the united states .

the substantial national gains from trade have long been recognized , yet trade liberalizing legislation often faces strong political opposition because related costs , although much smaller , affect a vocal and concentrated constituency .

congress first addressed this inherent tension with legislation that allowed higher tariffs and other trade barriers to be reimposed when domestic industries were threatened or hurt by imports .

in 1962 , however , congress adopted an additional approach by providing trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) directly to trade - affected firms and workers .

it remains a much - debated , but enduring pillar of u.s. trade policy today .

taa program authorizations are scheduled to expire on december 31 , 2013 , and the trade adjustment assistance extension act of 2013 ( s. 1357 ) would extend them through 2020 .

president obama also has supported taa reauthorization , linking it to renewal of trade promotion authority ( tpa ) .

this report discusses the role of taa in u.s. trade policy , from its inception as a legislative option in the early 1950s , to its core role as a cornerstone of modern trade policy that many argue has served to promote the long - term u.s. trade liberalization agenda .

it will also consider the extent to which taa has been linked to both renewal of trade agreements authority ( now tpa ) and trade agreement implementing legislation .

understanding the origins of taa , the historical economic and congressional debate , and legislative options considered by congress over the past 50 years may help inform the recurring discussion on taa reauthorization .

taa was first authorized in 1962 , with two programs covering workers ( eg , retraining , relocation allowances , extended unemployment benefits ) and firms ( eg , loans , loan guarantees , technical assistance , tax benefits ) .

congress added a communities program ( eg , loans and grants ) in 1974 , subsequently terminated in 1982 , and a farmers program ( technical assistance and cash benefits ) in 2002 .

congress authorized another communities program in 2009 , but discontinued it two years later .

all taa programs are usually reauthorized in one bill , although administered by three different federal agencies .

this discussion does not address details of the taa programs , which are available in other crs reports .

rather , it takes a holistic policy approach to the economic issue of federal assistance for adjustment to import penetration , with occasional reference to the large workers and much smaller firms programs , which have formed the core of taa since its inception .

nearly eight decades after the rtaa became law , passage of three ftas in the 112 th congress and president obama's national export initiative stand as reminders of the importance that the united states places on trade expansion , particularly of exports .

the pursuit of export growth , however , generally cannot be done without conceding to a reciprocal increase in imports , and the tradeoff does not affect stakeholders equally .

while freer trade can benefit exporters , consumers , and the economy as a whole , it can place hardship on some industries facing increased competition from imports .

freer trade is not entirely free , but bears the cost of economic adjustment .

supporters of taa argue that workers ( especially the permanently displaced ) and firms hurt by imports , due in part to changes in trade policy , have more severe adjustment problems than others affected by different types of economic dislocation .

following this reasoning , these firms and workers deserve their own category of assistance , rather than relying on broader programs designed to address all types of economic dislocation .

the issues raised by taa were identified early on in the postwar economic policy debate .

justification rested on arguments for ( 1 ) economic efficiency , by speeding the adjustment process and returning idle resources to work more quickly ; ( 2 ) equity , by compensating for lost income while spreading the cost of freer trade to society as a whole ; and ( 3 ) political pragmatism , by defusing opposition to trade liberalizing legislation .

additionally , the costs of trade liberalization were at first managed through temporary protection ( eg , escape clause and peril point provisions — see next section ) to maintain a coalition in favor of freer trade .

taa was offered as a more constructive alternative .

it would provide for positive adjustment rather than negative reaction to tariff reduction , with expectations that costs would be temporary for an adjustment period , and much less harmful than protectionist measures .

taa skeptics challenged the logic of these claims .

they argued that economic efficiency was far from guaranteed given that subsidies can operate to reduce worker and firm incentives to relocate , take lower - paying jobs , or in other ways seek a solution to being idled .

equity issues arose because many economic groups hurt by changing economic circumstances caused by other than trade policies were not afforded similar economic assistance .

a frequently cited alternative argues that if society has a responsibility to help all those dislocated by economic change , then policies should not be narrowly restricted to trade - related or other categories of harm .

administrative hurdles and costs were also considered high .

economists , among others , pointed to the methodological difficulties in defining and measuring injury from tariff reduction , arguing that solutions would be inexact , if not arbitrary .

previous studies suggest that many firms , even smaller ones , could adjust on their own , and that workers could just as well rely on more broadly available unemployment and retraining programs .

in addition , over time , the costs of taa would rise , diluting political support .

political accommodation proved to be another factor for congressional support of taa .

many members concerned with the negative effects of trade have insisted on taa to support trade liberalizing legislation , and taa skeptics often conceded in order to advance the broader trade agenda .

taa provisions in the trade expansion act of 1962 and the trade act of 1974 are often cited as providing the support necessary to conclude ground - breaking trade agreements like the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) kennedy and tokyo rounds of the 1960s and 1970s .

taa was also a quid pro quo for providing president bush with tpa in 2002 , and for passage of free trade agreement ( fta ) implementing bills in the 112 th congress ( see appendix for legislative chronology ) .

taa was a product of a time when u.s. domestic and foreign economic policies were shifting to address dire economic situations .

the seeds for change were planted with the rtaa , a reaction to the tariff - raising smoot - hawley act of 1930 .

the shift from protectionism toward greater trade opening was rooted partly in the prevailing belief that to escape the great depression , the domestic economy would be best served by boosting demand worldwide .

in addition to the benefits of export expansion , trade policy embraced the idea that restricting imports ran the risk of mutually destructive global retaliation .

the rtaa provided time - limited authority to the president to enter into reciprocal tariff - reducing agreements , without the need for congressional approval afterward .

it was the early precursor to the now - expired trade promotion authority ( tpa ) .

still , the legislation was controversial , prompting resistance not only to the trade provisions , but to what some considered to be a concession to the president of traditional congressional authority over tariffs .

within a few years , trade liberalization took on a stronger foreign policy rationale , as well .

by 1940 , president franklin d. roosevelt's state of the union address had elevated u.s. trade policy to an "indispensible part of the foundations for any stable and durable world peace," a view expressed in the shadows of an approaching world war that would soon devastate international commerce .

as a result , the president had positioned trade policy as a key ingredient to reconstruction of the post - war economic system , both as a pillar of international stability , and a counterweight to encroaching soviet communism .

this stance took on even greater importance as the united states became the undisputed leader of the "free world" during the cold war .

nonetheless , trade liberalization remained contentious in congress because the foreign policy imperative of supporting international stability ran headlong into concerns over protecting domestic industry from imports .

congressional testimony in the 1940s emphasized the renewed tilt toward protectionism , even as public opinion appeared more indifferent for two reasons .

first , u.s. imports in a war - torn world were not large enough to present a serious threat to u.s. jobs and production .

second , trade was viewed as a key element of the cold war strategy .

and so , the lack of public concern over liberalizing commerce provided congress with a window to take on multilateral trade negotiations ( mtns ) under the newly created gatt .

over time , however , as trade liberalization expanded , the need to address the concerns of import - competing industries also grew .

two policies at the time dominated: the escape clause , first instituted by executive order under president truman and later established in legislation ; and the peril point provision .

the escape clause allowed for the temporary reimposition of tariffs when fairly priced imports were proven or threatened to harm domestic industry .

the peril point provision required the united states tariff commission ( ustc ) to evaluate the effects of tariff reductions , and determine a point at which tariffs might be reduced without doing harm to domestic producers .

although president eisenhower would continue to receive renewed trade agreements authority that allowed him to pursue tariff - reducing agreements , domestic pressure resulted in shorter extensions and more limited tariff cuts .

trade as foreign economic policy again found itself in tension with a domestic policy aimed at securing and maintaining the economic welfare of u.s. citizens at home .

this policy tension opened the door to the earliest legislative vestiges of taa in the early 1950s .

while it would take more than a decade to become law , taa legislation would eventually serve , at least in part , to reconcile these sometimes competing foreign and domestic economic policy priorities .

the global market expanded briskly following world war ii , and the growing importance of the then - european economic community ( eec ) nudged u.s. policy further toward trade liberalization .

forming a trade pact with one of the most important markets in the world was not only considered an economic imperative , but central to achieving lasting world peace by defusing tension over protectionist policies .

the united states also faced balance of payments pressures , modest unemployment , and the growing communist threat , so trade policy had become an essential ingredient of foreign economic policy .

in this light , many considered the trade expansion act of 1962 to be the most important legislative initiative of the 87 th congress .

the 1962 trade act not only gave the president unprecedented "tariff - cutting authority," particularly with respect to a critical trade partner , but added a whole new approach to dealing with domestic resistance to trade liberalization — trade adjustment assistance .

taa stood in contrast to the escape clause and peril point ( the latter dropped in the 1962 act ) .

these options were well honed in the 1950s , despite pressure by the executive branch to limit their use .

taa was also a different and more highly targeted approach than the escape clause , focusing on specific firms and workers , rather than an entire industry , hurt by "concessions granted under trade agreements. .

taa was offered in the form of increased and extended unemployment benefits , retraining and relocation allowances , loans and technical assistance for firms , and special tax deductions .

taa shifted the trade debate by acknowledging more fully in legislation the costs of trade liberalization .

it was also politically effective , generating support from labor constituencies without turning to more protectionist responses .

it is notable that a relatively lengthy and broad "negotiating authority" was achieved in a bill that also included taa for the first time .

despite passage with bipartisan support , it was , nonetheless , the most controversial aspect of the bill .

the house mounted stiff resistance to taa from republicans and some conservative democrats , who objected to special treatment for tariff - affected workers and firms , and who sought a separate vote on taa .

despite this effort , the bill was debated under a closed rule , prohibiting amendments , and passed with bipartisan support , despite a majority of house republicans voting against it .

the senate rejected attempts to delete or modify the taa provisions , and proceeded to pass the bill with broad support and only minor amendments .

the 1962 trade act also changed the nature of trade legislation .

in recognizing the need to address domestic concerns as part of trade liberalization , congress and president kennedy incorporated taa into broader trade policy .

previously , congress concerned itself with ( 1 ) conveying a specific trade agreements authority to the president , which in turn ( 2 ) would lead to new trade agreements , without the need for further congressional action .

after 1962 , it would become difficult to consider new trade agreements authority without taking up taa , and it became increasingly likely that prospects for congressional support for new trade agreements would also hinge on such an accommodation .

taa initially achieved one goal: greater support from labor groups for trade liberalization .

by 1971 , as the u.s. balance of trade turned to deficit for the first time since 1888 , and perceptions of lost income and jobs to foreign competition grew , this support began to erode .

the failure of taa to provide significant relief from imports in its first decade of operation added to labor's concerns .

from 1963 until 1969 , not one of the 6 worker or 12 industry - wide petitions for taa led to assistance .

the eligibility criteria were tough to meet , requiring demonstration that the imported article was increasing , that the increase "was caused in major part" by the tariff reduction , and that the increase was the "major cause" of injury to the firm or worker .

the multistep process also took months to complete and was costly for the applicants .

in hindsight , the inability to demonstrate injury and the laborious administrative procedures combined with strict u.s .

tariff commission ( ustc ) rulings led to a deepening dissatisfaction with taa .

although ustc adjudication would become more relaxed in the early 1970s , and the number of affirmative rulings would rise , they were still only a fraction of total petitions , and the political tide had already turned on taa .

pressure mounted to address programmatic deficiencies , but by 1972 organized labor formally rejected the program for the time being .

in hearings before the house subcommittee on foreign economic policy of the house committee on foreign affairs , leaders of the afl - cio came out against the program , as well as trade liberalization in general .

the sentiment is reiterated by one trade expert: "so in the first 30 postwar years , import - affected industries that played the trade policy game by the legal rules generally lost out" and pressure mounted for congress to intervene directly for constituents , an option that the trade remedy rules "were intended to avoid. .

critics called for major adjustments to the taa eligibility criteria and administrative procedures , but the nixon administration offered a trade bill that actually diminished taa .

as the bill wound its way through congress , however , both the house and the senate not only restored all taa benefits , but increased them and made changes that would facilitate program implementation .

this was accomplished in the trade act of 1974 , one of the most far - reaching trade bills in u.s. history .

unlike in 1962 , taa was not the most controversial trade issue in 1974 , although congress still paid it considerable attention .

despite intentions to the contrary , taa had so far done little to encourage retraining or relocation of workers , and few firms capable of recovery received meaningful assistance .

providing additional unemployment insurance was its most noted accomplishment , and not one deemed by some as particularly effective in addressing injury from imports .

although numerous bills were introduced that would address many of taa's perceived weaknesses , congress passed none of them until taa was once again united with the major 1974 trade bill providing for renewal of trade agreements authority .

originally crafted by the nixon administration , the draft trade bill acknowledged the deficiencies of the taa program , and effectively gutted it .

congress , however , decided to retool rather than retire the program .

among the major changes , the eligibility criteria were made less stringent so that imports no longer had to be the "major factor" of threatened or actual dislocation , meaning more important than all other causes combined .

congress replaced this test with criteria requiring demonstration that a significant number of workers had lost their jobs , that a firm's sales had decreased , imports had increased , and that the imports "contributed importantly" to the declines .

determinations also were moved to the u.s. department of labor and the u.s. department of commerce for workers and firms , respectively , leaving escape clause determination to the newly named u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) .

requiring the two departments to act within 60 days versus six months for the usitc often made the taa option preferable to escape clause action .

other notable changes included adding a new program for communities , increasing worker and firm benefits , and providing special assistance for older displaced workers , or those who tend to make up a larger portion of plant closings compared to layoffs .

congress also included strong language indicating its intent that the program be used as a meaningful form of relief from imports .

in the end , the trade act of 1974 , known for its dramatic changes in how trade agreements would be considered under new expedited procedures , also provided a congressional imprint of support for taa by carefully considering ways to enhance the program , and ensuring its prominence by linking it to the major trade bill providing renewed trade agreements authority to the president .

in 1979 , u.s. trade policy took a major step with ratification of the gatt tokyo round of multilateral trade negotiations .

for taa , however , it marked the beginning of a long period of decline .

separate legislation to extend and expand the program passed the house , but failed to move through the senate .

although congress eventually reauthorized the program , by the early 1980s , taa had become a victim of its own growth , negative program evaluations , and changing political and economic priorities .

the declining automobile industry proved to be one catalyzing factor in its demise .

the slowing economy and increased japanese imports led to large layoffs and related "explosion of taa claims," which at the time resulted in historically generous benefits .

this combination multiplied taa program costs to the extent that president carter , generally a supporter , expressed concern over the budgetary impact .

although he agreed to a two - year extension , taa could not escape the impending deep budget cutting of the incoming reagan administration .

congress extended taa in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1981 , but the act reduced benefits and eliminated $2.6 billion from the budget .

detractors cited as cause a general accounting office ( gao ) report that challenged the program's effectiveness to bring about adjustment rather than simply pay out additional benefits .

high unemployment provided a reason for congress to support taa , but congress extended it only through fy1983 , again with much diminished finances and tightened standards for eligibility , particularly for unemployment benefits .

by 1983 , the reagan administration openly sought to terminate the program ( as did his successor president george h. w. bush ) , which was spared in reduced form by a congressional extension through fy1985 .

after two very short extensions and a three - month lapse , taa was finally extended for six years , through fy1991 , as part of deficit - reduction legislation passed in 1986 .

its programs were again trimmed with , for example , the elimination of all loans , loan guarantees , and other direct financial assistance to firms , providing only technical assistance , the basis of the firm program today .

it received additional extensions first through fy1993 in the omnibus trade and competitiveness act ( otca ) of 1988 , and second , through fy1998 in the budget reconciliation bill of 1993 ( see the appendix ) .

the lengthy extensions appeared to be inversely proportional to the budgetary effort in the bills .

in short , beginning in the 1980s , taa came under severe pressure .

evaluations criticized the program's effectiveness and rising costs , making it more difficult to support , even as a form of leverage to promote trade liberalization .

taa was also caught up in the deficit reduction negotiations , losing much of the clout it may have had years before , when it was part of finding compromise in broader trade and foreign policy debates .

two of its longest extensions were for much reduced program commitments , both done in budget rather than trade bills , where it was divorced from its primary policy rationale .

but even within the trade policy debate , emphasis was shifting back toward import relief , as seen in the rise of special protection in the form of voluntary export restraints ( vers ) , and countervailing duty ( cvd ) and antidumping ( ad ) petitions .

these became core negotiating objectives during future gatt rounds , temporarily relegating taa to the back seat of the trade policy debate .

the major trade events of the 1990s , occurring relatively early in the decade , were passage of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) and the gatt uruguay round .

negotiations to implement nafta were well underway during the 1992 presidential campaign and were highlighted in the debates .

newly elected president clinton oversaw the implementation of nafta , but did so only after a number of conditions were attached , including taa .

nafta reinvigorated taa by including a separate program ( nafta - taa ) that applied only to dislocation related to increased trade with mexico and canada .

this limited case was the only time that a taa program has been authorized in an fta implementing bill , which congress passed in december 1993 .

four months earlier , congress had already extended the general taa programs for a five - year period as part of the omnibus budget reconciliation bill .

in 1999 , congress extended taa through 2001 , at which point it lapsed until reauthorized for five years as part of the trade act of 2002 .

taa played a major role again in the 2002 debate over the extension of trade agreements authority to president bush ( renamed trade promotion authority — tpa ) .

president bush and the republicans pushed hard to renew the long - expired authority , but democrats were unwilling to provide it unless taa was reauthorized .

with the apparent need for a quid pro quo , the house ways and means committee , under republican leadership , offered a taa bill first .

the senate finance committee drafted its own taa bill , and agreement was tentatively struck to keep the votes separate on taa and tpa .

after a lengthy and exhaustive legislative process , however , the final bill that would become the trade act of 2002 incorporated taa , tpa , and a host of other trade issues .

despite republican opposition to the taa language , congress revised and expanded taa programs for five years , through september 30 , 2007 .

among the key new features , the bill merged nafta - taa with the general program , created government - subsidized health insurance ( health coverage tax credit ) for dislocated workers , altered eligibility criteria to include secondary or downstream workers affected by imports , and added a new program for farmers .

the bill as a whole passed in a tense , close , and some have argued , a bipartisan vote .

at this juncture , taa had once again worked its way into the center of the trade policy debate and trade - related legislation .

in the intervening years since the trade act of 2002 , congress debated taa reform with an eye on making it more responsive to the complex economic challenges of "globalization. .

congress did not complete legislative action intended to reauthorize and revise taa programs prior to their expiration on september 30 , 2007 .

as an interim measure , on september 25 , 2007 , it passed a simple extension through the end of the calendar year ( p.l .

110-89 ) .

competing visions along party lines , however , prevented more comprehensive legislation from passing in either the 110 th or 111 th congresses .

in the 110 th congress , house democrats drafted the trade and globalization assistance act of 2007 ( h.r .

3920 ) .

it offered a revised approach to taa that emphasized expanding eligibility to services workers and firms , public sector workers , and industry - wide applicants .

it would have eliminated the 2002 requirement that shifts in production be related to specific trade agreements and provided more flexible training opportunities , as well as stricter evaluation requirements .

the bill also would have raised program benefits , including higher authorizations for all taa programs and increased health coverage tax credit and longer income support .

many house republicans and the bush administration supported taa reauthorization , but came out against the democratic option , offering a substitute version instead .

they took issue with both the expanded eligibility and spending levels , arguing that they failed to make the needed reforms in efficiency , flexibility , oversight , and program delivery that would make taa more useful and cost effective .

the republican position also pressed for tying taa reauthorization to legislation that would renew tpa and implement bills for the then - pending ftas with colombia , panama , and south korea , whereas the democrats argued that taa should be reauthorized apart from these issues .

the house ways and means committee reported favorably on the bill , but the votes on the chairman's language and multiple amendments offered by republicans were taken along party lines .

the full house passed h.r .

3920 on october 31 , 2007 .

the bill was sent to the senate for consideration , where a companion ( but not identical ) bill ( s. 1848 ) had been introduced .

the senate , however , did not take up a taa bill and program authorizations expired on december 31 , 2007 .

in not reauthorizing taa , the 110 th congress instead provided short - term funding through consolidated appropriation bills to keep the taa programs running ( see appendix for legislative chronology ) .

in the 111 th congress , consideration of taa reauthorization coincided with the u.s. economy falling into a deep recession following an unprecedented financial crisis .

congress responded with passage of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) of 2009 .

this act became the legislative and budgetary vehicle to move taa revisions that had been developed over the previous years .

basic disagreements over the substance of the taa bill remained , but congress reauthorized the trade and globalization adjustment assistance act ( tgaaa ) of 2009 as part of the larger arra bill .

it extended the programs through december 31 , 2010 , and revamped them using a revised version of the framework developed in the 110 th congress .

this framework included eligibility for service workers and firms , a new communities program , an increased health coverage tax credit for dislocated workers , and additional funding for all programs , among other changes .

at the close of 2010 , as taa programs were about to expire again , congress extended them through february 12 , 2012 , as part of the omnibus trade act of 2010 .

higher authorization levels and expanded provisions of the arra , however , were only extended through february 12 , 2011 , although taa programs continued to operate at their pre - arra levels until early february 2012 .

when the arra provisions expired , a basic controversy reopened , largely along partisan lines .

supporters of the expanded taa saw the tgaaa - passed reforms as long - sought permanent changes needed to modernize taa for the 21 st century .

taa detractors viewed the lapsed expansion of taa reforms as the appropriate outcome of a limited - life stimulus bill .

the debate took on new life early in the next congress .

at the beginning of the 112 th congress , taa program authorizations were set to expire on february 13 , 2012 .

basic disagreements over taa remained entrenched in congress , with a strong democratic base arguing for continued revision and expansion , and many republican members voicing either strong opposition to the concept and programs , or support for a different set of reforms .

taa proponents reiterated the need to assist those hurt by "trade and globalization," while opponents increased their critique of taa for its lack of effectiveness and high costs .

budgetary considerations loomed in the background of all these discussions , as did intensifying debate over passage of implementing legislation for free trade agreements ( ftas ) with colombia , panama , and south korea ( korus ) .

despite many partisan disagreements , the desire to find a path forward on passage of taa and the fta implementing bills gained momentum .

as in times past , taa became the linchpin for legislative action on major trade bills .

two issues had to be resolved if legislation was to move forward .

first , congress had to write a taa bill that would garner sufficient bipartisan support in both houses .

second , because of strong differences of opinion and increasing distrust between legislative and executive branches , a legislative path was needed that would ensure passage of all three implementing bills and the taa legislation , in tandem .

some 50 years after its inception , taa remains a hotly debated topic in congress and this debate was renewed with president obama's request to link taa reauthorization with renewal of tpa reauthorization .

in addition , the trade adjustment assistance extension act of 2013 was introduced in the 113 th congress on july 24 , 2013 .

it would extend the taa programs through 2020 at current funding levels .

nonetheless , a lingering disagreement exists as to whether taa and tpa should be tied together in legislation .

one perspective argues that tpa should include taa renewal .

history could be interpreted as supportive of this notion .

taa began and , for its first two decades of existence , received its staunchest support when included in trade agreements authority legislation .

this was also the case for the trade act of 2002 .

in part , reauthorizing legislation for taa has varied in type for many reasons .

although taa has been an important component of the "national trade policy" debate , taa reauthorization bills have not always coincided with the granting of trade agreements authority or tpa .

for example , at times when there has either been a long renewal of tpa ( eg , 1979-1988 ) , or no renewal for an extended period of time ( eg , 1993-2002 ) , congress has reauthorized expiring taa programs independent of tpa .

on the other hand , 50 years of history suggest that the debate on taa tends to return to congressional consideration of broader trade liberalizing legislation — the granting of tpa .

congress often takes this as the appropriate time to amend or extend taa , in no small part because of the fundamental need to find a balanced political outcome on legislation that gives rise to the basic issue of the cost of freer trade .

the reverse , attaching tpa to taa legislation , has not been common .

taa , however , has also been reauthorized in standalone and appropriations bills in addition to major trade legislation .

nonetheless , with taa receiving relatively short extensions in recent years , the current trade policy debate likely will see these two issues reunited .

by comparison , taa has generally not been included as part of the debate over the consideration of implementing legislation for reciprocal free trade agreements .

often such legislative action occurs in a period following lengthier extensions of both tpa and taa , and so there is little or no need to address taa in an implementing bill .

the lengthy delay from signing the three ftas to consideration of implementing legislation in the 112 th congress is one factor that altered this particular legislative situation .

in the end , congress decided that the easier course was to keep the implementing bills free of provisions that might be challenged as extraneous under tpa rules .

