since 1870 , numerous proposals have been introduced in congress to establish permanent federal holidays .

eleven have thus far become law .

although these patriotic celebrations are frequently referred to as "national holidays," legally they are only applicable to federal employees and the district of columbia .

neither congress nor the president has asserted the authority to declare a "national holiday" that would be binding on the 50 states , as each state individually determines its legal holidays .

creating a holiday for federal employees does , however , affect each state in a variety of ways , including the delivery of mail and conduct of business with federal agencies .

federal holidays have been created for a number of reasons .

in several instances , congress created federal holidays after a sizeable number of states created state holidays .

in other instances , congress took the lead .

additionally , each holiday was designed to emphasize a particular aspect of american heritage or to celebrate an event in american history .

in 1870 , when congress passed the first federal holiday law , the federal government employed approximately 5,300 workers in washington , dc , and another approximately 50,600 around the country .

the distinction between federal employees working in the district of columbia and those elsewhere proved important because the initial holiday act only applied to the federal workforce in washington , dc .

federal employees in other parts of the country did not receive holiday benefits until at least 1885 , as federal holidays were initially interpreted as only applying to federal workers in the district of columbia .

for more information on applicability of federal holidays to federal employees , see " federal holidays and employee pay " below .

although there is no indication in the authorizing statutes ( or accompanying floor debate ) for either the 1870 and 1879 acts that any federal employees were to be paid for such holidays , an analysis of holiday legislation subsequently signed by president rutherford b. hayes in april 1880 seems to support such a conclusion .

the 1880 legislation was prompted by a grievance filed by a group of employees who had been denied holiday pay for the previous new year's day while other federal workers had been paid .

the house committee which favorably reported the bill that would become the law signed by president hayes , stressed that while there were no existing laws requiring such payment , this group of employees , "in the committee's opinion , should be placed upon an equality in this regard" with those of other government departments .

the committee went on to point out that , on the "question of legal holidays," the revised statutes of the united states were silent , but those relating to the district of columbia were very precise on the issue .

the implication was that the other federal employees in the district had already been paid for the holiday .

in august 1903 , acting attorney general james c. mcreynolds issued an opinion that substantiated the reasoning applied by the house committee on printing .

mcreynolds indicated that , for "many years" prior to 1870 , it was "customary to close the executive departments of the government at washington" on five holidays — new year's day , george washington's birthday , independence day , thanksgiving day , and christmas day — that had been "declared to be such by district laws. .

this practice , mcreynolds reasoned , "must have been known to the congress , and it must have been that those days were declared public holidays only by laws applicable to the district. .

as a consequence , mcreynolds concluded that congress intended with the 1870 and 1879 statutes "to designate all days made holidays by any law in effect within the district of columbia" to be such for employees of the federal government as well .

this was done even though congress , as late as the turn of the century , had yet to enact legislation "absolutely requiring that the executive departments of the government to be closed [sic] and the clerks and other employees therein to be released from work on such days. .

in 1885 , congress approved additional legislation making the five holidays thus far approved also applicable to per diem employees of the government "on duty at washington , or elsewhere in the united states. .

this act , apparently for the first time , extended at least limited holiday benefits to all federal employees .

for other holidays , the decision to pay federal workers was made at various times .

for example , in 1870 , thanksgiving day became a paid holiday for at least a portion of the federal workforce , after congress gave the president power to designate a day of thanksgiving , which was to be a holiday within the district of columbia .

in recent congresses , legislation has been introduced to create a new federal holiday or add celebrations to existing holidays .

on several occasions , resolutions have been introduced in the house to express support for the creation of "cesar e. chavez day. .

the proposed holiday would celebrate chavez's life and recognize "the example he set by never wavering in his commitment to education , civic responsibility , and nonviolence. .

another example of a proposal to create a new federal holiday is contained in h.r .

108 ( 112 th congress ) .

introduced in january 2011 by representative john conyers , the bill , among other items , would establish the "tuesday next after the first monday" in november in even numbered years as "election day. .

to date , the bill has been jointly referred to the house committee on the judiciary , the house committee on oversight and government reform , and the house administration committee .

no further action has been taken .

similarly , in the 112 th congress , representative john yarmuth introduced h.j.res .

97 , a proposed constitutional amendment that would set a "legal public holiday for the purposes of voting in regularly scheduled general elections for federal office. .

the joint resolution was referred to the house judiciary committee and no further action has been taken .

in addition to introducing legislation to create new federal holidays , legislation has been introduced to add to existing holidays .

for example , in the 110 th congress , h.r .

856 would have added susan b. anthony to the list of individuals celebrated on the "third monday in february," or george washington's birthday .

h.r .

856 was referred to the house committee on oversight and government reform and no additional action was taken .

