under the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) , the definition of income for eligibility for certain medicaid populations and premium credits in the exchanges is based on modified adjusted gross income ( magi ) .

the initial intent of using magi was to standardize the definition of income for medicaid eligibility purposes to reduce some of the variability and complexity that exists under the current medicaid program and to provide consistency between medicaid and the health insurance exchange .

magi is equal to adjusted gross income ( agi ) plus certain foreign earned income and tax - exempt interest .

agi is equal to gross income minus certain exclusions ( eg , public assistance payments , contributions to retirement plans ) minus some above - the - line deductions ( eg , trade and business deductions , losses from sale of property , and alimony payments ) .

the use of magi , however , has raised concerns among congress and the obama administration , as it excludes some income categories either partially or altogether and is , thus , different than the income definition used in most other federal low - income programs , like supplemental security income ( ssi ) and department of veterans affairs ( va ) benefits , which include most sources of income , taxable and nontaxable , when determining eligibility .

by excluding some types of income , individuals and families with a higher percentage of total income relative to the federal poverty level may qualify for medicaid and premium credits .

this report first describes the relevant medicaid and health insurance exchange provisions in aca that rely on magi .

it then discusses what is and is not included in this definition of income .

since social security income has been noted by others as a concern when defining income , the report discusses the enactment of legislation to include all social security benefits in the magi definition ( and not just taxable benefits ) .

finally , the report raises some issues for congress in considering changes to the definition of income for medicaid eligibility and premium credits in the health insurance exchanges .

medicaid is a means - tested program providing health insurance to certain low - income individuals .

today , people qualify for medicaid if they meet the program's categorical requirements and have income and assets equal to or below state - specified thresholds .

section 2001 of aca added a new mandatory coverage group to the medicaid statute to include certain individuals ( under the age of 65 ) with income at or below 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) ( effectively 138% fpl as a result of the 5% income disregard ) by january 1 , 2014 , or sooner at state option .

this mandatory expansion of medicaid was included in a legal challenge of the law: national federation of independent business v. sebelius ( nfib ) .

on june 28 , 2012 , the united states supreme court issued its decision in nfib .

the supreme court held that the federal government cannot terminate current medicaid federal matching funds if a state refuses to expand its medicaid program to include nonelderly , nonpregnant adults under 133% of the federal poverty level .

if a state accepts the new aca medicaid expansion funds , it must abide by the new expansion coverage rules .

however , based on the court's opinion , a state can refuse to participate in the expansion without losing any of its current federal medicaid matching funds .

the court's decision leaves enforcement of all other provisions of aca intact , including the exchange provisions and the use of magi .

states that choose to participate in this aca expansion will cover most nonelderly citizens ( including childless adults , parents , and individuals with disabilities ) up to 133% fpl , and the income that is compared with this threshold for individuals in this group will be based on magi .

 ( greater detail about what is and is not included in magi will be discussed later in this report. ) .

in addition to individuals eligible under the aca expansion group , aca also requires the new magi counting rule to be used to assess the financial eligibility for most of medicaid's other nonelderly populations eligible under prior law .

under aca , certain groups are exempt from income eligibility determinations for medicaid based on magi .

prior law's income determination rules under medicaid will continue to be used for determining eligibility for the following groups: ( 1 ) individuals who are eligible for medicaid through another federal or state assistance program ( eg , foster care children and individuals receiving ssi ) , ( 2 ) the elderly , ( 3 ) certain disabled individuals who qualify for medicaid on the basis of being blind or disabled without regard to whether the individual is eligible for ssi , ( 4 ) the medically needy , and ( 5 ) enrollees in a medicare savings program ( eg , qualified medicare beneficiaries for whom medicaid pays the medicare premiums or coinsurance and deductibles ) .

in addition , magi does not affect eligibility determinations through express lane enrollment ( to determine whether a child has met medicaid or chip eligibility requirements ) , for medicare prescription drug low - income subsidies , or for determinations of eligibility for medicaid long - term services and supports .

during a transitional period between april 1 , 2010 , and january 1 , 2014 , states have the option to extend medicaid to individuals eligible under the new eligibility group up to 133% fpl as long as the state does not extend coverage to ( 1 ) individuals with higher income before those with lower income or ( 2 ) parents unless their children are enrolled under the state plan , a waiver , or in other health coverage .

prior to 2014 , states are not required to use the magi counting rules when determining income eligibility for the new eligibility group up to 133% fpl .

states that pick up this option may apply a different income counting methodology , such as that used by ssi , as long as it is approved by the secretary .

during this transitional period , states may apply less restrictive income counting methodologies as long as such methodologies are available to all members in a given group .

aca requires health insurance exchanges to be established in every state by january 1 , 2014 , either by the state itself or by the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) .

the aca exchanges are not insurance companies ; rather , they will coordinate the offer of private health plans to qualified individuals and small businesses .

generally , the plans offered through the exchanges will provide comprehensive coverage and meet all aca market reforms , as applicable .

to make exchange coverage more affordable , eligible individuals may receive premium assistance in the form of tax credits .

eligibility for the premium credit is based , in part , on income and relies on the magi definition .

aca created sec .

36 ( b ) of irc to define household income based on magi for purposes of medicaid eligibility for certain populations and premium credits for coverage through the health insurance exchanges .

specifically , gross income is total income minus certain exclusions ( eg , public assistance payments , contributions to retirement plans ) .

from gross income , adjusted gross income ( agi ) is calculated to reflect a number of deductions , including trade and business deductions , losses from sale of property , and alimony payments .

magi is defined as agi plus certain foreign earned income and tax - exempt interest .

as originally enacted under aca , agi ( and consequently magi ) includes only sources of income that are taxable .

thus , some sources ( or types ) of income that may be considered resources for determining whether a person ( or couple ) is low - income were only partially included , whereas others were not included at all .

two sources of income that were partially included in the initial aca magi definition were non - taxable social security benefits and non - taxable pension and annuity income .

examples of other sources of income that are not included in magi are fringe benefits , cafeteria plan benefits , gifts ( cash , property , or in - kind ) , and inheritances ( see ) .

these may be considered resources for determining low - income .

in addition , as discussed later , many other low - income programs include some measure of liquid assets as resources when determining eligibility .

this definition of magi raised concerns , especially with respect to exclusion of non - taxable social security benefits .

generally , social security beneficiaries aged 65 and older are eligible for medicare coverage for health care services .

however , under the initially enacted aca definition of magi , individuals and households who choose to receive their social security benefits early at the ages of 62 through 64 could potentially qualify for medicaid if their magi was no higher than 133% of the fpl ( or 138% of fpl because of the 5% disregard ) , or for premium credits in the newly established health care exchanges if their magi was between 100% to 400% of the fpl , even if their total income was much higher .

specifically , if the aca definition of magi was used , not all social security income would be included in the magi definition and , for the majority of social security beneficiaries , no social security income would be included in magi .

to address this concern , the original aca definition of magi was later amended under p.l .

112-56 , which among other things , included non - taxable social security in the definition of magi .

this change did not affect the treatment of non - taxable pension and annuity income , which continues to be partially excluded under the amended definition of magi .

there has been increased interest in congress to change the aca definition of income for determining medicaid eligibility for new enrollees and premium credit eligibility to be more inclusive and more consistent with other low - income programs .

a number of issues might be considered in exploring the consequences of the change .

first , the initial intent of aca was to standardize current rules governing medicaid eligibility for a majority of medicaid - eligible groups ( eg , non - disabled children , parents , pregnant women , and caretaker relatives ) in order to reduce the variability and complexity of these definitions under the current medicaid program .

an alternative definition may add complexity compared with magi .

in addition , because adjusted gross income ( on which magi is based ) can be computed largely from information on an individual's federal tax return , verification of income is streamlined .

if an alternative definition is used that is not based on tax return information , the administrative complexity of verifying nontaxable income from different sources comes into play .

third , the definition was developed to be consistent so that qualifying for medicaid and qualifying for premium credits in the exchange would be mutually exclusive .

so changing the definition for medicaid should also apply to premium credits .

finally , many of the current legislative proposals have focused largely on the inclusion of social security benefits in income definitions for eligibility purposes .

however , most other low - income programs include other types of income ( eg , nontaxable pensions ) and asset holdings that are also excluded from magi .

this section discusses these issues in greater detail and identifies how other federal low - income programs define and verify income for eligibility purposes .

both the administration and congress have recognized potential shortcomings of using magi to determine eligibility for medicaid provisions and premium credits in aca .

the initial intent of using magi was to standardize the definition of income for medicaid eligibility purposes in order to reduce some of the variability and complexity that exists under the current medicaid program and to provide consistency between medicaid and the health insurance exchange .

although changing the definition of income to include a more comprehensive measure that includes other nontaxable income sources would be more consistent with other low - income programs , such as ssi , this change may increase the administrative complexity , especially for the premium credits in the health insurance exchanges .

