while section 271 ( a ) of the patent act creates strict liability for someone who directly infringes a patent , section 271 ( b ) of the patent act provides indirect infringement liability for "[w]hoever actively induces infringement of a patent. .

this succinct and seemingly straightforward statutory text was the subject of an interpretive dispute between the parties in global - tech appliances , inc. v. seb s.a. , a 2011 supreme court case .

although the statutory text does not specify a scienter requirement for a person to be found liable for actively inducing patent infringement , the supreme court in this case inferred that "at least some intent is required" because of the presence of the adverb "actively" before "induces," which "suggests that the inducement must involve the taking of affirmative steps to bring about the desired result. .

however , section 271 ( b ) is ambiguous in that two different interpretations are possible regarding the language "induces infringement": ( 1 ) the defendant induces another party to engage in conduct that happens to amount to infringement , or ( 2 ) the defendant persuades another party to engage in conduct that the inducer knows is patent infringement .

the question in global - tech was whether a plaintiff must show that the defendant knew that the induced acts constituted patent infringement in order to hold him liable under section 271 ( b ) .

on may 31 , 2011 , the supreme court ruled by a vote of 8-1 that induced infringement under section 271 ( b ) requires actual knowledge that the induced acts constitute patent infringement .

in addition , the court held that this knowledge standard could be satisfied by proof that the defendant took deliberate actions to "willfully blind" himself to the high probability of the infringing nature of the induced activities .

although the "willful blindness" doctrine is widely used by lower federal courts in criminal cases , this is the first time that the supreme court has applied it to a civil patent infringement case .

it is also the first time that the court has held that proof of willful blindness can satisfy a statutory requirement of knowing or willful conduct , thus establishing a standard not only for patent infringement cases brought under section 271 ( b ) , but also for all federal criminal cases involving knowledge .

this report provides a legal analysis of global - tech appliances , inc. v. seb s.a. and discusses its potential impact on the law .

the patent act grants patent holders the exclusive right to exclude others from making , using , offering for sale , or selling their patented invention throughout the united states , or importing the invention into the united states .

whoever performs any one of these five acts during the term of the invention's patent , without the patent holder's authorization , is liable for infringement .

a patent holder may file a civil action against an alleged infringer in order to enjoin him from further infringing acts .

the patent statute also provides for the award of damages "adequate to compensate for the infringement , but in no event less than a reasonable royalty for the use made of the invention by the infringer. .

while section 271 ( a ) of the patent act creates liability for someone who directly infringes a patent , section 271 ( b ) of the act "extends liability to one who actively induces infringement by another. .

this statutory provision "codified long - standing precedent deriving from tort law that those who aid and abet direct patent infringement shall be liable for indirect infringement. .

although direct patent infringement is a strict liability offense , in that the direct infringer's knowledge or intent is irrelevant — the unauthorized use of a patented invention is sufficient for liability — indirect infringement requires some element of knowledge .

thus , the elements of a section 271 ( b ) inducement claim include the following: ( 1 ) evidence of actual infringement of a patent by the direct infringer , ( 2 ) evidence of the defendant's "active steps ... taken to encourage direct infringement" by third parties , and ( 3 ) proof of the defendant's mental state .

with respect to this third element , however , the federal courts have struggled to clearly define what mental state is necessary to support a finding of induced infringement .

two decisions from different panels of the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit caused this confusion .

in hewlett - packard co. v. bausch & lomb , inc. , a panel of the federal circuit held that a defendant could be liable if the plaintiff could prove that the defendant actually intended to cause the acts that ultimately turned out to be patent infringement .

a different panel of the federal circuit held in manville sales corp. v. paramount systems , inc. that "[i]t must be established that the defendant possessed specific intent to encourage another's infringement and not merely that the defendant had knowledge of the acts alleged to constitute inducement .

the plaintiff has the burden of showing that the alleged infringer's actions induced infringing acts and that he knew or should have known his actions would induce actual infringements. .

an en banc federal circuit attempted to resolve this conflict of authority in its 2006 decision , dsu medical corp. v. jms co. , ltd. , which held that to be held liable under section 271 ( b ) ,"the inducer must have an affirmative intent to cause direct infringement. .

the en banc court explained that , the plaintiff has the burden of showing that the alleged infringer's actions induced infringing acts and that he knew or should have known his actions would induce actual infringements .

the requirement that the alleged infringer knew or should have known his actions would induce actual infringement necessarily includes the requirement that he or she knew of the patent .

however , prior to its decision in global - tech appliances , inc. v. seb s.a. , the u.s. supreme court had never before addressed the scope of the knowledge requirement ( or even determined whether there is a requisite intent ) for inducement liability under section 271 ( b ) of the patent act .

the supreme court in global - tech held that section 271 ( b ) requires specific intent to induce acts that constitute patent infringement .

however , the alleged inducer's actual knowledge of the patent is not necessarily required , as the knowledge requirement may be satisfied by the "willful blindness" doctrine .

this standard is stricter than the federal circuit's "deliberate indifference" standard for establishing inducement of infringement that would have allowed a finding of knowledge when there is only a "known risk" that the induced acts infringe a patent .

thus , the court has raised the bar for proving that a defendant is liable for actively inducing infringement of a patent under section 271 ( b ) .

in addition , as justice kennedy noted in his dissent , the court's opinion not only impacts patent law , but it also appears to apply to federal cases that involve criminal statutes with knowledge requirements .

one observer praised the court's decision by saying that the court's "willful blindness" rule "is truly narrow , limited to cases like this one with particularly bad facts showing that the defendant almost certainly knew they were infringing on the plaintiff's patent. .

another commentator believed that the ruling "will eliminate a lot of the ambiguity in the federal circuit's 'deliberate indifference' standard. .

several questions remain following global - tech .

the court did not decide whether a defendant's "willful blindness" may extend to the induced acts that constitute infringement ( as opposed to being willfully blind to the existence of the patent ) , as the question was not at issue in the case because "pentalpha was indisputably aware that its customers were selling its products" in the united states .

another unresolved matter is whether "knowledge of the patent" means knowledge of a specific patent , or knowledge of the high probability that a patent exists .

these questions remain left to be resolved by future litigation or by congress .

