over the past several decades , sustainable energy and environmental issues have gained an increasing level of attention in international humanitarian and development assistance , as countries have tried to integrate poverty reduction and economic growth initiatives with a shared concern for the global environment .

this integration is reflected in several international conventions including the 1972 united nations conference on the human environment ( the stockholm convention ) , the 1992 united nations conference on environment and development ( the rio convention ) , the 1992 united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) , and the 2002 world summit on sustainable development ( the johannesburg summit ) , among others .

donor countries , including the united states , that provide financial assistance to lower - income countries to aid in their economic development , have increasingly targeted projects that address the full range of economic growth indicators .

these indicators include financial viability , social inclusivity , and environmental sustainability at both the local and the global level .

the world bank group ( wbg ) , as the world's largest multilateral lending institution for development assistance , sits at the nexus of these efforts .

as an international organization , the wbg is generally exempt from u.s. law .

however , the united states — through its role as a financial contributor to the wbg and as a member on the various wbg governing boards — has influence on wbg policy .

this influence manifests itself through voting power on the board , general advocacy , reporting requirements , and financial leverage .

through these efforts , various u.s .

administrations have focused on the institution's lending practices as a means to induce greater environmental sustainability in multilateral development assistance .

similarly , the u.s. congress — through its role in wbg appointments , appropriations , and legislative guidance — has significant input on these issues .

congressional debate over the wbg's environmental practices is long - running .

as early as 1983 , a campaign to call attention to environmental problems caused by wbg projects was undertaken by several u.s. environmental groups , including the sierra club , environmental defense fund , national wildlife federation , natural resources defense council , and others .

the u.s. congress subsequently held hearings on the issues documented by these groups , and began a process that saw annual investigations by a wide range of committees , including those on banking , foreign affairs and foreign relations , appropriations , environment , and others .

witnesses included environmental groups from the united states and affected countries and the u.s. officials charged with directing u.s. participation in the wbg institutions .

when asked by congress to look into the problems identified by environmental groups , u.s. treasury officials also became concerned about possible negative environmental impacts of wbg projects — a subject that had received little or no official attention at that time .

beginning in the mid - 1980s and continuing to the present , congress has passed a succession of laws that aim to influence environmental practices at the wbg .

legislative guidance to help direct the u.s. officials in encouraging and promoting sustainability goals at wbg institutions has been included in many authorizing legislations and annual foreign operations appropriations bills .

the primary legislative vehicle for u.s. interaction with the wbg has been the international financial institutions act of 1977 , as amended ( p.l .

95-118 ) , as well as various annual appropriations acts , provisions of which are found in the u.s. code , title 22 , chapter 7 .

the u.s. code has several sections related to energy and environmental issues at the wbg , including guidance for the sustainable use of natural resources and the protection of the environment , public health , and the status of indigenous peoples in developing countries ; requirements for environmental impact assessments and the identification of proposals likely to have adverse impacts ; mandates for the creation of information exchange systems among countries and civil society organizations related to the environment ; promotions for loans supporting environmentally beneficial policies , projects , and project components ; and directives to adopt and implement greenhouse gas accounting in analyzing the benefits and costs of individual projects and ensure the expansion of activities supporting climate change mitigation .

through the years , the wbg has incorporated guidance provided by the u.s. congress via the u.s. executive directors in various lending reforms and operational policies .

in 2009 , u.s. environmental guidance — as well as other internal and external pressures — led to the wbg reporting its intentions to revise its decade - old strategy for energy and infrastructure lending .

after releasing an energy strategy approach paper in october 2009 , and consulting with government and civil society stakeholders from january 2010 to july 2010 , a strategy document , energizing sustainable development: energy sector strategy of the world bank group ( ess ) , dated march 16 , 2011 , was presented to the wbg committee on development effectiveness ( code ) on april 11 , 2011 , for consent and subsequent delivery to the wbg board of executive directors for a vote during the summer of 2011 .

the ess , however , stalled during debate in code .

with the appointment of jim yong kim as the 12th president of the world bank group on july 1 , 2012 , the ess process was discontinued .

efforts to revise energy and infrastructure lending have since been incorporated into the broader initiatives of the new administration .

this report summarizes the provisions of the proposed energy sector strategy of the world bank group .

it situates the strategy within current wbg lending practices and in response to various stakeholder critiques .

a final section outlines issues for congress .

the core mission of the world bank group , as stated in its literature and outreach , is poverty alleviation and environmentally sustainable development .

research shows an estimated 1.4 billion people worldwide ( i.e. , 20% of the world population ) are without access to electricity or modern energy resources , and many more face recurrent supply disruptions .

demand for primary energy is estimated to increase by 80% in lower - income countries by 2035 , and achieving universal access to electricity is estimated to require an additional annual average investment of $36 billion .

also , approximately 3 billion people continue to rely on traditional solid fuels for heating and cooking , with estimates that nearly 2 million die annually , and many more fall ill , from indoor air pollution caused by this practice .

further , it is speculated that lower - income countries may bear up to 80% of the cost of future damages caused by global climate change .

research suggests that energy - saving policies and low - emission technologies could be ways for meeting future energy needs in a globally sustainable manner as well as for mitigating local environmental problems associated with energy production and use .

the wbg claims that achieving these goals could contribute significantly to eradicating poverty and hunger , supporting primary education , promoting gender equity , combating disease , and ensuring environmental stability , as well as increasing entrepreneurial business activities and economic development in lower - income countries .

but world bank environmental strategies are not without their critics .

throughout the years , many of the wbg's lending practices have supported projects with potentially negative environmental implications .

road construction , large dams , fossil - fuel power generation , mining and extractive industries , and agricultural and forestry projects sponsored by wbg lending have been criticized by many who believe they are not only environmentally destructive , but are often harmful to large segments of the population in the societies they are intended to help ( eg , farm fertility may be harmed by unsustainable agriculture practices , soil may be contaminated by adjacent energy or mining industries , fisheries may be affected by pollution from excess fertilizer use or industrial runoff ) .

the proposed energy sector strategy before the world bank group committee on development effectiveness and the board of executive directors is a potential vehicle for the u.s. congress and the u.s. administration to address concerns regarding energy and infrastructure lending in lower - income countries and its effect on poverty alleviation and environmentally sustainable development .

whether the provisions in the march 16 draft of the ess are retained in the final version depends upon negotiations currently taking place in code and in the subsequent vote by the board of executive directors .

wbg debate on the ess also coincides with several other institutional initiatives , including ( 1 ) the drafting of a coordinated set of environmental and social safeguards , ( 2 ) the introduction of a new results - based lending platform , and ( 3 ) the request for increases in its capital base to fund the continued expansion of its development lending programs .

the final version of the ess may influence negotiations on any of these initiatives , and vice versa .

further , authorizations and appropriations for u.s. participation in the capital increases at the wbg are currently included in the u.s. administration's fy2012 budget request .

levels of u.s. funding for the capital increase may likewise influence negotiations on these initiatives .

the united states carries one — albeit a significant — voice and vote in the policies of the wbg .

the u.s. congress retains the role of deciding the overall terms of u.s. involvement in the wbg by setting the level of u.s. contributions and by influencing how the united states votes on policies and projects .

the house committee on financial services ( subcommittee on international monetary policy and trade ) and the senate committee on foreign relations ( subcommittee on international development and foreign assistance , economic affairs , and international environmental protection ) are responsible for managing wbg authorization legislation .

the u.s. house and senate committees on appropriations ( subcommittees on state , foreign operations , and related programs ) manage the relevant appropriations legislation .

congress can enact legislative mandates that oversee and regulate u.s. participation in the wbg .

these mandates fall into one of four main categories .

first , legislative mandates direct how the u.s. representatives at the wbg can vote on various policies and projects .

second , legislative mandates direct the u.s. representatives at the wbg to advocate for specific policies .

third , congress may require the secretary of the treasury to submit reports on wbg activities .

fourth , congress may attempt to influence policies at the wbg through the "power of the purse," that is , by withholding funding from the wbg or attaching stipulations on the wbg's use of funds .

appendix a .

world bank group classifications wbg institutions base their lending on levels of economic development .

appendix b .

world bank group energy portfolio , fy2003-fy2010 appendix c. u.s. department of the treasury guidance to the multilateral development banks on coal in december 2009 , the u.s. treasury department transmitted to the senior management of the multilateral development banks ( mdbs ) guidance for engaging with developing countries on coal - fired power generation .

the guidance is intended to be adapted by individual mdbs and incorporated into their respective operational policies , country and sector strategies , and other procedures that are related to the public or private project cycle for coal - powered generation operations .

it covers a range of issues including alternatives analysis , power sector policy reform , and capacity building .

it is intended to supplement rather than supersede other mdb operational policies ( eg , environmental impact assessment , other environmental and social safeguards , procurement ) and to be used to help determine u.s. interactions with the mdbs as they update relevant sector strategies and operational policies .

provisions in the guidance include the following , among others: having the mdbs incorporate procedures to ensure full consideration of no or low carbon options before appraising a proposed new or retrofit coal - fired power generation project ; identifying "no or low carbon options" as including ( 1 ) more carbon efficient fossil fuel generation , ( 2 ) renewable resources , ( 3 ) supply side efficiency improvements in other plants , and ( 4 ) demand side management ; supporting the use of best internationally available technology for reducing ghg emissions if proceeding with appraisal of a new or retrofit coal generation project ; for projects in ibrd and blend countries , incorporating offsetting actions ( i.e. , a package of significant and measurable actions elsewhere in the power sector that , in the aggregate , are intended to reduce emissions by an amount equivalent to the emissions to be added by the proposed project ) ; and , for projects in ida - only countries , proceeding with appraisal of a coal project that does not meet the above best available technology criteria , if the project ( 1 ) addresses critical national energy security needs , ( 2 ) responds to national short - term emergencies , or ( 3 ) overcomes binding constraints on national economic development when no viable alternatives exist .

