the united states looks to europe for partnership on an extensive range of global issues .

in terms of international politics , security , and economics , americans and europeans tend to share broadly similar values , and often tend to pursue common or compatible goals .

many observers assert that the collective weight and influence of europe and the united states , when projected through common transatlantic positions and complementary actions , fundamentally increases the odds that both sides will be able to achieve mutually desirable outcomes in world affairs .

more than five decades after the treaties of rome ( 1957 ) launched a process of european integration , the european union ( eu ) has come to play an increasingly important role in the life of its 27 member countries .

reflective of this evolution , significant aspects of policy making have been gradually shifting from national capitals to the eu institutions based in brussels .

although the united states continues to maintain strong and active bilateral relations with the individual countries of europe , and the transatlantic defense relationship remains centered in the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) , some observers assert that much of the transatlantic partnership is increasingly set in the context of u.s. relations with the eu .

from the time it was founded in the 1950s , the eu has regarded itself as a civilian power .

nato was the forum where many of the original eu members could focus on questions of cold war defense and security .

meanwhile , the early decades of the eu were preoccupied with the technical aspects of deep economic integration .

this type of integration represented a new form of cooperation between sovereign states that was the very antithesis of the power politics that twice led to the devastation of europe between 1914 and 1945 .

the end of the cold war , however , sparked debates within the eu about the desirability of developing a stronger foreign policy identity .

after some early steps in that direction , europe's inability to mount a strong political or military intervention in the balkan wars of the 1990s lent renewed urgency to such efforts while also stimulating initiatives to build an eu security and defense capability .

building on earlier efforts to coordinate member states' foreign policies , the 1992 treaty on european union formally established the eu's common foreign and security policy .

cfsp deals with international issues of a political or diplomatic nature , including issues with a security or military orientation — "high politics. .

under the eu treaties , these types of political and security issues remain the prerogative of the member state governments — conceptually , in the case of cfsp , "common" means 27 sovereign governments choosing to work together to the extent that they can reach a consensus on any given policy issue .

the common security and defense policy ( csdp ) is the operations arm of cfsp .

the member countries formally agreed to begin work on an integrated eu security and defense policy in 1999 .

despite its military and defense elements , it is important to note that the activities of csdp are not exclusively military in nature — in fact , in practice , csdp operations have most often consisted of civilian activities such as police and judicial training ( "rule of law" ) and security sector reform .

nearly 15 years after it was launched , csdp has become largely oriented toward such activities , as well as peacekeeping , conflict prevention , crisis management , post - conflict stabilization , and humanitarian missions , rather than conventional military combat operations .

nevertheless , european policymakers have sought to establish a more robust csdp by enhancing and coordinating eu countries' military capabilities .

under csdp , the eu has set a series of targets for improving capabilities and increasing deployable assets , including plans for a rapid reaction force and multinational "eu battlegroups. .

such forces are not a standing "eu army," but rather a catalogue of troops and assets drawn from existing national forces that member states can make available for eu operations .

some analysts have suggested that pooling assets among several member states and developing national niche capabilities might help remedy european military shortfalls amid tight defense budgets .

in 2004 , the eu established the european defense agency ( eda ) to help coordinate defense - industrial and procurement policy in order to stretch european defense spending .

an effective csdp also calls for an autonomous eu capability to conduct external operations .

many european officials stress that csdp is not intended to rival or compete with nato , but rather is meant to be a complementary alternative .

the lisbon treaty confirms the primary role of nato in its members' mutual defense and reiterates that csdp does not seek to compromise members' commitments to nato .

the existence of csdp gives the eu an ability to act in cases where eu intervention may be more appropriate or effective , or in situations where nato or the united nations choose not to become involved .

in contrast to the intergovernmental nature of cfsp and csdp , many common external policies are formulated and managed under the eu's supranational "community" process .

in areas such as trade , aid , neighborhood policy , and enlargement negotiations — what some observers call the "technical" aspects of external relations — the member states have agreed to pool their sovereignty and decision making at the level of the eu institutions .

accordingly , eu external policies are most integrated and firmly established in these areas .

although it has no formal role in cfsp decision making , the european parliament has a degree of influence on eu foreign policy .

this influence has increased following the enactment of the lisbon treaty .

even before adoption of the lisbon treaty , representatives of the council of ministers consulted the ep on cfsp issues , paying regular visits to the institution to keep members of the european parliament ( meps ) informed of cfsp and csdp decisions .

this exchange continues under the lisbon treaty , including by the president of the european council and the high representative .

the ep also indirectly influences member state debates on cfsp through its own discussions and activities: observers assert that the ep has become an increasingly prominent forum for debate on international issues .

the ep may issue resolutions that express its view or urge a course of action on an international issue .

in september 2012 , the ep issued a resolution containing an extensive overview and assessment of cfsp under the lisbon treaty .

the ep has a foreign affairs committee that monitors the conduct of eu foreign policy , with two subcommittees ( human rights and security and defense ) .

the ep may also set up special committees to investigate specific issues for a limited period of time , such as the 2006 special committee to examine the alleged role of eu member states in hosting reported secret cia detention facilities and aiding cia flights related to the rendition of terrorism suspects .

the ep has 41 delegations ( ranging in size between 20 and 50 meps ) that maintain parliament - to - parliament contacts and relations with representatives of many countries and regions around the world .

for example , the ep has interparliamentary delegations for relations with the united states and the nato parliamentary assembly , as well as with russia , iran , israel , the palestinian legislative council , china , india , and the korean peninsula .

the ep won significant concessions during the debates over setting up the external action service .

due to the ep's role in the oversight and approval of the eu budget , the ep's assent was required regarding the structure , staffing , and budget of the eeas .

the ep won the right to scrutinize the non - military parts of the cfsp / csdp budget ( previously , the particulars of these expenses were exempt from ep oversight ) .

the ep also won the right to hold u.s. senate - style confirmation hearings for some of the eu ambassadors designated to prominent postings .

the ep has a central , formal role in eu "community" decision making .

under the lisbon treaty , the number of issue areas in which the ep acts as a co - legislator along with the council of ministers has expanded considerably .

as a result , the ep must give its consent on all external agreements negotiated by the european commission .

this power includes trade deals ( such as the eu - south korea free trade agreement passed by the ep in february 2011 ) and agreements such as the u.s. - eu swift agreement on tracking terrorist financing and the u.s - eu airline security agreement on sharing passenger name record ( pnr ) information .

the ep has openly sought to assert itself as a more powerful actor within the eu's "institutional triangle. .

in cases such as the eu - korea fta , swift , and pnr , observers discern a trend in which meps seek to convey that the ep's positions must now be taken into account during ( and not after ) the negotiation of international agreements or the drafting of new legislative proposals .

the evolution of eu external policies and capabilities ties into a related discussion about the changing structure and dynamics of transatlantic relations .

in europe , "unfinished business" remains in the balkans , caucasus , and former soviet states , and the united states will continue to cooperate closely with europe on these issues .

overall , however , many analysts have observed that the focus of u.s. foreign policy has been gravitating increasingly to the middle east and asia over the past decade .

indications of a "pacific pivot" and strategic re - balancing toward east asia by the obama administration have recently attracted attention to this theme .

such trends , some argue , have made europe in and of itself less of a u.s. foreign policy priority .

instead , the political and security aspects of the transatlantic relationship are now mostly about what europe and the united states can do together to address global challenges of joint interest and concern .

many of these challenges pertain to new types of threats that have emerged since the end of the cold war , threats that require new capabilities to address .

at the same time , some analysts perceive an increasingly multipolar world order in which countries such as china , india , brazil , and russia are moving alongside the united states and europe as centers of power .

given these trends , u.s. policymakers might ask what kind of an eu they would like to see , and what role they might like to see the eu play in the world .

the eu is occasionally viewed as a potential counterweight , but many u.s. policymakers tend to view it more as a counterpart , a partner with whom cooperation might help achieve common ends .

many observers argue that a more united eu capable of acting decisively in world affairs is a better u.s. partner that can help achieve common goals .

on the other side of the coin , they assert , a disunited europe tends to be an ineffective and less relevant actor in dealing with major world issues .

some analysts have suggested that an overdependence on the united states prevents europe from acting as an equal partner — both sides might be better off with a europe , speaking and acting as one , that takes a more robust , assertive , and independent approach to international security issues .

on the other hand , skeptics question what happens when a united europe disagrees with the united states .

some such observers prefer to keep u.s. engagement with europe oriented toward a bilateral , country - by - country basis , arguing that such an approach is a better way to pursue u.s. interests on a range of issues .

such observers also assert that each bilateral relationship remains indispensible , countering suggestions that some national capitals could become increasingly less relevant to the united states if eu policy making continues to shift to brussels .

discussions about csdp inevitably raise the issue of eu - nato relations .

despite the fact that they have 21 member countries in common , nato and the eu continue to have difficulty establishing a more cooperative and coordinated working relationship .

in the past , u.s. officials expressed concern that the development of csdp and eu defense structures would result in a wasteful duplication of scarce defense resources and lead to the separation of the united states from the european security architecture .

while some remain skeptical , csdp has become increasingly viewed as a helpful means to build european capabilities and permit expanded eu engagement in global challenges .

in 2003 , the eu and nato agreed to the "berlin plus" arrangement , allowing eu - led military missions access to nato assets and planning capabilities , and thereby preventing the duplication of resources and structures .

the struggle with generating more european defense capabilities has also been playing out in nato — despite the adoption of an updated strategic concept in november 2010 , this struggle is a significant part of still ongoing debates about the future role and purpose of the institution .

some analysts assert that nato and the eu need to work in a more complementary fashion to permit a more efficient and effective overall use of euro - atlantic civil and military resources .

the nato strategic concept states that "nato and the eu can and should play complementary and mutually reinforcing roles in supporting international peace and security. .

the document directs nato to "fully strengthen the strategic partnership with the eu , in the spirit of full mutual openness , transparency , complementarity and respect for the autonomy and institutional integrity of both organizations" and to "broaden our political consultations to include all issues of common concern , in order to share assessments and perspectives. .

disagreements between turkey ( a member of nato but not the eu ) and cyprus ( a member of the eu but not nato ) are often cited as a primary obstacle to deeper cooperation and information sharing .

some observers also point to bureaucratic rivalry and competition between the two institutions , and conflicting views regarding their roles .

these blockages have been known for some time , although solutions at the political level continue to remain elusive .

some observers have suggested establishing a division of labor between the "hard" military tasks that lie at the core of nato and the "soft" peacekeeping and civilian - oriented missions that play to the strengths of the eu , but others decisively reject the idea of such rigid mandates .

on the other hand , some observers note that cooperation between the two institutions is already relatively functional at the working level .

setting aside efforts for a grand institutional fix , and assuming the continuation of political circumstances more or less as they stand , many observers have urged the two institutions to identify and leverage mutually beneficial synergies .

this push is reflected in the most recent strategic concept , which calls on nato and the eu to "enhance our practical cooperation in operations throughout the crisis spectrum , from coordinated planning to mutual support in the field" and to "cooperate more fully in capability development , to minimise duplication and maximise cost - effectiveness. .

together , the eu and nato represent the institutional toolbox that the euro - atlantic nations may draw on to address global challenges .

institutional structures and arrangements are imperfect , but having this toolbox presents the euro - atlantic community with options to choose from .

the most suitable flag to fly — eu , nato , or other — depends on an interplay between the capabilities offered by each institution and the political circumstances of a given situation or mission .

according to analysts , the security strategy documents released in recent years by the united states , the eu , and nato , as well as by france , germany , and the united kingdom , demonstrate a convergence of perceptions about the international security environment .

this trend in the direction of a shared security strategy may present opportunities to recast the dynamics of the u.s. - eu - nato relationship in ways that enable the euro - atlantic partners to better meet the challenges they face .

in other words , by bridging the remaining gaps between the institutions' respective worldviews , a shared security strategy might help accelerate the development of complementary military and civilian capabilities that address the evolving set of interrelated external and domestic security threats faced by all eu and nato member countries .

for the time being , nato remains the center of euro - atlantic defense cooperation , especially from the viewpoint of u.s. policymakers .

some analysts argue that the eu must still move ahead and develop its own military headquarters and planning capabilities in order for csdp to become a more credible and relevant option .

 ( in july 2011 , however , the uk definitively blocked a proposal to consolidate the command structure for eu military missions under a single permanent operational headquarters. ) .

although unlikely in the near term , the development of csdp into a robust military actor able to conduct high - end combat operations would affect the future of nato in many ways .

conversely , a stagnant or ineffective csdp would also have important long - term implications for the transatlantic security relationship .

as members of congress and the u.s. administration examine the u.s. role in nato and u.s. basing arrangements in europe in the years ahead , broad developments in csdp might be an area of related interest .

for all of the criticisms that may be directed at european foreign and security policy , europe is likely to remain the united states' closest global partner into the foreseeable future .

none of the world's other powers , established or rising , can claim to share europe's multi - faceted compatibility with the united states , and for many americans "going it alone" is not an attractive option .

in the emerging geopolitical and security environment suggested by current trends , the transatlantic partnership is unlikely to be well served by "muddling through" each problem on a case - by - case basis .

both americans and europeans have an interest in establishing a stable and enhanced u.s. - eu - nato dynamic that is as efficient and effective as possible .

u.s. policymakers may not be able to determine the choices made by europeans , but they can express u.s. preferences in support of solutions for overcoming resource constraints so that strategy and capabilities adequately match threats and challenges .

