the growth of the national debt , which is considered unsustainable under current policies , continues to be one of the central issues of domestic federal policy making .

on august 2 , 2011 , congress adopted , and the president signed , the budget control act ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) , which might be viewed as an initial step in addressing long - run debt issues .

it had been recognized for some time that the growing long - term debt is an issue , and this concern was reinforced with standard and poor's downgrading of u.s. treasury securities from aaa to aa+ on august 5 , 2011 .

as part of the bca , the joint committee on deficit reduction ( sometimes referred to as the super committee ) was appointed to find ways to achieve a specified amount of deficit reduction .

the committee failed to reach agreement , which triggered a set of automatic spending cuts , largely on discretionary spending , that were put into effect in fy2013 .

at the end of 2012 , however , concerns about the effect of recent spending cuts and tax increases about to take effect ( called the fiscal cliff ) on economic recovery became a central issue .

action to address this problem resulted in retaining tax cuts compared with present law by making most expiring tax cuts permanent and increasing discretionary spending levels .

these decreases in revenue collection and increases in spending resulted in higher budget deficits .

this report examines alternative approaches to reducing the deficit , relating to the immediate issues arising from the bca and the extended tax cuts as well as to ongoing , longer - term decisions about how to bring the debt under control .

it focuses on the trade - offs between limiting the provision of defense and domestic public goods , reducing transfers to persons including entitlements for the elderly and those with low income , reducing support for state and local governments , and raising taxes .

using projections of the debt and deficit , it also addresses how limiting reliance on one source of deficit reduction creates pressure on other sources .

the objectives of government spending and taxes are generally viewed as providing for public and quasi - public goods , such as defense , law enforcement , infrastructure , and education ; correcting market failures , including externalities ( both negative , such as pollution , and positive , such as research and development ) ; achieving distributive justice ; and managing business cycles .

measured by amount of spending , the most important pure public good the federal government provides is defense .

many public and quasi - public goods , as well as income - support programs , are provided by state and local governments , and some federal spending is through grants to state and local governments for these programs .

for example , in the state and local governments' fy2007 , state governments received 21% of total revenues from federal transfers and local governments received 3.6% .

states also provide transfers to local governments , and local governments provide transfers among themselves as well .

these intergovernmental transfers are important in evaluating budget proposals because a reduction in transfers to state and local governments may in large part shift the burden to these governments rather than reduce the overall government role .

spending in the u.s. budget can be divided in various ways that are relevant to considering deficit reduction .

in the remainder of this section , government spending is divided by whether the spending is to provide public goods or transfers , whether it is discretionary or mandatory ( and the major categories within those divisions ) , and by function .

this section also discusses taxes by source , tax structure , tax expenditures , and receipts and payments in the major trust funds .

the first approach to presenting spending distinguishes between the provision of goods and services ( defense and nondefense ) and transfers to persons or to state and local governments .

this approach is not a typical way of presenting budget data .

it is important to divide spending in this way , however , to address concerns about potential inefficiency in federal government operations , especially outside of defense , as it indicates the scope for cutbacks relative to the deficit .

the second approach divides spending into discretionary ( requiring appropriations ) and mandatory ( embodied in laws providing entitlements to benefits ) .

it is associated with the procedures needed to alter spending .

the third , also a common way of presenting budget data , divides spending by function ( defense , education , energy , health , etc .

 ) .

the cbo baseline projects the debt will stay at about 74% of gdp ( its fy2014 level ) for a number of years , then grow to 78% in fy2024 .

however , cbo also uses an alternative baseline that may reflect policies consistent with current service levels , expectations , or history .

in this baseline , the debt will continue to rise , reaching 87% of gdp in fy2024 .

this alternative baseline includes increased discretionary spending , eventually rising with output , higher medicare payments to doctors , an extension of certain temporary tax provisions , and other limits on taxes .

table 10 shows the projected spending against the cbo baseline by fy024 .

as indicated earlier with respect to the baseline issues , this table includes the effects of spending caps .

the table indicates that past patterns are expected to continue , in that programs for the elderly and health programs are becoming more costly over time .

in addition , as deficits persist and interest rates are projected to rise , interest payments will increase as well .

table 11 shows the forecast for revenues , again using the baseline assumptions .

with these assumptions and economic growth , revenues will rise to 18.4% of gdp by fy2024 .

cbo's long - run budget analysis indicates the possible pressures from a more realistic baseline , especially for health programs .

table 12 shows spending and revenues , along with debt - to - output ratios , further into the future under the cbo extended baseline .

table 13 compares this extended baseline with the alternative baseline .

the alternative baseline may be a more realistic representation of current policy .

cbo standard projections show an increase in transfers for old - age and health programs but a decline in other programs' relative size .

the standard baseline assumes income taxes will continue to rise through real bracket creep , whereas the alternative baseline assumes that action will constrain revenues .

the debt - to - gdp ratio increases in both scenarios , but it rises more steeply under the alternative baseline .

in that baseline , the deficit reaches 17% of gdp in fy2039 and the primary deficit ( excluding interest ) reaches 7% .

numerous proposals were put forward to address the budget deficit while attention was focused on deficit reduction in 2011 and 2012 .

the committee for a responsible federal budget ( crfb ) identified 32 different proposals and provided comparisons of provisions .

this section relies in part on that comparison to summarize the different approaches taken by the various plans , which provide examples of potential changes .

also presented are projections for some plans of the expected effects on revenues and spending relative to gdp .

because updated estimates are not available for these plans , data are presented as they were projected to be in 2012 .

although projections may have changed somewhat , the measures are presented as long - run effects rather than changes from a baseline and indicate the overall objectives of the plans .

all of the plans aimed at reducing the debt - to - gdp ratio , but they varied in spending , taxes , and the deficit relative to output .

for those plans in which measures were reported ( for 2020 ) , spending - to - gdp ratios ranged from 18% to 25% , whereas taxes - to - gdp ratios varied from 18% to 22.5% .

deficits ranged from 0% to 4% of output .

a debt level can still be sustainable with some continuing deficit .

the deficit causes the debt to grow , but as long as it is not large enough to cause debt to grow faster than gdp , the debt - to - gdp ratio will be stable or in decline .

although summarizing all of these plans is beyond the scope of this report , table 14 shows five plans that have been widely discussed along with the cbo standard baseline projection at that time and the crfb's own estimate of what it considered a realistic projection .

that projection is similar to cbo's baseline for spending but reflected a tax assumption that permanently extended the bush tax cuts ( similar to the cbo alternative baseline at that time and roughly consistent with what occurred. ) .

the five plans are the house republican budget plan , the president's framework , the bipartisan fiscal commission , and two private plans that are widely discussed , the galston - macguineas plan and the debt reduction task force ( domenici - rivlin ) .

 ( in subsequent plan comparisons , the senate's "gang of six" plan is also discussed ; the crfb reports no numbers for that plan. ) .

most of these plans had spending rising constantly or relative to 2007 ( at which time spending was approximately 20% of gdp ) but falling relative to current law projections at that time ( and to the cbo alternative baseline projection ) .

taxes relative to gdp ranged from slightly below the 2007 level of 18.5% to slightly above the cbo baseline projection of 20.0% ( a baseline that has the bush tax cuts and other temporary provisions expiring as scheduled ) .

these proposals raise five issues for consideration .

first , although discretionary spending cuts were the short - term target of many proposals , how easy is it to make these specific cuts ? .

second , to what extent did proposals appear to maintain the current trust fund revenues for social security and medicare , and how important is maintaining this relationship ? .

third , what spending measures would be required , and how realistic might it be , to maintain tax revenues at or below the levels experienced prior to the recessions ? .

fourth , is there a feasible way to preserve entitlement programs for the elderly and persons with low income ( social security , medicare , and low - income programs ) , and what measures would be necessary to achieve that purpose ? .

fifth , what are the consequences for state and local governments ? .

discretionary spending , as discussed above , whether for defense or nondefense purposes , is not the cause of the long - run growth in spending and historically has been relatively constant or in decline as a percentage of gdp .

discretionary spending , however , is targeted as a source of budget savings in the proposals and , because it is easier to change in the short run , may be a source of initial savings .

defense discretionary spending has declined since fy1971 , and nondefense discretionary spending is projected to be at a low point ( compared with the period fy1971-present ) as a percentage of output in the cbo baseline by fy2024 .

the cbo baseline already built in a decline in discretionary spending as a percentage of output because that baseline assumed spending grew at the rate of inflation .

it also incorporated the cuts in the bca through fy2021 .

there is no magic number indicating how high this spending should be in relation to output .

nevertheless , recent history has shown that nondefense discretionary spending has been higher in the past and hence cuts would lead to lower level of government services than has traditionally been the case .

 ( defense spending , as noted above , fluctuates depending on international conflicts , although it has increased to respond to perceived threats or other changes such as an all - volunteer force .

overall , however , it has declined since fy1971. ) .

as shown in table 15 and table 16 , all of the deficit reduction proposals envisioned lower levels of discretionary spending relative to gdp .

at the same time , most of the proposals did not spell out the specific cuts proposed , an important issue given the diversity in the types of programs in nondefense spending .

that is , these plans generally directed agencies to cut spending without outlining the specifics .

thus , the plans did not indicate , for example , if fewer prisons will exist , if grants for special - needs children will be reduced , if fewer highways will be built or repaired , etc .

however , these reductions might have needed to be significant .

for example , the fiscal commission proposed cuts that were 18% below the cbo baseline ( as shown in table 16 ) .

even so , it is unlikely that reductions in discretionary spending could close much of the long - run deficit gap .

the fiscal commission's proposed cut in discretionary spending , for example , would have reduced overall spending by about 1.3 percentage points of gdp .

yet , as seen in table 13 , the gap between spending and taxes by fy2039 if present policies continue ( alternative scenario ) is 17% of gdp .

thus , closing this gap is likely to require cuts in other spending , including entitlements , increases in tax revenues , or a combination .

cbo's 2011 study on budget options contained some specific proposals for cuts in discretionary spending , which might suggest the types of cuts that might be considered in these proposals , although most of these were small .

for example , consider education , training , employment , and social services , the largest category in domestic discretionary spending .

cbo included proposals to eliminate grants for educational opportunities outside school hours for low - income students , limit the availability of grants for college to the neediest students , eliminate national community service funding ( which funds americorps and similar operations ) , eliminate funding for community - service jobs for low - income individuals over the age of 55 , and cut funding for the arts by 25% .

taken together , these changes added up to about $40 billion over 10 years .

in contrast , the fiscal commission's cuts for this area appear to be over $100 billion if allocated proportionally to all programs .

since its inception in the 1930s , social security has been financed through a trust fund mechanism in which benefits were financed from payroll tax contributions .

payroll taxes are imposed at a flat rate , with a cap on income covered that is indexed to wages .

because of increasing disparities in income , this ceiling falls lower in the income distribution than it has in the past .

benefits , although they are linked to contributions , are progressive in that the replacement rate for wages falls as wages rise .

because of the link between wages and benefits , many viewed social security as much like a pension , with income in retirement earned through contributions .

with social security , there was a link between contributions and benefits , although it was not precise and , because the trust fund did not accumulate retirement contributions in the same way as a pension plan ( but rather paid most benefits out of current contributions ) , the trust fund's financing was affected by demographics .

currently , the trust fund is spending more in benefits than it collects in payroll taxes and using interest earnings to fill the gap .

benefits , as shown above , are growing faster than payroll taxes .

as a result , under current policy the social security trust fund has been using its assets and will become insolvent by 2033 , at which point it will have income sufficient to pay about three - fourths of benefits .

moreover , if a position is taken that taxes cannot be increased ( as discussed below ) or that payroll taxes are not to be increased , then either the close link between payroll contributions and earnings will have to be abandoned or the burden of restoring solvency will fall on cutting benefits .

as shown in table 17 , some of the plans had specific proposals to cut social security benefits and raise taxes ( generally by adjusting the payroll cap ) .

these proposals tended to be similar in some respects in the types of revisions they proposed .

 ( specific proposals for revision can also be found in the cbo's budget options document. ) .

some of the proposals do not directly provide changes to social security revisions but rather provide instructions to make the trust fund solvent .

in general , therefore , these plans apparently intend to preserve the structure of the social security program .

the medicare hi trust fund has been affected over time ( as has medicare in general ) by demographics and , more importantly , by the growth in health care expenditures per capita due to technical advances and cultural expectations .

as shown in table 18 , the plans have specific suggestions for health care ( medicare , medicaid , and the new health mandates ) .

in some cases , they include instructions to find savings in the future .

there was no specific reference to trust funds and no payroll tax revenues raised for the medicare hi trust fund .

most of the proposals , as seen in table 14 , envisioned some increase in taxes as a percentage of output compared with fy2007 , the last year before the 2007-2009 recession , when the bush tax cuts were in effect and taxes were 18.5% of output .

one plan set the level at 18% , but the others set the tax revenue at around the peak historical level ( 19.5% in fy2001 ) or higher .

one philosophy behind the view of keeping revenues fixed relative to gdp is that government spending takes away from private choices and creates inefficiency and that taxes impose distortions and inhibit economic activity .

 ( this view depends on strong assumptions about benefits generated by federal spending. ) .

by limiting revenues available , the scope of the government will be constrained .

most proposals contained higher tax levels .

an argument is sometimes made that tax increases would inhibit economic activity so much that revenues will decline rather than rise .

empirical evidence does not generally support this view , however .

if revenues are limited , significant pressure would be placed on major entitlements .

for example , social security , health spending , and interest alone are projected to total 18% in fy2039 ( table 12 ) .

if revenues are around 18.4% of gdp , only 0.4% is left for everything else .

 ( in fy2014 , this amount was 9.3% of gdp. ) .

defense , nondefense discretionary , and other mandatory programs are projected to amount to 6.9% of gdp in fy2039 .

these calculations would be even more constrained with the alternative scenario and the economic feedback in table 13 .

thus , it would appear that major reductions in social security and health spending would be required to constrain tax levels at current percentages of gdp .

the republican budget committee's plan would have set the tax level at 18% and spending at 20% in 2020 , fully four percentage points below the cbo baseline at that time ( 24% ) and inclusive of interest payments .

how did it accomplish this ? .

relative to the cbo baseline , it recommended a level of spending that was $5.8 trillion lower in the first 10 years .

the discretionary spending reductions were large ( $2.8 trillion ) , especially for nondefense , compared with other proposals .

for nondefense spending , reductions by 2021 were 34% of the cbo baseline , which projected a level that was already historically low .

the second - largest major change within the first 10 years , $1.4 trillion , was to repeal parts of the health care legislation that imposed costs ( while retaining other cost - reducing provisions ) .

the plan converted medicaid payments to the states into a block grant that would reduce spending by $0.8 billion over 10 years , or 35% in 2022 according to cbo .

the remainder included $0.7 trillion from other spending , which includes , as shown in table 19 , a block grant for food support ( snap ) as well as other mandatory spending changes .

interest payments also were to fall .

for medicaid , the plan stipulated that either the programs' benefits would have to decline or the states would have to shoulder a larger share of the financial burden .

significant changes would have been made after 2021 , primarily by converting medicare to a voucher system ( required for those under the age of 55 in 2011 ) , which would then grow at the inflation rate .

in addition , discretionary spending would continue to grow with inflation , so that it would continually decline as a percentage of output ( the cbo long - run standard baseline assumes this spending will grow with output after fy2021 ) .

essentially , this plan converted major entitlements into fixed payments that are constrained to grow with inflation to control the deficit and debt without raising taxes .

although this plan and its approach are illustrative , they are also suggestive of what would likely be necessary to hold the size of government and tax revenues fixed at 2007 levels: major changes to government programs for health care and other entitlements .

to examine the other side of this coin , consider what would be required to protect entitlements .

protecting entitlements reflects a view that government should maintain its social safety net for lower - income persons and programs for the elderly , including provisions for health care , because they are important components of maintaining a reasonable standard of living .

with respect to social security , sizeable surplus revenues have already been paid to support the payment of future benefits .

medicare hi also has accumulated surpluses that will maintain benefits for some years to come .

nevertheless , neither of these plans is sustainable in its current formulation , and the shortfall in revenues relative to payments contributes to the overall deficit .

most of the proposals already envisioned some increase in taxes ( see table 20 for details ) along with cuts in benefits , but they also cut back on entitlements .

tax increases would likely be required to maintain the current level of entitlement programs .

these effects can be seen by examining the different scenarios in table 12 , table 13 , and table 14 .

in table 13 , under the alternative baseline , taxes are held at current levels and spending rises relative to the standard baseline , resulting in a deficit of 5% of output in fy2024 and 17% of output in fy2039 .

consider the lower amount of spending from the cbo baseline compared with holding taxes at current levels from the cfrb projections in table 14 , in which the deficit is 5.5% .

as noted in the previous section , it is unlikely that cuts to discretionary and other non - entitlement spending alone would suffice to close the deficit to a sustainable level .

therefore , it is realistic to expect that tax collections would have to rise to restore the path of future deficits to sustainability .

is there a justification for increasing the size of government to continue the present social security and health benefit payments ? .

it is useful to consider separately social security , whose issues arise from demographics , and health care , whose issues arise from a combination of demographics and health care costs .

social security benefits are expected to rise from the current 4.9% of output to 6.3% in fy2035 .

however , beyond that point , the costs remain about the same , falling slightly as the baby boom generation begins to die and then rising as longevity increases .

the problem with social security funding did not arise from the baby boom ; it arose from the increase in life span whose pressures on the system were masked for a time by the growth in the labor force ( both from the baby boom and the entry of women into the labor force ) .

unlike health care , social security benefits are not expected to grow continuously but to settle down so that benefits and costs are relatively constant ( with benefits slightly greater than 6% and revenues about 5% of gdp ) .

there are , therefore , a range of tax increases , as well as benefit cuts , that could bring the program into permanent balance .

a congressional research service study of social security suggests that there are important justifications arising from market failure and that there is a rationale , based on life - cycle considerations , for making most of the adjustment in the imbalance through higher taxes rather than lower benefits .

another option , which affects both taxes and benefits , is to increase the retirement age , although such increases put pressure on the disability - insurance program because some individuals will find it more difficult to work longer .

thus , there are justifications for addressing more of the long - run insolvency of the social security program through tax increases rather than benefit reductions .

this assessment considers outcomes in the steady state .

there is also an issue of which generation bears the burden during the transition .

the more the system relies on tax increases as opposed to benefit cuts in the short and medium term , the more the burden is shifted to younger generations .

similar life - cycle arguments could be applied to any program for the elderly to the extent that program is increasing in cost because of longevity , including medicare and nursing home costs under medicaid .

these programs are financed by a combination of payroll taxes and general revenues , but most of these taxes would be collected during most individuals' working years .

cost increases for health care are a different matter , in part because they seem to be growing continuously and in part because there are different ways to view them .

to the extent that rising costs reflect better medical care that extends and improves the quality of life , spending more money on health care may appropriately reflect preferences of individuals whose higher incomes permit them to spend more of their resources in this area .

however , to the extent that rising medical costs reflect serious inefficiencies in the system arising from failure to allocate resources by price and causing patients and their physicians to consume large and inefficient amounts of health care , then increased benefits may not be justified .

if benefits are to be largely maintained , and because it is relatively clear that cutting other forms of spending will probably not be adequate , what are the tax options ? .

basically , these options , some of which are discussed in a number of the budget proposals , are raising rates , broadening the income tax base through reductions in tax expenditures , increasing other taxes ( such as payroll and excise taxes ) , and introducing new taxes ( such as a carbon tax ) .

rates can easily be varied , and many of the proposals included allowing the bush tax cuts , especially for high - income taxpayers , to expire .

because most of these tax cuts were extended , this change would be the equivalent of a rate increase currently .

the barriers for rate increases might be viewed as largely political rather than technical , and top tax rates in the past have been much higher than they are today .

allowing the temporary tax provisions to expire and including real bracket creep was reflected in the difference between the cbo standard and alternative baselines and accounted for 2.7% by fy2022 .

although tax expenditures have received much attention and are included in budget proposals , policy makers face significant political and technical barriers to implementing changes .

some tax expenditures are technically difficult to eliminate ( especially employer fringe benefits ) , some are valued as part of the social safety net ( such as the earned income credit or exclusion of transfers ) , some are desirable for other reasons , and some are so politically popular ( eg , the home mortgage interest deduction ) that eliminating them or scaling them back could be difficult .

for example , considering technical challenges alone , the largest individual tax expenditure is the exclusion of employer health insurance , which accounts for 11% of the total revenue foregone .

as discussed during the health reform debate , however , fairly designing an inclusion is very difficult because the value of insurance varies , for example , with the age of the employee and other characteristics .

if not allowed to vary by age , young employees who work for firms with higher average employee ages will be imputed more income than employees working for firms with younger employees .

potentially more serious imputation problems arise with the third - largest tax expenditure ( the exclusion of pension contributions and earnings ) , which accounts for 9% of the total .

problems arise with regard to this tax expenditure because of defined benefit pension plans , whose benefits are difficult to allocate because they ultimately depend on future work history with the firm .

at the same time , many of the proposals discussed in table 20 also envision eliminating tax expenditures to lower rates .

if used to generate additional revenue , reducing tax expenditures could result in significant progress toward reducing the deficit .

one study , for example , suggests that a more realistic appraisal of tax expenditure options , taking into account technical barriers , political barriers , and justification for some provisions , would increase income - tax revenues by about 15% .

in the earlier cbo alternative baseline , income - tax revenues would have been about 10.6% in fy2021 , suggesting increased revenues of 1.6% of gdp .

this increase is about two - thirds of the difference in revenues between the regular and alternative cbo baselines , which reflected the bush tax cuts , other temporary provisions , and some real bracket creep ( growth in revenues because real incomes are rising ) .

two other types of taxes that might be altered are the payroll and excise taxes .

for example , some proposals have included a provision for raising or eliminating the cap on earnings for payroll taxes .

other options include raising rates and expanding the base to include fringe benefits , such as pension contributions and health care .

 ( imputing income , however , as noted above , may be problematic. ) .

a number of options could significantly extend solvency to the social security trust fund .

revenue could also be raised by taxing social security benefits in the same way as pensions , and this revenue , although considered as part of tax expenditures , could be designated to finance social security benefits .

in addition , proposals have included increases in gasoline taxes to provide additional funding for highways and increases in alcohol taxes , whose real value has been declining since 1991 and would be an estimated 60% higher if they had been indexed to inflation since then .

finally , there are options for additional types of taxes .

three new tax sources that have been included in the proposals are value - added taxes , carbon taxes ( revenue could also be collected through an auction of carbon rights through a cap - and - trade system ) , and taxes on sugar - sweetened beverages .

both value - added taxes and carbon taxes could raise significant amounts of additional revenues .

these revenue sources differ in the incentives they create and also in their progressivity .

because income taxes tend to fall more heavily than other taxes on high - income individuals and tax expenditures tend to benefit higher - income individuals , these changes would likely add to the progressivity of the system .

changes in payroll rates would tend to be proportional and affect higher - income individuals less , although raising the wage cap would concentrate the effect on higher - income workers .

flat rate consumption taxes , including value - added taxes , carbon taxes , and specific excise taxes ( such as those on gasoline , alcohol , and sugared beverages ) tend to be regressive .

a combination of changes could , however , achieve approximately the same distribution as current revenues .

some of the proposals would address the budget deficit by reducing transfers to state and local governments .

because the details of discretionary spending ( other than caps and limits ) are not generally spelled out , some of this reduction could reduce transfers to state and local governments in areas such as education , transportation , and community development .

in addition , many entitlements , both for health and income security , are administered by the state and local governments with federal transfers .

one of the largest of these programs is medicaid , which the house republican budget proposal restricts to a block grant that grows at population rates plus inflation rates .

as noted above , federal transfers to state and local governments are 2.8% of output and constitute 21% of the receipts of these governments .

state and local governments also benefit from tax expenditures that allow itemized deductions for state and local taxes and exclusions for interest on state and local bonds .

depending on how these governments respond , restrictions that affect state and local transfers could largely shift the burden of spending from federal to subnational governments .

