federal regulations generally result from an act of congress and are the means by which statutes are implemented and specific requirements are established .

the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( hereafter , the "dodd - frank act," p.l .

111-203 , july 21 , 2010 ) is a particularly noteworthy example of congressional delegation of rulemaking authority to federal agencies .

a previous crs report identified 330 provisions in the dodd - frank act that require or permit the issuance of rules to implement the legislation .

nearly 80% of these 330 provisions assign rulemaking authorities or responsibilities to one of four agencies: the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( frs ) , the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) , and the newly created consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) .

the regulations that these and other agencies will issue pursuant to the dodd - frank act are expected to have a major effect on how the legislation is implemented .

as one observer put it , the rules would "turn reform into reality. .

shortly after the legislation was enacted , another observer said , "in most pieces of legislation like this , the real teeth is in the regulations. .

another said that the dodd - frank act "is complicated and contains substantial ambiguities , many of which will not be resolved until regulations are adopted. .

an article in the new york times stated that the legislation is basically a 2,000-page missive to federal agencies , instructing regulators to address subjects ranging from derivatives trading to document retention .

but it is notably short on specifics , giving regulators significant power to determine its impact — and giving partisans on both sides a second chance to influence the outcome .

the july 7 , 2011 , edition of the unified agenda listed 30 dodd - frank act - related actions in the "proposed rule stage" of rulemaking ( indicating that the agencies expected to issue proposed rules on the topics within the next 12 months , or for which the closing dates of the comment periods are the next step ) .

the agencies expected to issue the most proposed rules were the securities and exchange commission ( sec , 10 upcoming proposed rules ) and the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc , five upcoming proposed rules ) .

other agencies with upcoming proposed rules included the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ , three rules ) , the office of thrift supervision ( ots , two rules ) , the office of housing ( hud – oh , one rule ) , the farm credit administration ( fca , one rule ) , the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa , one rule ) , and the national credit union administration ( ncua , one rule ) .

six other upcoming proposed rules were expected to be issued jointly from among these agencies .

although most of these unified agenda entries referred to specific upcoming proposed rules , sometimes a single entry in the unified agenda indicated that more than one rule would be proposed .

for example , a cftc entry entitled "identity theft red flag rules for cftc regulated institutions under fair credit reporting act" said the following in its abstract: section 1088 of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act contains amendments to section 621 of the fair credit reporting act ( fcra ) .

these amendments add the cftc and the sec ( together referred to as the agencies ) to the list of federal agencies that are required to promulgate regulations relating to the development and implementation of identity theft programs under the fcra .

the agencies' rules implementing section 621 of the fcra will require financial institutions and creditors that are regulated by either of both of the agencies to develop and implement written identity theft programs to detect , prevent and mitigate identity theft in connection with the opening of certain accounts or certain existing accounts .

the july 7 , 2011 , edition of the unified agenda listed 72 dodd - frank act - related actions in the "final rule stage" of rulemaking ( indicating that the agency expected to issue final rules or take other final actions on the subjects within the next 12 months ) .

twenty - eight of the 72 final rule entries were from the sec ; another 28 were from the cftc ; five were from the federal reserve ; three were from fsoc ; two were from osha ; and one was from the national credit union administration ( ncua ) .

three other rules were expected to be issued as joint rules and were listed in the unified agenda by more than one agency .

however , it is possible that these entries will result in more than 72 final rules .

as was the case for upcoming proposed rules under the dodd - frank act , one of the cftc final rule entries in the unified agenda ( "position limits for derivatives' ) was rather general: the commission has been mandated by congress ( in the dodd - frank act ) to impose position limits , on an aggregate basis , on futures and swaps relating to exempt in order to ( a ) diminish , eliminate , or prevent excessive speculation ; ( b ) deter and prevent market manipulation , squeezes , and corners ; ( c ) ensure sufficient market liquidity for bona fide hedgers ; and ( d ) ensure that the price discovery function of an underlying market is not disrupted .

given the potential effects of position limits on various market participants , the commission has issued a notice of proposed rulemaking to solicit and consider the public's comments in advance of issuing final rules .

as noted earlier in this report , the unified agenda also identifies "long - term actions" — that is , regulatory actions that are under development in the agencies that the agencies do not expect to take action on in the next 12 months .

the july 7 , 2011 , edition of the unified agenda listed two long - term actions related to the dodd - frank act — both of which were actions to be taken by the cftc .

in the first entry , the agency stated that the "commission is directed by the dodd - frank act of 2010 , to adopt an interim final rule ( ifr ) to establish a timeframe for reporting to a registered swap data repository swaps entered into prior to enactment of the dodd - frank act whose terms had not expired on the date of enactment. .

cftc published the interim final rule on october 14 , 2010 , and the agency indicated that the nature and timing of its next step was "to be determined. .

the second long - term entry , also from the cftc , indicated that the dodd - frank act directs that rules adopted by the commission under this section shall provide for the reporting of 'transition' swaps - e.g .

those swaps entered into after the date of enactment of the dodd - frank act and prior to the effective date of that statute .

the commission expects shortly to issue a notice for comment about permanent , substantive rules under cea section 2 ( h ) ( 5 ) to govern the reporting of these post - enactment swaps .

the purpose of the interim final rule is to alert counterparties that these swaps may be subject to reporting rules and to ensure the preservation of data relating to those swaps pending implementation of such rules .

cftc published the interim final rule on december 27 , 2010 , and indicated that the nature and timing of its next step was "to be determined. .

as noted earlier in this report , when federal agencies issue substantive regulations , they are carrying out legislative authority delegated to them by congress .

therefore , it is appropriate for congress to oversee the rules that agencies issue to ensure that they are consistent with congressional intent and the rulemaking requirements established in various statutes and executive orders .

for congress to oversee the rules being issued pursuant to the dodd - frank act , it must first know that they are being issued — ideally as early as possible .

the unified agenda is perhaps the best vehicle to provide that early information , describing not only what rules agencies are expected to issue , but also providing information regarding their significance and timing .

congress has a range of tools available to oversee the rules that federal agencies are expected to issue to implement the dodd - frank act , including oversight hearings and confirmation hearings for the heads of regulatory agencies .

individual members of congress may also participate in the rulemaking process by , among other things , meeting with agency officials and filing public comments .

congress , committees , and individual members can also request that the government accountability office ( gao ) evaluate the agencies' rulemaking activities .

however , the act itself contains more than 40 provisions requiring gao to conduct studies and write reports .

for example: section 412 of the act requires gao to examine compliance costs associated with sec rules regarding custody of funds or securities of clients by investment advisers , and any additional costs if a portion of a rule relating to operational independence is eliminated .

gao is required to submit a report on the results of the study to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs and the house committee on financial services not later than three years after the date of enactment ( i.e. , by july 21 , 2013 ) .

section 939e requires gao to study the feasibility and merits of creating an independent professional organization for rating analysts employed by nationally recognized statistical rating organizations .

gao is to submit a report on the results of the study to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs and the house committee on financial services not later than one year after the date of publication of the rules issued by the commission pursuant to section 936 of the act .

section 1421 requires gao to submit a report to congress within one year of the date of enactment ( i.e. , by july 21 , 2011 ) assessing the effects of the dodd - frank act on the availability and affordability of credit for consumers , small businesses , homebuyers , and mortgage lending .

another option is the congressional review act ( cra , 5 u.s.c .

§§801-808 ) , which was enacted in 1996 in an attempt to reestablish a measure of congressional authority over rulemaking "without at the same time requiring congress to become a super regulatory agency. .

the act generally requires federal agencies to submit all of their covered final rules to both houses of congress and gao before they can take effect .

it also established expedited legislative procedures ( primarily in the senate ) by which congress may disapprove agencies' final rules by enacting a joint resolution of disapproval .

the definition of a covered rule in the cra is quite broad , arguably including any type of document ( eg , legislative rules , policy statements , guidance , manuals , and memoranda ) that the agency wishes to make binding on the affected public .

after these rules are submitted , congress can use the expedited procedures specified in the cra to disapprove any of the rules .

cra resolutions of disapproval must be presented to the president for signature or veto .

for a variety of reasons , however , the cra has been used to disapprove only one rule since it was enacted .

perhaps most notably , it is likely that a president would veto a resolution of disapproval to protect rules developed under his own administration , and it may be difficult for congress to muster the two - thirds vote in both houses needed to overturn the veto .

congress can also use regular ( i.e. , non - cra ) legislative procedures to disapprove agencies' rules , but such legislation may prove even more difficult to enact than a cra resolution of disapproval ( primarily because of the lack of expedited procedures in the senate ) , and if enacted may also be vetoed by the president .

although the cra has been used only once to overturn an agency rule , congress has regularly included provisions in the text of agencies' appropriations bills directing or preventing the development of particular regulations .

such provisions include prohibitions on the finalization of particular proposed rules , restrictions on certain types of regulatory activity , and restrictions on implementation or enforcement of certain provisions .

appropriations provisions can also be used to prompt agencies to issue certain regulations , or to require that certain procedures be followed before or after their issuance .

the inclusion of regulatory provisions in appropriations legislation as a matter of legislative strategy appears to arise from two factors: ( 1 ) congress's ability via its "power of the purse" to control agency action , and ( 2 ) the fact that appropriations bills are considered "must pass" legislation .

congress's use of regulatory appropriations restrictions has fluctuated somewhat over time , and previous experience suggests that they may be somewhat less frequent when congress and the president are of the same party .

