section 36 of the internal revenue code ( irc ) provides for a credit for many taxpayers who bought a principal residence in 2008 , 2009 , or 2010 .

the amounts of the credit vary depending upon whether the property was purchased in 2008 or was purchased later and , for purchases made after 2008 , whether the purchaser qualified for the "long - time resident" exception .

credits based on purchases made in 2008 generally must be repaid over a 15-year period .

those for subsequent years' purchases generally are not subject to repayment .

however , section 36 ( f ) ( 2 ) provides for acceleration of the repayment in certain circumstances if the taxpayer ceases to use the property as a principal residence .

for credits based on purchases after 2008 , acceleration of repayment means that the entire credit must be repaid if taxpayers cease using the purchased properties as their principal residences within the 36 months following the purchase .

for credits based on a 2008 purchase , acceleration of repayment means that the outstanding balance of the credit becomes due .

in each case , the repayment is calculated and included as tax on the tax return for the tax year in which the property ceased to be the taxpayer's principal residence .

there are several exceptions to these repayment provisions .

this report addresses the exception for involuntary conversions of the property , as well as the limitation on repayment based on gain ( if any ) realized on the disposition of the property as it applies to involuntary conversions .

generally , an involuntary conversion will not trigger acceleration of repayment in the tax year in which the involuntary conversion occurs .

under the exception for involuntary conversions , taxpayers who have received the homebuyer tax credit have two years from the date of the involuntary conversion to replace the property and , thereby , avoid acceleration of repayment .

for those who purchased their homes in 2008 , the involuntary conversion will not suspend their existing duty to repay the credit over a 15-year period .

those who purchased property in 2008 and received the maximum $7,500 credit were required to begin repayment of the credit at $500 per year beginning with their 2010 tax returns .

if the property was destroyed or otherwise involuntarily converted in 2011 , they still would be required to repay $500 on their 2011 and 2012 tax returns .

only acceleration of repayment is affected by an involuntary conversion .

although the acceleration provision is not triggered in the year of the involuntary conversion , the involuntary conversion must nonetheless be reported to the internal revenue service ( irs ) on the tax return for the year in which the involuntary conversion occurs .

this is done on form 5405 .

the form requires taxpayers to report any disposition or change in the use of the property on which the credit was based .

on the 2010 form 5405 , two options apply to involuntary conversions .

the first ( line 13f ) states , "my home was destroyed , condemned , or disposed of under threat of condemnation and i acquired or plan to acquire a new home within 2 years of the event ( see instructions ) . .

the second ( line 13g ) states , "my home was destroyed , condemned , or disposed of under threat of condemnation and i do not plan to acquire a new home within 2 years of the event ( see instructions ) . .

even if the taxpayer does not currently intend to replace the property within two years , accelerated repayment is not due until the tax year for the year in which the two - year replacement period expires .

in some cases , a taxpayer may be unable or unwilling to replace a home within the two - year replacement period that provides an exception to the acceleration of repayment .

in some of these cases , repayment may not be necessary due to the limitation based on gain .

a taxpayer may have gain from an involuntary conversion due to either insurance proceeds ( in the case of property that has been damaged or destroyed ) , condemnation awards , or selling price ( in the case of property that has been sold under threat of condemnation ) .

in this case , the taxpayer who does not replace the principal residence within the two years allowed must determine whether there was a gain or loss realized on the property .

section 36 ( f ) ( 3 ) limits the repayment of the homebuyer credit to the amount of gain from the disposition of the property .

if there is a loss or no gain , no accelerated repayment is required .

however , for purposes of determining gain on the disposition , the property's adjusted basis must be reduced by the total amount of the homebuyer credit that was claimed .

when there is a gain , that gain would be compared to the outstanding balance of the homebuyer credit .

the smaller of the two would be the amount that is added to tax as accelerated repayment of the credit in the year in which the two - year replacement period expires .

1 .

my principal residence was destroyed by flooding in 2011 .

do i have to repay the outstanding balance of my homebuyer credit with my 2011 tax return ? .

no .

the destruction of your home is an involuntary conversion .

the homebuyer tax credit provisions include an exception to the repayment acceleration requirements when the property is destroyed .

•    if , within two years of the date your property was destroyed , you replace your principal residence with another that would have qualified you for the credit if acquired in 2008 , repayment of your credit will not be accelerated .

•    if you do not replace the residence within this two - year period , your credit will be accelerated , but will be reported on the tax return for the tax year in which the two - year period expires .

•    despite the involuntary conversion , if your residence was purchased in 2008 , you must continue to repay the usual amount ( $500 per year if the credit was $7,500 ) with your tax returns .

2 .

my residence was not completely destroyed by the flooding , but it was severely damaged .

i will have to move out of it while it is being repaired .

do i have to repay the outstanding balance of my homebuyer credit with my 2011 tax return ? .

no .

generally , you do not abandon your principal residence due to temporary absences ; therefore , it is likely that you would not be considered to have ceased using the property as your principal residence even if you actually move out of it while it is being repaired .

additionally , your property does not need to be completely destroyed for there to be an involuntary conversion ; therefore , the involuntary conversion exception ( explained above ) would also apply .

3 .

my house was destroyed and was in a federally declared disaster area .

does this mean that repayment of my credit will not be accelerated if i replace my house within four years ? .

no .

the involuntary conversion exception for acceleration of repayment of the homebuyer tax credit requires you to replace the property within two years .

there currently is no provision to expand that replacement period when the property is within a federally declared disaster area .

4 .

my house was destroyed or damaged in 2011 .

do i have to do anything special when i file my 2011 tax return ? .

yes .

you must file form 5405 with your tax return .

on it , you will enter the date on which the damage or destruction occurred and indicate that your house was damaged or destroyed ( rather than sold , converted to business or rental use , or abandoned ) .

you will also need to indicate whether you currently intend to replace your property within two years .

5 .

if i say that i am not going to replace my house , does it mean that i will owe a lot more in taxes for 2011 ? .

no .

you are indicating that you currently do not intend to replace the property .

if you do not replace the property , the accelerated repayment of the tax credit will not be reported on your tax return until 2013 .

if you change your mind and do replace the property within two years , there would be no accelerated repayment requirement .

6 .

i purchased my house in 2008 and it was destroyed in 2011 .

i started repaying the credit on my 2010 tax return .

what do i need to repay in 2011 and subsequent years ? .

•    you will need to continue paying your scheduled repayment amount ( $500 if the credit was $7,500 ) in 2011 and 2012 .

•    if you replace your home within two years after its destruction , your repayment will not be accelerated .

you will continue repaying your scheduled repayment amount each year .

•    if you do not replace your house within the two - year replacement period , you generally would need to repay the outstanding balance on your credit ( $6,000 if originally $7,500 ) , showing it on your 2013 tax return .

however , that repayment may be reduced or eliminated depending on whether there was a gain from the involuntary conversion .

•    if there was no gain , you would not have to repay any more of the credit .

•    if the gain was less than the outstanding balance on the credit , your repayment would be the amount of the gain .

•    for purposes of calculating this gain , you would be required to reduce your cost basis in the house by the original amount of the credit .

