the debate over the need to establish a constitutional limit on spending or debt is nearly as old as the nation itself .

thomas jefferson is often cited as an intellectual forefather in the current debate because of his distrust of government debt .

he once wrote that the way to cure what he felt was extravagant spending by the administration of john adams was a constitutional amendment that took away the power of the federal government to incur debt .

support for such an idea has waxed and waned continuously since that time .

support was echoed in the "contract with america" advanced by republican house candidates during the 1994 congressional campaign , and by the wide consensus on a balanced budget as a political ideal , especially since the late 1970s .

the current call for a constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget reflects its status as one of the most persistent political issues of recent decades .

in the current congress , the house judiciary committee has reported a proposal , h.j.res .

1 , that includes provisions that would require a super majority to allow a budget with outlays in excess of receipts , to allow outlays to exceed 18% of the "economic output" of the united states regardless of whether the budget were balanced , to increase the debt limit , or to increase revenues .

generally the term balanced budget simply refers to a situation wherein the annual expenditures made by the government are equal to its receipts .

disagreement about just exactly how these key components should be defined and measured has been one of the chief stumbling blocks in the consideration of balanced budget proposals .

although these sound like straightforward concepts , this definitional problem is far from trivial ; any sound definition must say what is to be included and , at least by inference , who is to be responsible for insuring that its provisions are carried out .

when coupled with additional provisions , as with h.j.res .

1 , the debate takes on even greater complexity .

probably the most popular method advocated for ensuring that the federal budget is balanced has been a constitutional amendment .

although it would require a two - thirds vote of approval in both houses of congress as well as ratification by three - fourths of the states before it could become effective , most of the debate has focused on the constitutional amendment approach .

for more than six decades , congress has shown an interest in a balanced budget requirement .

because balanced budget proposals are often in the form of proposed constitutional amendments , which are under the jurisdiction of the house and senate judiciary committees , these committees have been in the forefront of the debate .

as indicated in table 2 and table 3 below , the senate committee on the judiciary has conducted hearings on balanced budget amendments on at least 23 days extending back to the 84 th congress .

it also reported nine joint resolutions between the 97 th and 105 th congresses .

the house has held hearings less often , but its members have considered balanced budget constitutional amendments on seven separate occasions: in the 97 th , 101 st , 102 nd , 103 rd , 104 th , 105 th and 112 th congresses .

this section summarizes congressional hearings and floor action in consideration of balanced budget amendments .

article v of the constitution describes two methods by which the constitution can be changed .

to date , constitutional amendments have always been proposed to the states by congressional action , but article v of constitution also provides that "on the application of two - thirds of the several states congress shall call a convention for proposing amendments. .

because this method for proposing a constitutional amendment is untried , there are many unanswered questions about such a convention .

a convention would not have the power to amend the constitution directly , only to propose an amendment , and any proposed amendment would subsequently need to be ratified by three - fourths of the states in the same manner as an amendment proposed by congress .

between the mid - 1970s and early 1980s , various interest groups lobbied state legislatures to petition congress to call a constitutional convention to propose an amendment to limit the power of the federal government to incur budget deficits .

the national taxpayers union and the national tax limitation committee , for example , were active in these efforts to lobby for the proposal in the state legislatures .

a number of other groups , including citizens to protect the constitution ( formerly known as citizens for the constitution ) , the committee to preserve the constitution , and people for the constitution , have been active in their opposition to a convention .

these petitions have typically requested that congress convene a constitutional convention for the purpose of considering a balanced budget amendment and proposing it to the states for ratification .

frequently such requests have sought a convention for the "specific and exclusive" purpose of considering a balanced budget amendment , although some constitutional scholars suggest that the work of a constitutional convention could not be limited to specific subjects .

as a consequence , some opposition to a constitutional convention is based on concern regarding the scope of other possible amendments that might also be proposed for ratification as well as opposition to a balanced budget amendment in particular .

other related questions have been raised regarding state applications or petitions for a constitutional convention .

some of these include ( 1 ) whether there is a specific procedure that states must follow for enacting and submitting petitions , ( 2 ) whether all the petitions must be in the same form , and ( 3 ) whether they must all be contemporaneous .

the senate has on two occasions passed constitutional convention procedures bills , in 1971 ( s. 215 , 92 nd congress , s.rept .

92-336 ) , and 1973 ( s. 1272 , 93 rd congress , s.rept .

93-293 ) .

neither bill was considered in the house .

the senate judiciary committee also reported a bill in 1985 ( s. 40 , 99 th congress , s.rept .

99-135 ) , but it was not considered further .

although the house has not considered a similar measure , the subcommittee on civil and constitutional rights of the house judiciary committee held hearings on the issue in 1985 .

in 1983 , at the beginning of the 100 th congress , 32 of the required 34 states had passed resolutions requesting a constitutional convention for proposing a balanced budget amendment .

in addition to those states listed in table 4 , at least four states ( california , illinois , kentucky , and montana ) had adopted resolutions requesting that congress propose a deficit spending amendment , but had not asked for a constitutional convention to do so .

by the end of the 100 th congress , however , two states had rescinded their applications for a constitutional convention , at least in part due to the influence of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act in late 1985 .

coupled with the possibility that other states would follow suit , this made the prospect of such a convention less imminent .

left unresolved , however , was the legal standing of rescissions , and the question of whether or not a state has the power to rescind such an application once it has been made .

although alabama and florida were the only states to rescind their applications for a constitutional convention in the 100 th congress , similar measures were subsequently passed in nevada ( 1989 ) , louisiana ( 1991 ) , colorado ( 1992 ) , oregon ( 1999 ) , idaho ( 2000 ) , utah , ( 2001 ) , north dakota ( 2001 ) wyoming ( 2001 ) , arizona ( 2003 ) and georgia ( 2004 ) .

an alternative for regulating the government's spending and taxing policies is the enactment of a statute requiring a balanced budget .

proponents of a statutory approach argue that it would be more flexible than a constitutional amendment , since the law itself could be modified more easily by enacting amendments to deal with changing circumstances .

advocates also argue that it could become effective quickly , in contrast to a constitutional amendment that would require a lengthy and ultimately uncertain ratification process .

significant opposition to the statutory approach has come from those who consider it a poor substitute for a constitutional amendment .

these critics contend that the adoption of a law offers no binding constraint on the actions of future congresses ; in their view the very flexibility of the approach destroys its utility .

they argue that congress can always waive or reject the rules of a previous congress , or can overturn or supersede a statute .

critics offer the past decade's experience with attempts to mandate balanced budgets by statutory means as evidence that the political context makes circumvention virtually certain .

what follows is a general discussion of language commonly used in proposals for a balanced budget amendment .

in particular , the discussion addresses provisions that have been included in balanced budget proposals , and how some of these provisions could be subject to varying interpretations .

many of the points addressed in this analysis have been raised during previous consideration of balanced budget amendments , particularly on the floor of the house in 1982 , 1990 , 1992 , 1994 , and 1995 , and in the senate in 1982 , 1986 , 1994 , 1995 , and 1997 .

a number of these interpretations might have achieved some measure of consensus among members of congress concerning their general meaning .

however , no determinative judgments have yet been made on the vast majority of the issues discussed here , and parts of a proposed amendments' language may well be subject to interpretation .

especially in the absence of any extensive legislative history , these unresolved issues would presumably need to be treated by statute , or interpreted by the courts , or both .

because it would be by its nature new to the federal government with far reaching consequences , even in its most basic form , a balanced budget amendment would raise some questions concerning its meaning and enforcement .

all of the proposed amendments have as their central purpose a limitation on the budgetary freedom of congress , although they pursue this objective in a number of different ways .

each of the measures proposes to require a balanced budget , but they display great variety regarding how to achieve this end and about the nature of the budgetary process and the roles that should be played in it by the president and congress .

in their most direct form , balanced budget proposals require that "total outlays shall not exceed total receipts for a fiscal year. .

this is most often coupled with a proviso to allow an excess of outlays if they are approved by a vote of three - fifths in each chamber .

most proposals , either explicitly or implicitly , would allow any enforcing or implementing legislation to be based on estimates , but these would generally not supersede the requirement that actual balance at the end of a fiscal year be measured in absolute terms .

a common alternative approach would permit estimates to be used to measure compliance with the amendment's requirements .

one common formulation of this is to require that congress adopt a statement of receipts and outlays prior to a fiscal year , in which total outlays are not greater than total receipts .

this is sometimes coupled with a provision that "congress and the president shall ensure that actual outlays do not exceed the outlays set forth in such statement. .

this type of amendment would thus not require that at the end of the fiscal year the budget be in balance .

actual outlays could not exceed projected outlays , but the relation between projected and actual receipts is not explicitly addressed .

receipts less than the projected level would produce a deficit , but not be a violation of this type of amendment language .

using estimates to measure compliance could also be applied to both outlays and receipts .

this approach would prohibit estimated outlays from exceeding estimated receipts , but not prohibit end of the year actual outlays from exceeding end of the year actual receipts .

in one form that has previously been introduced this would simply require a two - thirds vote to approve a budget resolution that recommends an excess of outlays .

because the amounts in budget resolutions are projections , such a proposal would not impose any requirement for actual end - of - year balances .

such an approach is not inconsistent with the practices of some states .

according to a general accounting office report ( now called the government accountability office ) , at least nine states with balanced budget requirements do not require a year - end balance , and several others allow a deficit to be carried over to the next fiscal year if necessary .

the reliability of estimates is crucial , especially in cases where the proposed amendment would require adherence to a standard of balance based on actual outlays rather than projected outlays .

under a variety of circumstances either the president , or congress , or both would have an incentive to skew estimates of receipts in the same or opposite directions .

if one branch favored spending cuts , it would have an incentive to estimate receipts at a relatively lower level ( and thus restrain spending ) .

alternately , if one branch favored relatively higher spending , it would have an incentive to estimate receipts at a correspondingly higher level .

these incentives could have profound implications for enforcement .

the prohibition on excess outlays in the absence of a three - fifths vote would in most cases be absolute and require adjustments to compensate for inaccurate estimates of outlays .

the inability to estimate accurately the outlays that will result from entitlements is demonstrated with regularity .

in recent years , supplemental appropriations have been necessary to cover the mandatory outlays associated with such programs as veterans' benefits and agricultural subsidies .

there are a number of open questions about the impact of this type of provision on mandatory spending , especially that which is provided in annual appropriations and supplemental appropriations acts .

would it have the effect of requiring supplemental appropriations to achieve three - fifths support in each chamber to provide necessary funds for entitlement programs ? .

would it require three - fifths support to allow the release of funds already appropriated but not yet converted to outlays ? .

if spending must be cut or deferred to keep actual outlays in balance with receipts during a fiscal year , how would such restrictions be applied to entitlements ? .

would this amendment implicitly establish a constitutional power to delay outlays for entitlements , or even to cancel such payments ? .

some proposals , while considered as proposed balanced budget amendments , would not actually prohibit deficit spending .

for example , they could simply require that either the president's budget or congress's concurrent budget resolution be balanced , but not necessarily bar appropriations or outlays in excess of revenues .

another possibility would mandate that the budget be balanced only with respect to expected revenues or outlays so that an economic downturn that decreased revenues and increased outlays would not put the government in violation of the constitution .

these proposals could pose problems because they contain an obvious incentive favoring "rosy" forecasting of the economy and of revenues .

many proposals also provide that the requirement for balance could be waived in certain circumstances .

various proposals allow for these waivers in the case of a national emergency , low economic growth , a declaration of war or by congressional passage of a resolution by a super - majority , such as three - fifths or two - thirds .

conversely , some proposals seek to prohibit congress from making appropriations in excess of anticipated revenues for a fiscal year .

these could be narrowly construed so that , to the extent that deficits result from actions other than those taken by congress in the appropriations process itself , the amendment would not be an obstacle to deficits .

if this interpretation were to prevail , the executive departments might be permitted to spend in excess of revenues , provided they had the budget authority to do so .

the requirement for a super - majority to approve a "specific excess" of outlays over receipts , while seemingly straightforward , could present issues in implementation .

it could simply apply to a concurrent or joint resolution encompassing the entire budget , but there are other possibilities .

because no mechanism is provided for identifying the "specific excess" it is not clear what this means .

conceivably it could be applied to either the amount of money , to the recipient program or agency , or to both .

it is unsettled how the provision would be applied in four different scenarios that could arise .

could the requirement be applied so that each specific program or agency would need to have a separate three - fifths majority to receive a specific amount of funds in excess of the overall ceiling ? .

could the three - fifths requirement be applied to a specific total to fund program shortfalls , which could subsequently be distributed through some mechanism that did not require a further three - fifths vote ? .

could the three - fifths requirement be applied to the release of funds for mandatory spending programs or interest on the debt in circumstances where outlays threaten to exceed receipts after all budgetary legislation has been enacted ? .

could the requirement be applied to a specific program or agency rather than a specific dollar amount , so that the agency or program could later receive some unspecified amount of funding above the outlay ceiling ? .

this ambiguity might give the majority party in either chamber of congress , through their power to control the legislative agenda , power to subject the programs least popular with its leadership to the super - majority threshold .

considering such programs as separate matters could increase the likelihood of their being unfunded or discontinued .

conversely , the application of this requirement could also allow the majority leadership to circumvent the amendment and ensure deficit spending , excluding the most popular programs from any balanced budget regimen .

some programs might be popular enough to secure funding regardless of the deficit .

if such programs were left unfunded until the ceiling was reached , they could then be funded subject to the requirement that they have three - fifths support in each chamber .

such a provision also leaves it unclear of the claims of mandatory outlays , including interest on the debt , in relation to other outlays in the absence of a balanced budget or a super - majority waiver .

more basic questions regarding the ultimate responsibility for maintaining a balanced budget are raised by proposals that establish the seemingly simple mandate that "total outlays of government funds during any fiscal year shall not exceed the total revenue of the government. .

since outlays ( that is , the actual expenditure of funds ) are primarily an executive function , such language could be interpreted as a qualification on presidential spending powers , but not on congress's ability to appropriate funds in excess of revenues .

if the president's spending powers were thus the primary focus for enforcement , how would this be accomplished ? .

would it be necessary to statutorily increase presidential rescission or deferral powers ? .

more significantly , would an amendment assigning responsibility to the president , either solely or jointly with congress , to "ensure that outlays not exceed receipts" imply enhanced impoundment authority ? .

this possibility suggests that any workable constitutional prohibition on deficit spending take into account the workings of the federal budget process and expenditure practices , as well as the division of responsibility between the executive and legislative branches .

most measures requiring a balanced budget also include a requirement that the president submit a proposed budget with total outlays not in excess of total receipts .

in addition to the requirement that his budget proposal balance estimated outlays and receipts , such a provision would also effectively make the president's role in the budget process a part of the constitution .

the president's formal involvement in the budget process currently has a statutory , rather than constitutional , basis .

it stems from the budget and accounting act of 1921 ( codified at 31 u.s.c .

1105 ( a ) ) .

historically , the budget - making process has been the constitutional preserve of congress , requiring only the president's concurrence or passage over his veto .

although such presidential requirements are generally included in proposals as a way to preserve symmetry between the executive and legislative branches , this is not precisely the same requirement that congress would have to adhere to .

because of the timing of the president's budget submission , the estimates of receipts and outlays used in this proposal would not necessarily be the same as those used by congress .

this could mean that the president would be able to use a unilateral estimate to fashion his proposal , while congress might have to base its spending actions on an estimate more agreeable to both branches .

also , the president's proposal would have to balance estimated outlays against estimated receipts , while under most proposed amendments congress would ultimately have to balance actual outlays against actual receipts .

this distinction is likely to revive a problem highlighted during the reagan administration and especially under the balanced budget and emergency deficit reduction act .

differing estimates and projections of the economy and the budget by congress and the president could make it difficult to achieve budgetary goals .

a concern addressed in many proposals is the issue of coverage .

lengthy debates on which activities or agencies ( if any ) should be exempted from the effects of sequestration under the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act have amply demonstrated the difficulty in reaching agreement on the issue , as well as the problems associated with exempting certain activities .

it is not clear whether the term "off - budget" would continue to have any meaning if a balanced budget proposal were added to the constitution .

would the federal government be able to exclude specific entities from its presentation of the budget ? .

would an amendment have the effect of nullifying the current off - budget status of the postal service and social security ? .

if the terms "all receipts" and "all outlays" used in many such proposals removed the option to create off - budget entities , it would also remove the option to consider such entities without regard to their impact on the remainder of the budget .

the debate on the budgetary status of social security , for example , would become moot , and surplus social security receipts would constitutionally be treated in the same way as other government receipts as they are today .

conversely , if federal agencies or programs could be excluded from the amendment's coverage by statute , it might open a channel for manipulating the scope of the "budget" to insure that it was balanced .

various proposals have sought to anticipate problems that could be brought about by attempts at circumvention , and have either included or excluded a variety of specific expenses or activities .

these have sought to exempt such things as net interest on the public debt , social security , or federal credit programs .

other measures would be coupled with a capital budget , which would separate federal expenditures into one budget for current operating expenses and a second one for net investment in assets that have a useful life of several years .

even so , the question of what would be included or excluded would have to be addressed .

generally , the more inclusive the coverage , the more restrictive will be any constitutional limitation ( although the reverse is true for the case of social security during the period from now until about 2010 ) .

in contrast to the experiences of states , most proposals at the federal level are planned as inclusive .

they are almost always defined as applying to "all receipts of the united states government except those derived from borrowing" and "all outlays of the united states government except those for repayment of debt principal. .

state governments are typically required to balance their operating , or general fund , budget , but other major fund groups ( such as capital , enterprise , trust , and other special funds ) may not necessarily be required to balance on an annual basis .

the senate judiciary committee's 1993 report accompanying s.j.res .

41 expressed the intent of the committee that "total receipts" and "total outlays" include "all moneys received by the treasury of the united states , either directly or indirectly through federal or quasi - federal agencies created under the authority of acts of congress. .

the report further stated that some programs , such as the electric power program of the tennessee valley authority ( tva ) , are not intended to be covered by this definition .

the only explanation given is that the program is self - financing .

it is unclear to what extent this interpretation by the judiciary committee would be binding .

if it were , it could potentially allow the federal government to follow the state example and create other special authorities that would not be covered by the amendment's definitions of outlays and receipts .

in 1995 , one of the chief sources of public opposition to a balanced budget amendment was the status of social security funds .

proposals to exclude the receipts and outlays of the social security trust funds ( specifically the federal old - age and survivors insurance trust fund and the federal disability insurance trust fund ) from the requirement for a balanced budget were among the chief topics for debate .

supporters of such an exemption argued that because social security operates with funds that are counted separate from the general fund of the federal government , and currently operates at a surplus , it should not be subjected to potential benefit reductions resulting from a deficit in the general fund .

further , they argue , because the accumulated surplus of the social security trust funds is held in the form of government securities , under a balanced budget amendment redemption of these securities , and thus any expenditure of these funds , would effectively require a budgetary surplus .

opponents counter that removing such a massive portion of federal transactions , whatever the source , from the discipline of a balanced budget amendment would undercut the amendment's effectiveness .

in addition , they believe that an exemption for a specific trust fund could establish a channel for broad circumvention of an amendment , because it would not necessarily limit the activities that could be encompassed within the trust fund's budget .

government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) are not now considered to be a part of the federal government , and their transactions are considered to be non - budgetary rather than off - budget .

these are entities established and chartered by the federal government and typically act as financial intermediaries to influence the allocation of credit in large sectors of the economy .

examples include the student loan marketing association , the federal national mortgage association , and the federal home loan mortgage corporation .

they are not included in the federal budget totals because they are classified as private , although most derive special benefits from their sponsorship by the federal government .

their budgetary treatment and the range of their activities are not specifically addressed in the language or legislative history of balanced budget amendments , and it may well be assumed that they would not be included .

the most common exception to the requirement for a balanced budget is a waiver in cases of declared war .

some proposals would also allow a waiver for military emergencies declared by law .

other provisions in proposed amendments would trigger exemptions or allow waivers .

a proposal considered by the senate in 1994 would have suspended the requirement for a balanced budget for any fiscal year , and the following fiscal year as well , if the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that real economic growth has been or will be less than one percent for two consecutive quarters during the period of those two fiscal years .

other proposals would allow a waiver of the balanced budget requirement for any fiscal year in which a declaration of national emergency were in effect .

with the term "national emergency" left undefined , such a provision might well be applicable to economic as well as military emergencies .

it should be noted that the duration of such a national emergency , or how its end should be determined , is left unstated .

an issue closely related to balanced budgets is federal debt and the debt limit .

indeed , a number of proposed balanced budget amendments have included provisions that would make it more difficult to increase the public debt of the united states by requiring a super majority in each house to enact legislation to do so .

the apparent intent is to reinforce the balanced budget requirement by making it difficult for the amount of federal debt to be increased .

without the authority to borrow funds , the government could not operate with a deficit .

indeed , some proposals deal only with debt and require a balanced budget solely by implication .

at least one proposal made in the house would go further and require surpluses in order to pay down the debt .

of particular importance is the debt to be included in such a limitation .

some proposals would apply a limitation to increases in the debt "held by the public. .

others would apply the limitation to the gross public debt ( eg , all federal government debt including that held by the government's own trust funds ) .

another approach has been to apply a limitation to public debt with certain specified exceptions , such as for trust funds or debt for capital expenditures .

these are more than minor semantic differences , and such provisions could affect aspects of federal finances beyond the balance of the annual budget .

h.j.res .

1 in the 112 th congress would require a super majority of three - fifths to increase the limit on the debt held by the public .

as defined in current law and practice , the debt subject to statutory limit includes more than just the debt held by the public .

debt held by the public involves only money borrowed by the treasury from the public , including domestic and foreign individuals and institutions .

the debt subject to statutory limit , however , includes both the debt held by the public and debt held by the federal government ( or intragovernmental debt ) .

intragovernmental debt includes primarily debt held by trust funds .

debt held by the public represents a financial claim by the public on the federal government in the form of bonds and other debt instruments , and is the measure of debt used in most economic analyses .

the intragovernmental debt held by trust funds does not result in borrowing from world credit markets or represent a direct financial claim of the public on the government .

a trust fund program itself may entitle recipients to claim present or future program benefits , and securities are held by the funds as a reserve against future benefits in excess of receipts expected in the future , but beneficiaries do not have any direct claim on the accumulated debt held by trust funds .

an increase in trust fund holdings also increases the reported gross public debt of the federal government .

generally such an increase is generated when receipts into trust funds exceed payments .

excess trust fund receipts are invested in federal government debt instruments .

the portion of the gross public debt held by trust funds or other intragovernmental accounts in 2010 was approximately 33% .

the distinction between gross public debt and debt held by the public could have significant implications , particularly with regard to the budgetary status of social security .

because it is currently accumulating a surplus for future use , the social security trust funds increase the amount of gross debt .

accordingly , a balanced budget amendment that requires a three - fifths vote in order to increase the gross public debt could mean that a super - majority was necessary to allow the surplus held by a trust fund to increase .

even in cases where the trust fund was in balance , the accumulation of interest on outstanding debt held by the trust fund could itself have the effect of requiring an increase in the gross public debt .

on the other hand , a balanced budget amendment requiring action to increase the amount of "publically held federal debt" could make it difficult for social security to liquidate its accumulated reserves to pay benefits after about 2020 .

distinctions between classes of federal debt could cause the federal government to operate with separate statutory debt limits for intragovernmental debt ( requiring only a majority vote for increases ) and for debt held by the public .

the division of federal debt instruments into a number of different classes to secure technical compliance with an amendment could have wider implications as well .

such a phenomenon would be roughly analogous to state experience , where different debt instruments , including some not backed by the "full faith and credit" of the government , are routinely issued and separately rated by financial markets .

by many accounts , state experience suggests that constitutional limitations on debt have been less than wholly effective .

state legislatures have devised a wide variety of financing techniques to comply technically with constitutional limitations on the issuance of debt , including special fund financing , creation of public authorities and lease arrangements .

it is not implausible that the federal government would have occasion to resort to one or more of these devices if limits were placed on its issuance of new debt .

another broad category of proposals includes those that place a limit on the ability of the federal government to tax or spend .

some would hold total outlays to a set percentage of some economic indicator , such as gross domestic product ( gdp ) or gross national product ( gnp ) , while others would limit increases in spending to a percentage of the growth of a particular economic indicator .

support for such provisions is derived from two chief premises: ( 1 )  the part played by the federal government in the economy has grown too large in recent decades , and ( 2 ) efforts to balance the budget should be biased in favor of spending cuts rather than tax increases .

h.j.res .

1 in the 112 th congress , for example , would limit the level of outlays to 18% of the "economic output" of the united states , regardless of whether the budget is balanced , unless there were a two - thirds super majority to support the increase .

one significant question is how a provision to limit increases in revenues might be interpreted .

the term "revenue" appears in the constitution , in this context , in article i , section 7 , the so - called origination clause .

as interpreted by the supreme court , the phrase "all bills raising revenue" has typically meant measures raising revenue to support government generally , but not those that raise funds to support a specific governmental program .

this constitutional understanding of the term "revenue" therefore may differ from that used , for example , in relation to the jurisdiction of congressional committees or under budgetary statutes ( such as the congressional budget act of 1974 ) .

also it could restrict the application of a tax limitation to measures that affect money raised for the general fund of the federal government , but exclude funds raised for specific programs .

another potential difficulty with the definition of revenue is that not all receipts to the federal government are currently treated equally in the budget process .

collections from the public based on the government's exercise of its sovereign powers are treated as revenues ( eg , personal income taxes ) .

collections by the government as a result of business - type or market oriented activities are generally treated as offsets to outlays ( eg , various royalties and licensing fees ) .

offsetting collections can be applied either to the outlays of a specific agency or program or to the government generally .

without further direction , through more explicit language in a proposed amendment , it is unclear how it might be interpreted .

conversely , the phrase "increasing revenue" as used in these proposals could be interpreted to apply these requirements broadly to a wide variety of measures .

such a provision might apply not only to measures that would increase revenues by increasing the rate of taxation , but also to those that would increase revenues by lowering the rate of taxation while increasing either the taxable base or the volume of taxable activity , or both .

this interpretation could have an impact on a large portion of the legislation considered by congress .

indeed , any legislation that has the direct or indirect , effect of stimulating economic ( hence taxable ) activity and thereby increasing revenues might be covered by a tax limitation provision .

one example of increasing revenues by increasing taxable activity would be a reduction in the tax rate on capital gains income .

although estimates differ sharply as to the longer - term effect of reducing the capital gains tax rate , the short - term effect is generally projected to increase revenues as a result of increased realization of capital gains .

it is not clear whether a limitation on increasing revenues could also be applied to measures , such as an excise tax on tobacco products , which increase tax rates to a level intended to inhibit a taxable activity .

the intended effect in such a case would be a reduction in revenues , due to the inhibitory effect , rather than an increase in revenues due to the higher rate .

the question remains as to whether the provision would be interpreted such that the intended effect would exempt such a measure from the restrictions of a tax limitation provision or such that the increased rate would be sufficient to place the measure in contravention of the provision .

typically , these provisions would limit the rate of increase in revenues to "the rate of increase in national income in the second prior fiscal year , unless a three - fifths majority of the whole number of each house of congress shall have passed a bill directed solely to approving specific additional receipts and such bill has become law. .

this form of limitation is the most common in recent proposals .

variations have previously been considered in both the senate and the house .

national income ( or any other measure or index ) is dependent on a meaning defined either in a statute or in practice .

proponents argue that such a provision would preserve the current ratio of federal revenues to the economy as a whole .

detractors of this approach suggest that the definition of any index would be subject to manipulation , and tax policies would thus hinge on who controlled the definition .

for example , in 1980 the commerce department revised the definition of national income to include most forms of overseas earnings , resulting in a significant increase in national income .

in this case , the action taken did not directly affect the size of the economy , but did have a significant impact on the calculation of national income .

under a formula limitation , such actions could make it permissible to increase revenues regardless of the state of the economy .

in theory , this type of provision could require the government to reduce taxes if revenues were to increase at a rate faster than the economy because of changing economic conditions .

for example , inflation in the late 1970s caused personal incomes to increase at a greater rate than the economy as a whole .

this resulted in increased federal revenues due to higher income taxes ( "bracket creep" ) .

although the income tax rate structure is now indexed for inflation , its progressive structure means that increases in personal income due to economic growth can still result in revenues increasing at a more rapid rate than the economy .

such a provision could also require a tax cut following a recession because of an associated downturn in national income .

more importantly , there is a two year lag between when change in national income is measured and when fiscal policy is enacted .

this delay could force the federal government to adopt a counter - productive fiscal policy .

another approach would require that measures to increase revenues be passed by a super - majority of three - fifths or two - thirds of the total membership of each house .

this would allow increases in taxes beyond the rate of growth of national income , but only under one of two circumstances .

first , tax revenues could increase under existing tax laws as a result of economic upturns .

alternately , they could increase as a result of any new law , if it were passed by super - majority .

this type of tax limitation was endorsed in the "contract with america" signed by many republican candidates for the house of representatives during the 1994 congressional election .

h.j.res .

1 in the 112 th congress includes such a provision to require a two - thirds super majority .

alternately , some proposals might limit taxes indirectly by limiting the level of expenditures .

while this method would not actually prohibit the federal government from taking action to increase revenues , it would inhibit such increases by removing the primary incentive for doing so .

even in the 19 th century , the federal government did not historically operate with a sustained budgetary surplus , and it seems unlikely that a mandatory balanced budget would create an incentive to do so .

if expenditures were limited , any increases in revenues beyond the level necessary for balance could be applied only towards repayment of debt principal .

because the repayment of debt principal , and particularly its scheduling , is dependent on the terms under which such funds were originally borrowed , it seems unlikely that this would provide a significant incentive for the federal government to operate at a sustained surplus .

without such an incentive , the indirect effect of an expenditure limit would be to limit taxation .

the levels of the expenditure limits commonly associated with such proposals generally has been in the range of 18% to 20% of gross domestic product .

however , as shown in table 6 , the current level of expenditures is higher than that .

therefore , such a limitation would require significant cuts in spending as well as an overall balance of expenditures and revenues .

in any form , a limitation on revenues or outlays could create a bias in favor of tax expenditures .

because in most cases these are receipts foregone by the government , rather than actual outlays , they would likely be largely exempt from any limitations on spending .

proposals to limit the growth or level of federal taxation would also favor tax expenditures over outlays .

although increasing receipts and reducing outlays are budgetarily equivalent , a limitation on increases in receipts would limit congress's ability to eliminate tax expenditures to achieve a balanced budget .

this is because eliminating tax expenditures would increase receipts rather than reduce outlays , and thus increase the risk of running afoul of such a limitation .

although h.j.res .

1 in the 112 th congress does not include such a provision , when the senate considered a balanced budget amendment during the 103 rd congress , the issue of judicial review was prominently debated .

in particular , the senate considered a provision to establish that the power of "any court to order relief pursuant to any case or controversy arising under this article shall not extend to ordering any remedies other than declaratory judgment or such remedies as are specifically authorized in implementing legislation. .

such a provision would leave the judiciary with the authority to issue decisions concerning the meaning of the amendment or any implementing legislation , but judicial remedies of violations could only be ordered in circumstances specifically provided by law .

although such declaratory judgments would be binding , courts would lack the enforcement remedies of injunctive relief or writs of mandamus .

enforcement would be left to the elected branches unless the courts were specifically provided with authority to use these or other remedies .

limiting the judiciary to declaratory judgments might not be an entirely empty authority , but its effectiveness would depend on the parties involved respecting and following the terms of the judgment .

such a limitation on judicial remedies would represent a significant shift in the balance of power among the three branches of the federal government , and a departure from the accepted practice that allows courts to interpret constitutional disputes and determine the appropriate remedy .

appendix a .

comparison of deficit projected in presidential budget submissions and actual amounts , fy1965-fy2010 appendix b .

legislative history of the balanced budget provision in 31 u.s.c .

1103 ( formerly 31 u.s.c .

27 ) "byrd amendment" ( named after its sponsor senator harry f. byrd , jr. ( d - va ) ) passed senate 58-28 ( vote no .

270 , july 31 , 1978 ) , as an amendment to a bill to amend the bretton woods agreement pertaining to the international monetary fund .

the house adopted nonbinding instructions to its conferees on the bill that included agreeing to this provision , by a vote of 286-91 ( roll no .

778 , september 14 , 1978 ) .

it was subsequently incorporated in the final version of the measure during conference .

the provision has been amended twice although there has been no separate vote in either chamber on these changes .

p.l .

95-435 , 92 stat .

1051 , october 10 , 1978 to amend the bretton woods agreement ( imf ) .

 ( 92 stat .

1053 ) "section 7 .

beginning with fiscal year 1981 , the total budget outlays of the federal government shall not exceed its receipts. .

p.l .

96-389 , 94 stat .

1551 , october 7 , 1980 to amend the bretton woods agreement ( imf ) .

 ( 94 stat .

1553 ) "section 3 .

strike section 7 of p.l .

95-435 , the bretton woods agreements act am endments of 1978 , which reads: ' beginning with fiscal year 1981 , the total budget outlays of the federal government shall not exceed its receipts .

' , and insert in lieu thereof: ' the congress reaffirms its commitment that beginning with fiscal year 1981 , the total budget outlays of the federal government shall not exceed its receipts.' .

p.l .

97-258 , 96 stat .

877 , september 13 , 1982 to revise , codify and enact without substantive change certain general and permanent laws , related to money and finance , as title 31 , united states code , "money and finance. .

 ( 96 stat .

908 ) "section 1103 .

budget ceiling .

congress reaffirms its commitment that budget outlays of the united states government for a fiscal year may not be more than the receipts of the government for that year. .

