a common concern voiced by proponents of regulatory reform in recent decades has been that the costs associated with certain regulations outweigh the benefits that the regulations are intended to provide .

another , and somewhat related , view is that more intelligent regulatory policies could achieve the same social goals ( eg , cleaner environment , safer workplaces ) at less cost , or could achieve more ambitious goals at the same cost .

to improve the quality and effectiveness of federal rules and minimize burden , regulatory reform proponents have frequently advocated greater use of a range of analytic tools during the rulemaking process , including cost - benefit analysis ( sometimes referred to as benefit - cost analysis ) and cost - effectiveness analysis .

cost - benefit analysis , in this context , involves the systematic identification of all of the costs and benefits associated with a forthcoming regulation , including nonquantitative and indirect costs and benefits , and how those costs and benefits are distributed across different groups in society .

a proposed regulatory requirement is judged to pass the "cost - benefit test" if the sum of its anticipated benefits outweighs , or otherwise justifies , the sum of its present and future costs in present value terms .

cost - effectiveness analysis seeks to determine how a given goal can be achieved at the least cost .

in contrast to cost - benefit analysis , the concern in cost - effectiveness analysis is not with weighing the merits of the goal , but with identifying and comparing the costs of alternatives to reach that goal ( eg , in terms of dollars per life saved ) .

the prospective ( also known as ex ante ) estimates of benefits and costs that are done before rules are issued are necessarily uncertain and heavily dependent on numerous assumptions .

particularly difficult to quantify are long - term or uncertain effects of rules where subtle interactions between various factors are often not well understood or directly measurable .

cost - benefit analysis is particularly controversial when it seeks to rationalize inherent value trade - offs and to place a value on benefits not traded in the market ( eg , health or lives ) .

also , congress has required cost - benefit analysis in some statutes ( as discussed in detail later in this report ) , prohibited it in other statutes , and not precluded it in still other statutes .

these issues notwithstanding , many economists believe that , when used carefully and with adequate data , cost - benefit analysis can be an effective tool in regulatory decision making .

although many federal agencies are currently required to prepare cost - benefit analyses and cost - effectiveness analyses for certain rules before they are published in the federal register , proposed legislation has been introduced in the 113 th congress to expand those requirements to more agencies and more types of rules , and to produce more detailed analyses .

this report identifies a number of those bills , but first describes the existing requirements for cost - benefit and other types of analysis in the federal rulemaking process .

it also discusses options for changing the current set of analytical requirements .

the report does not , however , attempt to address issues related to the quality of the analyses that agencies develop , or whether agencies use the results of cost - benefit analyses to guide decision making .

the current set of regulatory analytical requirements has been established incrementally during the last 40 to 50 years through a series of presidential and congressional initiatives , including statutes , executive orders , circulars , and other documents .

those initiatives vary in terms of the agencies and rules they cover , and the types of analyses that are required .

most of the analytical requirements cover cabinet departments and "independent agencies" such as the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , but some also cover "independent regulatory agencies" such as the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , and the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) .

although independent regulatory agencies are not covered by the analytical requirements in executive order 12866 and omb circular a - 4 , that lack of coverage may be ameliorated if the individual statutes that provide rulemaking authority to these agencies require cost - benefit or other types of economic analysis .

this section of the report examines the analytical requirements in the underlying statutes for selected independent regulatory agencies .

as noted previously in this report , executive order 12866 requires covered agencies to prepare cost - benefit analyses only if their rules are expected to be "economically significant" or "major" ( eg , are expected to have a $100 million annual effect on the economy ) .

a 2011 crs report examined 100 rules issued during calendar year 2010 that oira and the agencies considered to be "major," and concluded that 37 of the rules appeared to be major because they involved annual transfers of $100 million in funds from one party to another party , most commonly the transfer of federal funds to the recipients of those funds ( eg , grants , food stamps , medicare or medicaid funds , special pay for members of the military , and crop payments ) .

ten other rules appeared to be major because they were expected to prompt $100 million or more in annual consumer spending , or because they were establishing fees for the reimbursement of particular federal functions ( eg , issuance of passports and oversight of the nuclear power industry ) .

thirty - nine rules appeared to be major because they were expected to result in at least $100 million in annual compliance costs , regulatory benefits , or both .

in 20 of those 39 rules , estimated annual costs and benefits were both expected to exceed $100 million .

in 14 of the 20 rules , the agencies' lowest estimates of regulatory benefits were larger than the highest estimated compliance costs .

in only one rule were the lowest costs greater than the highest benefits , and the agency indicated that this result was caused by the lack of discretion provided in the underlying statute .

a number of bills have been introduced in the 113 th congress that would codify , expand , or otherwise modify existing requirements for cost - benefit or other types of regulatory impact analysis .

some of the bills would expand the principles and requirements in executive order 12866 to all agencies or rules , some would require cost - benefit analysis by certain agencies , and other bills would modify the analytical requirements in the rfa or umra .

a few examples of these bills are listed below .

h.r .

899 , the unfunded mandates information and transparency act of 2014 , would amend the current analysis requirements in umra by making those requirements more broad ( i.e. , by requiring them to be completed for a greater number of rules ) and by requiring a more detailed level of analysis .

h.r .

2122 , the regulatory accountability act of 2013 , would make several changes to the rulemaking process by amending the administrative procedure act ( apa ) .

among those changes would be a requirement for agencies to conduct cost - benefit analysis when issuing rules , which is not currently required under the apa .

h.r .

2542 , the regulatory flexibility improvements act of 2013 , would amend and expand current analysis requirements under the rfa .

h.r .

3863 and s. 2099 , the sound regulation act of 2014 , would amend the apa to require that agencies conduct cost - benefit analysis when issuing rules .

h.r .

5184 and s. 2153 , the national regulatory budget act of 2014 , would establish an office of regulatory analysis as an independent establishment in the executive branch that would be required to conduct its own cost - benefit analysis .

s. 1173 , the independent agency regulatory analysis act of 2014 , would authorize the president to subject independent regulatory agencies to cost - benefit analysis requirements that exist in executive order ( discussed above ) and do not currently apply to independent regulatory agencies .

as the preceding discussion indicates , many federal agencies are already required to conduct cost - benefit and other types of analysis before they issue certain proposed or final rules .

these requirements have been added incrementally by various statutes and executive orders during the past 40 to 50 years , and sometimes require agencies to perform the same general types of analyses .

for example , virtually all of the elements of the written statements that agencies are required to prepare pursuant to umra were already required by executive order 12866 ( eg , quantitative and qualitative estimates of costs and benefits , effects on the national economy , consideration of a range of alternatives , selection of the alternative that is least costly , most cost - effective , or least burdensome , or an explanation of why that alternative was not selected ) .

the drafters of umra appear to have recognized the overlap , stating in section 202 ( c ) of the statute ( 2 u.s.c .

§1534 ) that an agency may prepare the written statement "in conjunction with or as part of any other statement or analysis. .

section 605 ( a ) of the rfa ( 5 u.s.c .

§605 ( a ) ) contains the same type of statement .

also , many of the current requirements have substantial exclusions and exceptions , or give federal agencies substantial discretion to decide whether an analysis is required .

for example , the rfa's analytical requirements do not apply to rules that are issued without a prior notice of proposed rulemaking , and agencies can avoid regulatory flexibility analyses if they certify that their rules do not have a "significant" economic impact on a "substantial" number of small entities .

umra does not apply to independent regulatory agencies , and contains more than a dozen other ways that "economically significant" rules would not be covered by its requirements .

executive orders on children , federalism , and energy permit agencies to escape coverage of their analytical requirements if they conclude the effects of their rules will not have "disproportionate" effects on children , will not have "significant federalism implications," or do not involve "significant energy actions. .

executive order 12866 and omb circular a - 4 contain some of the most inclusive and far - reaching analytical requirements , but they do not apply to independent regulatory agencies , or to rules that are not "economically significant. .

congress could decide to keep the existing analytical framework in place .

alternatively , congress could decide to enact one or more of the bills listed above , perhaps resulting in more analyses being performed , more detailed analyses , or both .

some of these bills would result in substantial changes to the current requirements discussed above , while other bills would not substantially change the nature or number of regulatory analyses that certain agencies would perform .

finally , enacting one or more of the bills would add to the existing , incrementally developed combination of statutes , executive orders , and omb circulars that covers some agencies and rules but not others , and could potentially be confusing to agencies and the public .

another , more comprehensive approach could be to consolidate all of the analytical requirements in one place , and perhaps expand those requirements to include more agencies or more rules , or to require different types of analysis for the rules that are covered .

since executive order 12866 and omb circular a - 4 currently contain the most detailed and inclusive analytical requirements , perhaps the easiest way to accomplish that goal would be to add elements to the executive order and circular and ensure that certain agencies and types of economic effects are included ( eg , effects on small entities , or state , local , or tribal governments ) .

the president could arguably make most of these changes by amending the executive order and the circular without congressional action .

in 2011 , omb said obtaining better information on the costs and benefits of independent regulatory agencies' rules was "desirable," and described the absence of such information as an "obstacle to transparency" that may be having "adverse effects on public policy. .

for more than 20 years , the administrative conference of the united states and the american bar association have recommended that independent regulatory agencies' rules be reviewed by oira .

however , expanding the executive order's cost - benefit analysis requirements to independent regulatory agencies , and requiring those agencies to submit their covered rules and analyses to oira for review , may trigger resistance by those in congress and elsewhere who believe these agencies should remain more independent of presidential influence than cabinet departments or agencies like epa .

sally katzen , oira administrator for five years during the clinton administration , favors expansion of the executive order's requirements to independent regulatory agencies , and has suggested that a "sense of the congress" resolution indicating that such a course would be desirable "would go a long way to ameliorate any concerns in that regard. .

another option would be to amend the executive order to require independent regulatory agencies to prepare cost - benefit analyses , but not require them to submit their rules to oira for review .

if congress was to establish a "congressional office of regulatory analysis" as is contemplated in h.r .

214 from the 112 th congress ( introduced by representative don young on january 7 , 2011 ) , then perhaps the rules and analyses could be submitted there .

or , to maintain a measure of independence , the independent regulatory agencies could be required to submit their rules and analyses to oira , but the agencies could be given the same type of authority they have with regard to pra submissions — to override any objections from oira by a majority vote of the agency's leadership .

alternatively , congress could decide to enact legislation codifying and expanding the executive order's requirements to cover independent regulatory agencies , and requiring different types of analyses .

supporters of this approach include susan dudley , oira administrator for two years during the george w. bush administration , who has said codification could ( 1 ) signal congressional support for cost - benefit analysis principles , ( 2 ) apply the requirements to independent regulatory agencies , and ( 3 ) make compliance with the requirements judicially reviewable .

she also said that legislation could emphasize certain types of analyses that have been found lacking ( eg , effects on employment or indirect effects ) .

support has also come from professor peter l. strauss of columbia law school , who testified in february 2011 that codifying in one statute the analytic requirements in executive order 12866 and elsewhere , and "framing them to permit needed regulation to proceed efficiently , would in my judgment be a highly desirable step. .

other observers , however , have opposed codification of the cost - benefit analysis requirements in executive order 12866 .

for example , sally katzen has said that ( 1 ) the executive order's requirements have been successfully implemented for more than 30 years ( as evidenced by the fact that omb's reports regularly show that the costs of rules exceed the benefits ) ; ( 2 ) even if the executive orders were not working well , there is no evidence that putting the requirements in statutes would make them work better ; ( 3 ) the executive orders permit presidents to emphasize different things during their administrations , which would be lost if the requirements were put in statute ; and ( 4 ) codification of cost - benefit analysis requirements "would be amending a host of previously enacted statutes that either are silent on the role of costs in the formulation of regulations or do not permit the consideration of such factors. .

another option to cover all or some of the independent regulatory agencies by the requirements of executive order 12866 would be for congress to amend the statutory definition of an "independent regulatory agency" that is referenced in the executive order .

executive order 12866 defines an "agency" as ( unless otherwise indicated ) "any authority of the united states that is an 'agency' under 44 u.s.c .

§3502 ( 1 ) , other than those considered to be independent regulatory agencies , as defined in 44 u.s.c .

§3502 ( 10 ) . .

that definition ( which is actually in 44 u.s.c .

§3502 ( 5 ) ) lists the agencies considered to be independent regulatory agencies ( eg , cftc , sec , fcc , and the nrc ) , and also says it includes "any other similar agency designated by statute as a federal independent regulatory agency or commission. .

congress could amend this provision , stating that , for purposes of executive order 12866 , all or certain of these agencies would be covered by the analytical and / or rule submission requirements in the executive order .

this approach would not , however , prohibit the president or any future president from amending or revoking the executive order .

whether done by presidential or congressional action , any effort to consolidate or reform the analytical requirements in rulemaking should be cognizant of the state of existing law in this area .

congress has required cost - benefit analysis in some statutes , prohibited it in other statutes , and not precluded it in still other statutes .

both executive orders 12866 and 13563 contain the phrase "to the extent permitted by law" when referencing the principles of rulemaking and the analytical requirements , confirming that agencies must adhere to the requirements contained in their authorizing statutes , and may only apply the principles and procedures of the executive orders if the statutes permit them to do so .

should congress decide to enact legislation superseding existing law , it should do so in full recognition of the likely consequences .

presidential and congressional requirements for cost - benefit analysis should also recognize that data availability may be an implementation issue , and that additional resources may be necessary for the agencies conducting these analyses .

in some cases , the data that agencies need to estimate the costs and benefits of their rules may not exist , or may only be available from regulated entities .

although there is no "typical" cost - benefit analysis ( just as there is no "typical" rule ) , the cost of conducting many individual regulatory analyses has been in the hundreds of thousands of dollars .

if more agencies were required to prepare more detailed analyses for more rules , it is likely that the agencies would make the argument that they would be unable to do so without additional resources .

