some time ago , a federal prosecutor referred to the mail and wire fraud statutes as "our stradivarius , our colt 45 , our louisville slugger … and our true love. .

not everyone shared the prosecutor's delight .

commentators have argued that the statutes "have long provided prosecutors with a means by which to salvage a modest , but dubious , victory from investigations that essentially proved unfruitful. .

federal judges have also expressed concern from time to time , observing that the "mail and wire fraud statutes have 'been invoked to impose criminal penalties upon a staggeringly broad swath of behavior,' creating uncertainty in business negotiations and challenges to due process and federalism. .

nevertheless , mail and wire fraud prosecutions have brought to an end schemes that bilked victims of millions , and sometimes billions , of dollars .

the federal mail and wire fraud statutes outlaw schemes to defraud that involve the use of mail or wire communications .

both condemn fraudulent conduct that may also come within the reach of other federal criminal statutes .

both may serve as racketeering and money laundering predicate offenses .

both are punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years ; for not more than 30 years , if the victim is a financial institution or the offense is committed in the context of major disaster or emergency .

both entitle victims to restitution .

both may result in the forfeiture of property .

the first of the two , the mail fraud statute , emerged in the late 19 th century as a means of preventing "city slickers" from using the mail to cheat guileless "country folks. .

but for penalty increases and amendments calculated to confirm its breadth , the prohibition has come down to us essentially unchanged .

speaking in 1987 , the supreme court noted that "the last substantive amendment to the statute ... was the codification of the holding of durland ... in 1909. .

congress did amend it thereafter to confirm that the mail fraud statute and the wire fraud statute reached schemes to defraud another of the right to honest services and to encompass the use of commercial postal carriers .

the wire fraud statute is of more recent vintage .

enacted as part of the communications act amendments of 1952 , it was always intended to mirror the provisions of the mail fraud statute .

since its inception , changes in the mail fraud statute have come with corresponding changes in the wire fraud statute in most instances .

the mail and wire fraud statutes are essentially the same , except for the medium associated with the offense — the mail in the case of mail fraud and wire communication in the case of wire fraud .

as a consequence , the interpretation of one is ordinarily considered to apply to the other .

in construction of the terms within the two , the courts will frequently abbreviate or adjust their statement of the elements of a violation to focus on the questions at issue before them .

as treatment of the individual elements makes clear , however , there seems little dispute that conviction requires the government to prove the use of either mail or wire communications in the foreseeable furtherance of a scheme and intent to defraud another of either property or honest services involving a material deception .

the mail and wire fraud statutes essentially outlaw dishonesty .

due to their breadth , misconduct that constitutes mail or wire fraud may constitute a violation of one or more other federal criminal statutes as well .

this overlap occurs perhaps most often with respect to ( 1 ) crimes for which mail or wire fraud are elements ( "predicate offenses" ) of another offense ; ( 2 ) fraud proscribed under jurisdictional circumstances other than mail or wire use ; and ( 3 ) honest services fraud in the form of bribery or kickbacks .

whoever , having devised or intending to devise any scheme or artifice to defraud , or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses , representations , or promises , or to sell , dispose of , loan , exchange , alter , give away , distribute , supply , or furnish or procure for unlawful use any counterfeit or spurious coin , obligation , security , or other article , or anything represented to be or intimated or held out to be such counterfeit or spurious article , for the purpose of executing such scheme or artifice or attempting so to do , places in any post office or authorized depository for mail matter , any matter or thing whatever to be sent or delivered by the postal service , or deposits or causes to be deposited any matter or thing whatever to be sent or delivered by any private or commercial interstate carrier , or takes or receives therefrom , any such matter or thing , or knowingly causes to be delivered by mail or such carrier according to the direction thereon , or at the place at which it is directed to be delivered by the person to whom it is addressed , any such matter or thing , shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 20 years , or both .

if the violation occurs in relation to , or involving any benefit authorized , transported , transmitted , transferred , disbursed , or paid in connection with , a presidentially declared major disaster or emergency ( as those terms are defined in section 102 of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( 42 u.s.c .

5122 ) ) , or affects a financial institution , such person shall be fined not more than $1,000,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 years , or both .

whoever , having devised or intending to devise any scheme or artifice to defraud , or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses , representations , or promises , transmits or causes to be transmitted by means of wire , radio , or television communication in interstate or foreign commerce , any writings , signs , signals , pictures , or sounds for the purpose of executing such scheme or artifice , shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 20 years , or both .

if the violation occurs in relation to , or involving any benefit authorized , transported , transmitted , transferred , disbursed , or paid in connection with , a presidentially declared major disaster or emergency ( as those terms are defined in section 102 of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( 42 u.s.c .

5122 ) ) , or affects a financial institution , such person shall be fined not more than $1,000,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 years , or both .

for the purposes of this chapter , the term "scheme or artifice to defraud" includes a scheme or artifice to deprive another of the intangible right of honest services .

any person who attempts or conspires to commit any offense under this chapter shall be subject to the same penalties as those prescribed for the offense , the commission of which was the object of the attempt or conspiracy .

