relatively high default and foreclosure rates in the housing market have led some to question whether borrowers were fully informed about the terms of their mortgage loans .

there has been concern that mortgage disclosure forms are confusing and not easily understood by borrowers .

it has been argued that transparent mortgage terms could enhance consumer shopping and discourage predatory , discriminatory , and fraudulent lending practices .

lending practices that involve hidden costs may result in a payment shock to a borrower , possibly leading to financial distress or even foreclosure .

the issue of adequate disclosure of mortgage terms is longstanding .

the truth in lending act ( tila ) of 1968 , which was previously implemented by the federal reserve board via regulation z , requires lenders to disclose the cost of credit and repayment terms of mortgage loans before borrowers enter into any transactions .

the tila disclosure statement conveys information about the credit costs and terms of the transaction .

the tila disclosure statement lists the annual percentage rate ( apr ) , an interest rate calculation that incorporates both the loan rate and fees .

the statement also discloses finance charges , the amount financed , the total number of the payments , whether the interest rate on the mortgage loan can change , and whether the borrower has the option to refinance the loan .

the real estate settlement procedures act ( respa ) of 1974 is another element of the consumer disclosure regime .

respa requires standardized disclosures about the settlement or closing costs , which are costs associated with the acquisition of residential mortgages .

examples of such costs include loan origination fees or points , credit report fees , property appraisal fees , mortgage insurance fees , title insurance fees , home and flood insurance fees , recording fees , attorney fees , and escrow account deposits .

in other words , the mortgage loan rate and fees are disclosed in separate calculations rather than in one calculation .

in addition , respa , which was implemented by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , includes the following provisions: ( 1 ) providers of settlement services are required to provide a good faith estimate ( gfe ) of the settlement service costs borrowers should expect at the closing of their mortgage loans ; ( 2 ) a list of the actual closing costs must be provided to borrowers at the time of closing , which are typically listed on the hud - 1 settlement statement ; and ( 3 ) respa prohibits "referral fees" or "kickbacks" among settlement service providers to prevent settlement fees from increasing unnecessarily .

the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act of 2010 ( dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) transferred general rulemaking authority for various provisions of tila and respa to a new consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) effective july 21 , 2011 .

lenders currently present borrowers with both tila and respa disclosures , but the dodd - frank act has directed the cfpb to create a single disclosure form that satisfies both disclosure requirements .

the cfpb must issue a proposed rule of the new loan estimate form within one year of its july 21 , 2011 transfer date .

the cfpb released two initial loan estimate prototypes in may 2011 and has proposed several rounds of updated prototypes since then .

this report reviews current efforts to regulate the reporting of pertinent loan information to consumers , including actions taken by the cfpb .

as previously stated , tila requires mortgage lenders to present borrowers with a disclosure statement that conveys information about the credit costs and terms of the transaction in one apr calculation expressed as a percentage .

tila was amended in 1980 to require the federal reserve to publish apr disclosure forms .

on november 17 , 2008 , hud made changes to the respa component of the mortgage disclosure process that it supervises .

key modifications are discussed below .

as required by the dodd - frank act , the cfpb has proposed various prototypes of a standardized loan estimate form to combine the tila disclosure statement and hud's gfe into a single document .

the dodd - frank act directed the cfpb to issue a proposed rule of the new loan estimate form within one year of its july 21 , 2011 transfer date .

the cfpb stated its plans to perform five rounds of testing in six different cities before the final rule is proposed .

in addition to consumer testing , the cfpb convened a small business review panel to solicit feedback on its prototype .

the current prototype , tupelo , is the most recent form available on the cfpb website and has been developed after at least five rounds of testing .

tupelo has three pages with the first page containing three sections .

the first section presents the loan amount ; the interest rate and whether it can change ; the monthly loan payment ; and whether a prepayment penalty or a balloon payment exists .

the second section discloses the projected monthly payments over various time periods of the loan .

estimates of the borrower's monthly payment also includes estimated property taxes , insurance , and assessments .

this section also shows whether an escrow account exists and how much the borrower should expect to pay each month .

the last section on page one provides the estimated amount needed to close .

the second page of the tupelo prototype uses the example of a loan for $211,000 with $6,151 in closing costs for the sake of illustrating a completed form .

the prototype has five sections .

the first two sections itemize the various expenses associated with closing .

the third section calculates the cash needed to close by summing the settlement fees , settlement costs , down payment , and other costs .

next , a table provides the potential borrower with information on the monthly payments , such as whether there are any interest - only payments and what the maximum payment could be .

finally , a second table describes whether the mortgage interest rate is adjustable and how it could potentially change .

the third page of the tupelo prototype contains three additional sections .

the first section allows borrowers to compare the terms of other loans offered by other loan originators .

the section lists the amount that a borrower will have paid in total over the first five years of the loan and how much would go to paying down principal .

it also lists the apr as well as the total amount of interest paid over the loan term as a percentage of the loan .

the next section provides brief information about other aspects ( eg , appraisal , homeowner's insurance , late payments , and servicing ) .

should the borrower decide to proceed with the mortgage origination process , the final section provides a space for the applicant to sign to confirm that the form was received .

the cfpb has also developed a prototype settlement disclosure , which consolidates the hud - 1 settlement statement and the final tila disclosure .

