the united states has exported natural gas for close to 100 years , but has generally exported less natural gas than it has imported .

u.s. gas exports have been primarily via pipeline to mexico and eastern canada .

historically , the united states has also exported liquefied natural gas ( lng ) from alaska — almost exclusively to japan — but the volumes of those shipments have been relatively small and alaska's natural gas market has been isolated from the rest of the united states .

natural gas companies are now considering exporting greater quantities of u.s. lng by tanker ship to a number of other countries .

increased development of u.s. natural gas resources — primarily shale gas — along with low domestic prices and idle lng import infrastructure , have driven the change in the u.s. position .

within the next several years , the united states may become a much larger natural gas exporter , particularly in the form of lng .

however , natural gas exports from the united states require federal approval pursuant to section 3 of the natural gas act ( nga , 15 u.s.c .

§717b ) .

the department of energy's ( doe's ) office of fossil energy and the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) must authorize the export of the commodity and related facilities , respectively .

this overarching federal role in the expansion of u.s. natural gas exports has been the subject of ongoing oversight and debate in congress .

the prospect of the united states supplying a global market with large quantities of lng from the lower - 48 states raises concerns in congress , particularly about a potential rise in what consumers pay for natural gas and effects on the economy .

developers of natural gas export projects and natural gas producers argue that domestic gas prices will not rise significantly if u.s. natural gas exports increase because the united states has ample gas resources to meet both export and domestic demand .

they argue that any domestic gas price increases due to exports would be more than offset by benefits from the increased gas production , such as higher employment and an improved trade balance .

doe has used the results of several studies it commissioned about the impact on domestic natural gas prices of exports and the effect on the u.s. economy to justify the approval of lng export proposals .

however , some stakeholders disagree with the agency's conclusions .

u.s. natural gas prices are lower than those in other international markets , partly because of the nature of the natural gas resources and partly due to competition in the u.s. market .

nevertheless , natural gas prices within the united states vary by region because of transportation limitations , access to supplies , and differences in demand .

as new volumes of shale gas are developed , these supplies seek markets where little or no natural gas production has existed before .

over time , the u.s. natural gas market is reconfiguring itself to balance supply and demand regionally and nationally .

but getting new natural gas supplies to market may be an ongoing challenge for the industry , whether within the united states or abroad .

infrastructure constraints , such as limited pipeline capacity , environmental regulations , and other regulatory requirements will play a part in how the natural gas market adjusts .

exports of natural gas either by pipeline or as lng will be a factor as the market seeks balance , especially on a regional basis .

hence the potential export of more u.s. natural gas may have economic effects that vary significantly from region to region , and regional impacts may diverge from impacts on the nation as a whole .

 ( for an illustration of regional natural gas price differentials in the lower - 48 states , see appendix b ) .

other issues have also been raised regarding natural gas exports .

environmental groups are divided on the desirability of greater use of natural gas at home and abroad .

advocates see it as reducing emissions compared to other hydrocarbons , especially coal , whereas opponents point out that natural gas still emits carbon dioxide and other pollutants .

concerns about contamination of water supplies during gas production have been raised because of hydraulic fracturing ( "fracking" ) — which uses water , sand , and chemicals to create fissures in shale , allowing the trapped natural gas to be cost - effectively extracted .

other groups want to see greater use of natural gas in the u.s. economy for economic and national security concerns before it is exported overseas .

the prospect of growing u.s. natural gas exports , particularly lng , continues to be a factor as congress debates the economy , energy independence , climate change , and energy security .

bills to expedite and expand lng exports have been introduced in the 114 th congress , including the lng permitting certainty and transparency act ( h.r .

351 and s. 33 ) , the american job creation and strategic alliances lng act ( h.r .

287 ) , the crude oil export act ( h.r .

156 ) , the domestic prosperity and global freedom act ( h.r .

89 ) , and the export american natural gas act of 2015 ( h.r .

428 ) .

this report examines what has changed in the u.s. natural gas market and the prospects and implications of the united states becoming a larger net exporter of natural gas .

heading into the 2000s , the united states was expected to be a growing importer of natural gas because domestic gas production was declining and demand was rising ( figure 1 ) .

the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) in its 1999 annual energy outlook forecasted that net natural gas imports between 1997 and 2020 would grow from 12.9% of consumption to 15.5% , based on consumption growing faster than production .

to accommodate the potential increase in imports , five new lng import terminals were built by industry in the latter half of the 2000s , and some existing lng import facilities were re - commissioned and expanded .

the united states currently has lng import capacity of almost 14 billion cubic feet per day ( bcfd ) or over 5 trillion cubic feet ( tcf ) per year .

however , higher domestic production has made imports largely unnecessary , leaving existing import capacity mostly idle .

in its annual energy outlook 201 4 , eia projects that the united states will be an overall net natural gas exporter by around 2016 , when u.s. production exceeds domestic consumption ( figure 1 ) .

the abundance of new domestic natural gas supplies shifted industry interest from building lng import terminals to constructing lng export terminals .

as of the beginning of january 2015 , there have been 48 applications for permits either to construct liquefaction facilities at existing lng import terminals ( also known as regasification facilities ) or for new lng export facilities , in order to export domestically produced natural gas as lng .

the total capacity proposed is approximately 42 bcfd .

in addition , companies have active permits to re - export lng cargos from existing import terminals , which involves taking in foreign lng cargos , holding them in storage , and then reloading them onto lng tankers for shipment to foreign markets .

increased pipeline exports to canada and mexico may also continue to rise if their domestic demand continues to increase .

low u.s. natural gas prices ( especially in the gulf of mexico ) relative to other international markets have spurred interest in exporting u.s. produced natural gas ( figure 2 ) .

what effect exporting natural gas will have on u.s. prices and the overall u.s. economy are central questions in the debate over whether to export .

doe has commissioned several studies as part of its evaluation of whether lng exports to non - free - trade - agreement ( non - fta ) countries are in the public interest , further discussed later in this report .

lower u.s. natural gas prices since 2008 along with a large and growing resource base have also prompted calls for greater use of natural gas in the nation's overall fuel mix .

natural gas comprised about 27% of u.s. primary energy consumption last year and has averaged approximately 24% per year since 1973 .

instead of exporting u.s. natural gas , some say , the united states should increase use of natural gas in the electric power sector to displace coal , as an alternative transportation fuel to displace oil , and to provide fuel and feedstock to domestic industries such as petrochemicals .

some transition to natural gas is already occurring , particularly in the electric power sector .

however , the eia's annual average projected prices to 2040 ( which assume no changes in u.s. policy ) never reach the price peaks of the latter 2000s ( figure 3 ) .

total u.s. natural gas exports are relatively small but have grown since 1999 , increasing more than 15-fold through 2012 ( figure 4 ) .

the united states has been exporting natural gas since at least the 1930s , primarily to canada and mexico .

in 2013 , over 99% of exports were by pipeline to these two countries .

starting in 1969 , a small amount of natural gas was also exported as lng to japan via the kenai lng terminal in alaska .

kenai lng operated continuously from its opening until its temporary idling in 2012 .

in april 2014 , the facility's owner announced that it would reopen the kenai lng terminal because the local area gas supply forecast had increased , providing a renewed opportunity to export alaskan natural gas production in excess of local demand .

it remains the only completed lng export facility in north america although it is currently not shipping any lng .

in 2010 , the united states , through doe's office of fossil energy , allowed lng import terminals to re - export foreign - sourced lng to international markets .

lng volumes that are re - exported from the united states after being imported from third countries are not treated the same way as exports of domestically produced natural gas for the purposes of federal regulation .

lng re - export volumes are small , but have exceeded u.s. lng export volumes in recent years due to the steady decline of lng exports since 2005 ( figure 4 ) .

growing u.s. natural gas production , primarily from shale gas , has decreased the demand for both pipeline imports and lng imports , leaving the import terminals mostly idle .

although most of the applications for lng exports would build new facilities , the projects considered most viable are those that add liquefaction to existing import terminals .

in some cases companies that have partnered in a facility have both applied for licenses , but the volumes are only included once in doe's data .

as stated above , u.s. lng exports began in 1969 with the opening of the kenai lng export terminal in alaska .

while this facility was the only u.s. lng export terminal for several decades , numerous new lng export projects have been advancing in the united states .

if all the proposed u.s. lng export projects were operational today , the united states would rank first in the world , by far , for global export capacity .

however , u.s. lng exports will face competition in the global lng market .

according to one study , global liquefaction capacity is projected to rise by almost 50% by 2020 ( figure 5 ) , including only one of the u.s. projects .

many non - u.s. projects are much further along than the u.s. projects .

in 2013 lng trade accounted for 31% of all natural gas traded internationally .

most lng sold in the world is under long - term contracts indexed to oil prices .

long - term contracts are needed to finance the liquefaction facilities , usually the most expensive part of the lng supply chain , which also includes lng tankers , storage , and lng import terminals .

u.s. natural gas prices are natural gas market - based , which can give u.s. lng export projects an advantage because the differential with oil - indexed natural gas prices can be large compared to the u.s. price ( figure 2 ) .

u.s. lng exports could add to the pressure for other countries to delink their natural gas exports — either as lng or by pipeline — from oil - indexed prices .

japanese companies , for example , have been vocal about their interest in a natural gas - based pricing mechanism to reduce costs and exposure to oil prices .

several recent lng supply contracts with proposed u.s. exporters are of this type .

however , recent declines in global oil prices have reduced the oil - indexed versus gas - indexed price differential .

furthermore , u.s. lng export contracts will still need to be long - term ( usually 20 or longer ) to obtain financing .

for some facilities , this may be a difficult hurdle to overcome given market and financial conditions and recent price volatility .

providing lng to countries that use oil for heating , industrial processes , or electricity generation could also decrease demand for petroleum products , putting further downward pressure on oil prices .

the dip in 2012 in figure 5 is due to major declines in algeria , trinidad & tobago , oman , and indonesia .

algeria's two export terminals have been undergoing maintenance and one is being rebuilt .

trinidad & tobago's decline is mostly because the united states is no longer a big importer of lng .

egypt and libya declined because of the turmoil in those countries .

many of the projected projects in figure 5 are targeting the asian lng demand centers .

although the locations of most of the proposed u.s. export terminals are on the u.s. gulf coast and the east coast , asia may be the target market for u.s. lng , as it tends to pay higher prices for its natural gas imports .

the widening of the panama canal , scheduled to be completed in 2015 , would contribute to u.s. competitiveness in asia .

europe has a lot of lng import capacity and growing demand , but needs to continue to improve its infrastructure connections to transport gas to markets .

russia , the main supplier of natural gas to europe , may be put under increasing pressure by u.s. export projects to further delink its natural gas prices from oil .

u.s. lng exports could also provide options for some countries that are highly dependent on one supplier .

the growth in u.s. natural gas resources , particularly from shale gas , and the projected continued growth are what make increased natural gas exports a possibility .

u.s. natural gas reserves have climbed approximately 80% since 2000 and 60% since 2005 ( figure 6 ) .

these data include reductions for natural gas extracted during the period and so are net increases .

in recent years , the increase in reserves is mostly attributed to development of shale gas , which has grown from 10% of u.s. natural gas reserves in 2007 to 45% in 2013 .

by comparison , conventional u.s. natural gas reserves declined between 2007 and 2008 , and fell again in 2010 .

though the decline was marginal , it highlights the importance of shale gas to future u.s. natural gas production .

many industry analysts expect shale gas reserves to continue to rise and make up a greater portion of u.s. natural gas reserves unless new restrictions are placed on the industry , such as rules related to hydraulic fracturing , power plant emissions , pipeline development , or other factors .

several bills in the 114 th congress directly relate to lng exports , primarily facilitating the approval of exports to non - fta countries .

both the house and senate versions of the lng permitting certainty and transparency act ( h.r .

351 and s. 33 ) would impose a 30-day or 45-day deadline , respectively , on doe export permit decisions after a final environmental impact statement is issued under nepa , among other provisions .

the domestic prosperity and global freedom act ( h.r .

89 ) would impose a similar 30-day deadline on doe permit decisions .

the export american natural gas act of 2015 ( h.r .

428 ) would impose a 60-day deadline on doe permit decisions beginning on the date the doe receives a completed application , an applicant signs an lng export contract , or enactment of the bill , whichever is later .

the american job creation and strategic alliances lng act ( h.r .

287 ) would extend fta nation treatment to world trade organization member nations with respect to lng export permitting by doe .

the crude oil export act ( h.r .

156 ) would repeal limitations on export of outer continental shelf natural gas under section 28 of the outer continental shelf lands act ( 43 u.s.c .

1354 ) .

other bills , such as the natural gas pipeline permitting reform act ( h.r .

161 ) , would also affect natural gas production and infrastructure affecting lng exports .

the public focus on u.s. exports of natural gas has been on the applications to export lng , despite the united states exporting much more natural gas by pipeline .

groups such as the industrial energy consumers of america ( ieca ) , a national association of manufacturing companies , and the american public gas association ( apga ) , a national association of publicly owned natural gas distribution systems , have filed motions to intervene against or have lobbied congress in opposition to various lng export projects or bills to facilitate exports .

both of these organizations represent firms that use natural gas and would be negatively affected if natural gas prices rose .

natural gas producers and certain local businesses have supported the projects , as they would benefit from access to new overseas markets and higher international prices .

analyses of the price effects of potential natural gas exports likely will receive continued attention as companies move forward with their projects .

the sierra club has filed against projects on environmental grounds , particularly related to the source of natural gas for export .

expectations about the economic impacts of greater u.s. natural gas exports depend on assumptions about the volume of exports , economic growth , market segmentation , and environmental regulations , among other market parameters .

some initial estimates projected a modest rise in absolute terms in domestic natural gas prices if all the proposed export projects are built , premised on a relatively flat supply curve for natural gas .

these estimates also projected that u.s. natural gas prices would stay relatively low in historic terms as well as in comparison to global prices .

those in favor of exports add that increased production could result in increased revenue for local , state , and federal governments ( through taxes , royalty payments , and economic development ) , more employment , an improved international trade balance , and reductions in natural gas flaring .

natural gas consumers counter that higher natural gas prices abroad could eventually lead to higher prices in the united states , and possible supply shortages , as producers seek to maximize profits by diverting more and more u.s. natural gas to overseas markets .

in the near term , increased use of natural gas in the u.s. economy is limited , primarily to electric power generation .

natural gas - fired electric power plants account for a significant and growing share of u.s. natural gas demand .

although coal remains the dominant fuel for u.s. electric power generation , environmental concerns regarding atmospheric emissions are limiting its use and prompting the retirement of older coal plants that are less equipped to curtail emissions .

switching from coal to natural gas in electric power generation may consume incremental u.s. natural gas supply increases before exports do .

there are many proposed petrochemicals projects , but these are at various stages of development and will take a number of years to come to fruition .

other sectors such as transportation , industrial , commercial , and residential are not likely to see a substantial rise in natural gas demand in the next couple of years .

this could change if technologies can be improved to increase the use of natural gas in transportation , such as gas - to - liquids , natural gas vehicles , or electric vehicles ( assuming the electricity is generated by natural gas ) .

although proponents see strategic value in such fuel - switching as a means to reduce u.s. dependence on imported oil , high technology costs diminish this prospect in the near term .

although much less attention is paid to natural gas exports by pipeline , it is anticipated that these will continue to increase .

canada's natural gas production has been declining , but it is possible this will be reversed as canada develops its own shale gas resources , which are estimated to be large .

however , canadian consumption may also increase as production from oil sands is projected to rise .

natural gas is heavily used in the extraction of petroleum from oil sands .

canada also has at least two of its own lng export projects being considered .

a recent eia study estimated canada's technically recoverable shale gas resources at 573 trillion cubic feet , over 100 years' worth at the country's current production rate .

if canada develops these resources , they could be an additional source of natural gas for the united states as well .

mexico's natural gas production has been rising steadily for the last decade , but not quickly enough to keep up with consumption .

imports now account for almost 27% of consumption compared to under 10% in 2000 , and imports from the united states made up over 70% of all natural gas imports to mexico in 2013 .

although mexico may have significant technically recoverable shale gas resources , 545 trillion cubic feet or 364 years at their current production level , mexico is much further behind in developing these resources than the united states and canada , and will likely remain dependent on u.s. supplies to meet growing demand .

receiving permits to export natural gas by pipeline to canada and mexico is typically easier than receiving a permit to build an lng export facility , even though pipeline projects require authorization from the secretaries of defense and state .

both canada and mexico are fta countries and exports are assumed to be in the u.s. national interest by statute .

pipeline export projects tend to be less costly and easier to finance than lng export projects may be .

as highlighted above , the development of shale gas resources will be a key factor in the united states becoming a net natural gas exporter .

infrastructure constraints within some of the major shale gas producing areas may limit the amount of natural gas that can reach markets and be available for export .

changes to the regulatory environment would also have an impact on natural gas production .

environmental groups differ on the desirability of greater natural gas use in general .

although burning natural gas produces less pollution than burning other fossil fuels , it still emits greenhouse gases and other atmospheric pollutants .

some environmental groups view natural gas as a necessary bridge fuel to a zero carbon economy , while others want to go to the zero carbon economy directly .

some environmental groups see natural gas exports raising domestic natural gas prices , making renewables more viable .

additionally , there are concerns about risks to water supplies associated with hydraulic fracturing , the technique for extracting shale gas which uses water , sand , and chemicals to create fissures in shale , allowing the trapped natural gas to be cost - effectively extracted .

the possibility of increased shale gas development and pipeline construction in the united states to supply overseas lng buyers troubles some environmental advocates .

appendix a .

select u.s. natural gas import and export infrastructure appendix b. lower - 48 states natural gas hub ma .

