in response to continuing high rates of unemployment and a weak economy , president obama announced his american jobs act on september 8 , 2011 , before a joint session of congress , and submitted formal legislation the following week .

the president stated the purpose of the legislation was to "put more people back to work and more money in the pockets of those who are working. .

the american jobs act was introduced , by request , in the senate on september 13 , 2011 ( s. 1549 ) , and in the house on september 21 , 2011 ( h.r .

12 ) .

the administration estimated the act would result in spending of $447 billion , to be offset by revenue provisions included in the bill or savings achieved by the joint select committee on deficit reduction .

senate majority leader harry reid subsequently re - introduced the proposal as s. 1660 , using a different offset to pay for its spending provisions .

specifically , s. 1660 would impose a 5.6% surtax on income above $1 million .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated this version would increase revenues by $453 billion over fy2012-fy2021 , compared to $450 billion in the original version of the american jobs act ( s. 1549 ) .

in the months since its introduction , individual provisions of the american jobs act have been considered — and some enacted — as freestanding bills or parts of other legislation .

this report describes provisions in the american jobs act that fall into three major categories: provisions intended to promote hiring and prevent layoffs among selected categories of workers , specifically teachers , law enforcement officers , firefighters , veterans , and the long - term unemployed ; provisions to assist unemployed workers through unemployment compensation and reemployment services ; and provisions to expand workforce development opportunities for low - income adults and youth .

the report does not discuss tax provisions ( except for specialized tax credits intended as hiring incentives ) or proposals related primarily to infrastructure ( except for school modernization grants ) .

the american jobs act has four titles , as shown below .

 ( note that the body of this crs report is not organized in the sequence of the act , but rather by the three major topic areas identified above. ) .

title i — relief for workers and businesses — would extend and expand through 2012 the temporary payroll tax reduction in effect during 2011 , and would also establish a tax credit for employers for increased payroll attributed to certain workers .

the title includes other tax relief for businesses , including provisions related to bonus depreciation and tax withholding requirements for government contractors .

 ( title i provisions are not discussed in this report. ) .

title ii — putting workers back on the job while building and modernizing america — includes subtitles that would create hiring incentives for veterans ( through the work opportunity tax credit ) ; authorize grants to prevent layoffs and create jobs for teachers , law enforcement officers , and firefighters ; and provide funding for the modernization , repair , and renovation of schools and colleges .

 ( these provisions are all discussed in the body of this report. ) .

title ii also includes subtitles related to infrastructure development , including transportation infrastructure grants ; establishment of an american infrastructure financing authority ; project rebuild to be administered by the department of housing and urban development for the purpose of rehabilitating and refurbishing foreclosed and vacant properties ; and a national wireless initiative to expand access to high - speed wireless .

 ( these provisions are not discussed in this report. ) .

title iii — assistance for the unemployed and pathways back to work — includes an extension of certain temporary unemployment compensation ( uc ) provisions .

the title also would create a reemployment now program for beneficiaries of emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) ; and would clarify existing law and make grants for short - time compensation programs .

the title would create incentives for employers to hire veterans and long - term unemployed workers through the work opportunity tax credit ; and would create a pathways back to work program to assist unemployed , low - income adults and youth .

finally , the title includes a provision intended to prohibit employment discrimination on the basis of an individual's unemployed status .

 ( all title iii provisions are discussed in this report. ) .

title iv — offsets — includes tax provisions intended to offset costs of the american jobs act .

these provisions are different in the administration's version ( introduced as s. 1549 and h.r .

12 ) and the subsequent version introduced as s. 1660 .

as proposed by the administration , this title also would increase the deficit reduction goal and automatic spending reduction trigger established in the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

111-125 ) .

 ( these provisions are not discussed in this report. ) .

the american jobs act contains several provisions to promote hiring and prevent layoffs of selected categories of workers , specifically teachers , law enforcement officers , and firefighters , through formula or competitive grant programs to government entities .

the act also would promote hiring of veterans and long - term unemployed individuals through tax credits to employers .

finally , the act would prohibit employment discrimination on the basis of an individual's unemployed status .

these components of the act are discussed in the following sections .

the american jobs act focuses on the income and reemployment needs of unemployed workers , particularly the long - term unemployed who might qualify for benefits under the temporary emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) program , or the extended benefits ( eb ) program that provides benefits beyond the usual unemployment compensation ( uc ) maximum of 26 weeks .

in addition to provisions that would extend certain temporary programs and expand services for certain euc08 claimants , the act also would authorize a new reemployment now program , that would provide formula grants to states to address the reemployment needs of eligible individuals , and would expand federal funding for state - administered short - time compensation ( or "work sharing" ) programs .

these provisions are discussed in the following sections .

title iii , subtitle c of the american jobs act would authorize the pathways back to work act of 2011 ( pathways act ) , which would provide funds for three grant programs to promote the employment of unemployed low - income adults and youth .

overall , the pathways act would provide $5 billion for these initiatives through a combination of formula and competitive grants .

funds provided under the pathways act would remain available for obligation by the department of labor ( dol ) until december 31 , 2012 , and would remain available for expenditure by grantees until september 30 , 2013 .

for all three pathways act initiatives , the secretary of labor would be allowed to reserve up to 1% of the allocated funding for each initiative to provide technical assistance , evaluations , and administration .

the three grant programs are described in the following sections .

the american jobs act would authorize two new grant programs for the modernization , renovation , and repair of education facilities .

part i of title ii , subtitle d would authorize a new elementary and secondary education school facilities grant program .

part ii of title ii , subtitle d would authorize a new grant program of federal assistance for eligible postsecondary education facilities .

currently , the majority of federal support for education facilities is attributable to interest exemptions and tax credits on bonds .

the federal government also provides grant and loan support for facilities serving certain populations , facilities with specific needs , and facilities serving particular purposes .

under the proposed two programs , funds could be used for the modernization , renovation , and repair of eligible facilities .

funds could not be used for routine maintenance costs or for stadiums or other facilities primarily used for athletic contests or exhibitions or other events for which admission is charged to the general public .

elementary and secondary education facilities funds could not be used for new construction .

postsecondary education facilities funds could not be used on facilities used for sectarian instruction , religious worship , or a school or department of divinity ; or in which a substantial portion of the functions of the facilities are subsumed in a religious mission .

modernization , renovation , and repair would include activities such as facilities assessments , roofing , installation of heating systems , code compliance , and reducing or eliminating hazards .

the use of funds under both programs would also be required to adhere to the wage rates in the davis - bacon act , as amended .

in addition , funds used on elementary , secondary , or postsecondary facilities would have to use american iron , steel , and manufactured goods , unless waived .

funds for each program would be used to supplement , not supplant ( sns ) , other federal , state , and local funds that would otherwise be used for the modernization , renovation , and repair of eligible facilities .

provisions that are substantially similar to title ii - d of the american jobs act have been included in the fast act of 2011 ( s. 1597 and h.r .

2948 , introduced september 21 and november 18 , respectively ) .

the major differences between the fast act and the school modernization provisions included in the american jobs act are: the fast act would allow states to reserve up to 1% of their allocation for administrative costs associated with the elementary and secondary schools modernization program and reserve up to 1% of their allocation for administrative costs associated with the community college modernization program .

the american jobs act would restrict the administrative reservations to the lesser of 1% or $750,000 each .

the fast act does not include the american jobs act provisions that would require the equitable participation requirements for private school students , as authorized under section 9501 of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , to apply to the funding provided for the elementary and secondary schools modernization program .

the fast act would require additional reporting .

each local educational agency ( lea ) and state that receives either a elementary and secondary schools modernization program grant or a community college modernization program grant would be required to report annually on the projects and jobs created .

the secretary would be required to report on the programs to the appropriating and authorizing committees .

finally , the government accountability office ( gao ) would be required to evaluate the impact and benefits of the programs .

the american jobs act would only require reports on the community college modernization program from the states and the secretary .

the house version of the fast act ( h.r .

2948 ) includes two additional differences: h.r .

2948 does not include the american jobs act provision that would prohibit elementary and secondary schools modernization funds from being used for stadiums or other facilities primarily used for athletic contests or exhibitions or other events for which admission is charged to the general public .

for the community college modernization program , h.r .

2948 would define the eligible institutions of higher education ( ihes ) as two - year public ihes , two - year private not - for - profit ihes , four - year public ihes that award a significant number of degrees and certificates below the baccalaureate level , and four - year private not - for - profit ihes that award a significant number of degrees and certificates below the baccalaureate level .

under the american jobs act , the eligible ihes would not include four - year private not - for - profit ihes that award a significant number of degrees and certificates below the baccalaureate level .

the sections below describe the school modernization provisions , as included in the american jobs act .

the act would appropriate a one - time amount of $25 billion for obligation by the secretary of education ( secretary ) through fy2012 for early learning , elementary , or secondary education facilities .

the program would provide a 0.5% set - aside for bureau of indian education ( bie ) - funded schools , a 0.5% set - aside for the outlying areas , and a set - aside of an amount deemed necessary for the department of education's national center for education statistics ( nces ) to conduct a survey of public school construction , modernization , renovation , and repair needs .

the administration has estimated that the survey may require $5 million ( see table a - 2 ) .

the act does not suggest a methodology for distributing the funds among the bie - funded schools or outlying areas .

the remainder of funds after the set - asides would be allocated by formula to states and 100 local educational agencies ( leas ) in the same manner that funds were allocated for qualified school construction bonds ( qscbs ) in cy2009 and cy2010 .

the 100 leas are those with the largest numbers of children aged 5-17 living in poverty ( hereafter referred to as the 100 largest leas ) .

the states , which include the district of columbia and puerto rico , would each receive an allocation of 100% of the remaining funds in proportion to their fy2011 allocations under title i - a of the esea , reduced by the amount received by the largest leas in the state ( see table a - 2 ) .

the 100 largest leas would receive 40% of the remaining funds in proportion to their fy2011 allocations under title i - a of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) ( see table a - 3 ) .

the states and 100 largest leas would have to obligate their funds within 24 months of enactment of the aja .

of the funds received by the state and the largest leas in the state , the lesser of 1% or $750,000 could be reserved by the state for administrative costs associated with the elementary and secondary schools modernization program .

after the administrative reservation , states , in turn , would award both competitive and formula subgrants to leas , including charter schools that are their own leas but excluding the 100 largest leas .

formula subgrants would be awarded from 50% of the state's remaining allocation in proportion to the fy2011 esea title i - a allocation of each lea that was not one of the 100 largest leas .

the minimum lea formula subgrant would be $10,000 .

leas would have to obligate their formula funds within 24 months of enactment .

states would award competitive grants to leas , which are not one the 100 largest leas , from the other 50% of the state's remaining allocation based on "objective criteria" with priority for project need and rural leas .

states would be required to give priority to the use of green building / energy rating standards .

leas would have to obligate their competitive funds within 36 months of enactment .

all leas , including the 100 largest leas , could use the funds to support direct costs , interest on newly issued bonds , or payments for other newly issued financing instruments for modernization , renovation , and repair or a combination of these uses .

the proposal would require that the equitable participation requirements for private school students authorized under section 9501 of the esea apply to the funding provided for the elementary and secondary schools modernization program .

section 9501 requires that leas ( or other grantees under relevant programs ) shall "after timely and meaningful consultation with appropriate private school officials provide to those children and their teachers or other educational personnel , on an equitable basis , special educational services or other benefits that address their needs under the program. .

under the american jobs act , equitable participation requirements for private school students would only apply to students enrolled in private nonprofit elementary and secondary schools with child poverty rates of at least 40% .

in addition , all services , benefits , material , and equipment provided would be required to be secular , neutral , and nonideological .

the services provided would be equitable in comparison to services provided to public school students and staff , and would be required to be provided in a timely manner .

the expenditures for private school students would be required to be equal to those for public school students , taking into account the number and educational needs of the children to be served .

under the proposal , expenditures for services would be considered equal if the per - pupil expenditures under the elementary and secondary schools modernization program for students enrolled in eligible private schools were consistent with the per - pupil expenditures for children enrolled in the public schools of the lea receiving funds under the program , unless there is insufficient need in the eligible private schools .

eligible private schools would be able to use funds for modifications of school facilities necessary to meet the standards applicable to public schools under the americans with disabilities act of 1990 ( 42 u.s.c .

12101 et seq .

 ) ; modifications of school facilities necessary to meet the standards applicable to public schools under section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 ( 29 u.s.c .

794 ) ; and asbestos or polychlorinated biphenyls abatement or removal from school facilities .

when implementing the provisions of section 9501 for esea programs , the control of funds used to provide services and the title to materials , equipment , and property purchased with those funds remains with a public agency .

for the purposes of the elementary and secondary schools modernization program , however , these requirements would not apply , and private schools receiving funds under the program would retain the title to their property .

the minimum lea formula subgrant of $10,000 may not be of sufficient size to support substantial modernization , renovation , or repair .

table a - 4 provides examples of construction , modernization , renovation , and repair project estimates from the alabama department of education , the wyoming school facilities department , and illinois state board of education .

the american jobs act would appropriate $5 billion for obligation by the secretary in fy2012 to modernize , renovate , or repair existing facilities used by postsecondary students pursuing two - year and less - than - two - year degrees / certificates .

the program would provide a 0.25% set - aside for tribally controlled colleges and universities and a 0.25% set - aside for the outlying areas .

the act does not suggest a methodology for distributing the funds among the tribally controlled colleges and universities and outlying areas .

the remainder of funds after the set - asides would be allocated by formula to the states , including puerto rico and the district of columbia , that have approved applications using a formula based on a combination of postsecondary enrollment and degree / certificate awards ( see table a - 2 ) .

in determining these grants , each grant would be based on the sum of the numbers of students enrolled in two - year public and two - year private not - for - profit institutions of higher education ( ihes ) in the state ; and the estimated number of students who are pursuing two - year and less - than - two - year degrees / certificates and who are enrolled in four - year public ihes that award a "significant number" of two - year and less - than - two - year degrees / certificates in the state ( see formula below ) .

the estimated number of students at four - year ihes would be calculated as the total enrollment at four - year public ihes that award a significant number of two - year and less - than - two - year degrees / certificates multiplied by the ratio of two - year and less - than - two - year degrees / certificates awarded at such ihes to all degrees / certificates awarded at such ihes .

the proposal would require the secretary to use data from the department of education's integrated postsecondary education data system ( ipeds ) to determine grant amounts .

the minimum state grant amount is $2.5 million .

where: np2e = two - year public and two - year private not - for - profit ihe enrollment pub4e = four - year public ihe enrollment 2yrdeg = total of two - year and less - than - two - year degrees / certificates awarded at public four - year ihes alldeg = total of all degrees / certificates awarded at public four - year ihes app = program allocation after set - asides ∑ = sum ( for all approved states ) the proposal would require each state application to include estimated start dates for each project .

although many states have capital plans and capital project priority lists for public ihes , states may need to solicit similar information from the private ihes , develop a process for verifying cost estimates , and establish standards for estimating costs .

states receiving a grant would be required to report annually on the use of funds to the secretary starting on september 30 , 2012 .

the report would include a description of projects funded and planned for funding , subgrant amounts , and the number of jobs created .

the secretary would in turn consolidate the state reports annually for the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions and the house committee on education and the workforce .

of the funds received by the state , the lesser of 1% or $750,000 could be reserved for administrative costs associated with the community college modernization program .

the proposal does not establish a methodology or process for further distributing funds to eligible ihes , except that states would be required to consider the extent to which ihes plan to use green building / energy rating standards .

grants could only be made to eligible ihes — two - year public ihes , two - year private not - for - profit ihes , and four - year public ihes .

ihes could use the funds to modernize , renovate , or repair existing facilities used by postsecondary students pursuing two - year and less - than - two - year degrees / certificates .

four - year ihes could not use the funds for facilities that are not available to students pursuing two - year and less - than - two - year degrees / certificates .

ihes would have to obligate their funds within 36 months of enactment .

