congress has delegated monetary policy duties to the federal reserve ( fed ) , but retains oversight responsibilities .

the fed enjoys an unusual degree of independence from congress and the president compared with other government agencies .

proponents of these arrangements argue that this independence results in good , nonpolitical policymaking and a high degree of credibility with financial markets .

critics of the fed argue that it performs essential government functions with political implications , yet is more opaque and unaccountable than other government agencies .

following the financial crisis , they assailed the fed's decision to extend more than $1 trillion of assistance to the financial sector — exceeding the amount extended by the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) — without any congressional input .

much of this assistance was authorized by broad , seldom - used emergency powers found in section 13 ( 3 ) of the federal reserve act .

these critics call for more oversight , transparency , and disclosure for the fed .

more specifically , critics have focused on government accountability office ( gao ) audits of the fed and the disclosure of details on the identities of borrowers and terms of loans .

some of these critics downplay the degree of fed oversight and disclosure that already takes place , which is outlined in this report .

contrary to popular belief , gao has conducted frequent audits of the fed since 1978 , subject to statutory restrictions discussed below .

in addition , the fed's annual financial statements are audited by private - sector auditors .

the wall street reform and consumer protection act of 2010 ( hereinafter , the dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) resulted in an audit of the fed's emergency activities during the financial crisis , released in july 2011 , and an audit of fed governance , released in october 2011 .

h.r .

24 would eliminate statutory prohibitions on gao audits of activities related to monetary policy and fed lending , and it would require a one - time gao audit of the fed within 12 months of enactment that is not subject to remaining statutory restrictions .

the fed discloses extensive information about its operations voluntarily or as required by statute .

in december 2010 , as a result of the dodd - frank act , the fed released individual lending records for emergency facilities , revealing borrowers' identities for the first time .

going forward , the act requires individual records for discount window and open market operation transactions to be released with a two - year lag ; the fed began releasing those records in the third quarter of 2012 .

although oversight and disclosure are often lumped together , they are separate issues and need not go together .

oversight entails independent evaluation of the fed ; disclosure concerns what internal information the fed releases to the public .

contrary to a common misperception , a gao audit would not , under current law , result in the release of any confidential information identifying institutions that have borrowed from the fed or the details of other transactions .

this report will consider the two issues separately .

this report provides an overview of existing fed oversight and disclosure practices , highlighting recent legislative changes and proposals .

it also considers the potential impact of greater oversight and disclosure on the fed's independence and its ability to achieve its macroeconomic and financial stability goals .

before the recent financial crisis , oversight of the fed already occurred in a number of forms .

regular congressional oversight of the fed was , and still is , done through statutorily required semiannual hearings with and written reports to the house financial services committee and the senate banking , housing , and urban affairs committee , as well as ad hoc hearings on more focused topics , such as the fed's response to the financial crisis .

indeed , the house financial services committee has a subcommittee dedicated primarily to monetary policy issues , the subcommittee on monetary policy and trade .

the terms of the chairman and vice - chairmen of the federal reserve board of governors last for four years and are subject to presidential nomination and senate confirmation .

this gives the senate a chance to review and weigh in on the fed's performance every four years .

governors are also subject to presidential nomination and senate confirmation , but can serve only one full term , so it is rare for the senate to evaluate a sitting governor .

the fed's regional bank presidents , who vote with the governors on monetary policy decisions , and regional bank directors are not subject to senate confirmation , but are chosen in part by the board of governors .

one notable difference between the fed and most other government agencies is that there is no congressional budgetary oversight of the fed — the fed is self - financing and its budget is not subject to the appropriations or authorization process .

thus , there is no regular avenue for congress to ensure that the fed is devoting resources to congressional priorities , or to use congressional control over resources as leverage to achieve its goals .

within the federal reserve system , there is an office of inspector general ( oig ) that regularly issues reports stemming from its investigations .

it also issues semiannual reports to congress that provide an overview of its activities .

the fed's oig "promotes integrity , economy , efficiency , and effectiveness ; helps prevent and detect fraud , waste , and abuse ; and strengthens the agencies' accountability to congress and the public" ; it does not perform policy or economic evaluations .

examples of oig reviews include the fed's emergency lending facilities and the board's implementation of the dodd - frank act .

in its rulemaking , the fed follows the standard notice and comment process , which provides some transparency to the fed's decisionmaking process and gives the public a chance to weigh in on regulatory proposals .

however , as an independent agency , the fed's rulemaking is not subject to executive review by the office of information and regulatory affairs and cost - benefit analysis requirements under executive order 12866 .

the fed has an ombudsman and an appeals process for its supervisory decisions , such as exam results .

the dodd - frank act also created a federal reserve vice chairman for supervision and required the vice chairman to appear before the house financial services committee and the senate banking , housing , and urban affairs committee semiannually regarding the fed's financial supervisory powers .

effective congressional oversight is complicated by the complex , technical nature of monetary policymaking .

there is no group with monetary policy expertise tasked by congress with evaluating the fed's actions .

congress could create specific oversight boards or bodies composed of outside experts that focus on the federal reserve .

congress could also rely on gao audits for enhanced oversight .

the congressional debate has focused on gao audits , which are discussed in the next section .

until the financial crisis , statutory requirements for fed disclosure were limited to its overall activities and finances .

the fed is statutorily required to "annually make a full report of its operations" to congress that includes a full account of open market operations and "publish once each week a statement showing the condition of each federal reserve bank and a consolidated statement for all federal reserve banks" showing in detail the system's assets and liabilities .

this annual report is made available to the public and includes votes taken on monetary and regulatory decisions , as well as a summary of major actions taken .

the fed is statutorily required to have its financial statements annually audited by an independent auditor .

this audit is published in the fed's annual report .

congress also requires the fed to produce reports on other miscellaneous topics .

despite the limited scope of statutory requirements , particularly related to monetary policy , the fed has publicly disclosed extensive information on its operations on a voluntarily basis .

furthermore , the amount of disclosure has increased over time .

until 1993 , the fed did not publicly announce its monetary policy decisions ( eg , interest rate changes ) .

the fed has released minutes from its monetary policy deliberations ( fomc meetings ) with a three - week lag since 1993 and transcripts of those deliberations with a five - year lag since 1995 .

the fed's monetary policy has also become more transparent in recent years — a move endorsed by chair janet yellen — with a more detailed description of the rationale for current and future policy decisions provided to the public .

in 2009 , the fed began releasing the economic projections of fed officials .

in 2011 , the chairman began holding quarterly press conferences following fomc announcements .

in 2012 , it announced a "longer - run goal" of 2% inflation for monetary policy .

the fed also releases information on its rulemaking , policies , and enforcement actions on its website .

the fed is subject to the freedom of information act ( foia ) , although it sometimes invokes exemptions provided in that act to deny foia requests .

two studies found the fed to rank as one of the more transparent central banks in the world .

before 2007 , fed lending to the financial system was minimal and monetary policy was limited to the buying and selling of u.s. treasury securities .

public and congressional interest in fed disclosure increased in response to the significant financial assistance the fed provided the financial sector during the financial crisis .

as the crisis unfolded , the fed publicly released a significant amount of information on its emergency actions .

the fed voluntarily provided detailed information to the public on the general terms and eligibility of its borrowers and collateral by class for each crisis - response program .

it also provided a rationale for why each crisis program was created and an explanation of the goals the program aimed to accomplish .

beginning in june 2009 , the fed began releasing a monthly report that listed the number of and concentration among borrowers by type , the value and credit - worthiness of collateral held by type , and the interest income earned for each of its facilities .

contracts with private vendors to purchase or manage assets for the facilities are also posted on the new york fed's website .

prior to the dodd - frank act , the fed had kept confidential the identity of the borrowers from its facilities , the collateral posted in specific transactions , the terms of specific transactions , and the results of specific transactions ( i.e. , whether they resulted in profits or losses ) .

as historical precedent , the fed has had a long - standing policy of keeping confidential the identity of banks that borrow from its discount window .

calls for greater fed transparency can be placed into two categories: ( 1 ) more disclosure of its policy decisionmaking and ( 2 ) more disclosure of its borrowers and counterparties .

although there is a large academic literature on the former , popular calls for transparency tend to focus on the latter .

there is some evidence that more transparency on policy goals , targets , and rationales can make the fed's actions more predictable to market participants ; some economists believe predictability makes monetary policy more effective .

others worry that too much transparency risks hindering frank debate among policymakers or making monetary policy more political .

the fed has argued that allowing the public to know which firms are accessing its facilities could undermine investor confidence in the institutions receiving aid because of a perception that recipients are weak or unsound .

a loss of investor confidence could potentially lead to destabilizing runs on the institution's deposits , debt , or equity .

if institutions feared that this would occur , the fed argues , the institutions would be wary of participating in the fed's programs .

a delayed release of information mitigates , but does not eliminate , these concerns .

some critics would view less fed lending as a positive outcome , but if the premise that the fed's lender of last resort role helps prevent financial crises by maintaining the liquidity of the financial system is accepted , then an unwillingness by institutions to access fed facilities makes the system less safe .

whether investors are less willing to borrow as a result of the disclosure of identities will not be apparent until the next liquidity crunch .

a historical example supporting the fed's argument would be the experience with the reconstruction finance corporation ( rfc ) in the great depression .

when the rfc publicized to which banks it had given loans , those banks typically experienced depositor runs .

a more recent example — disclosure of tarp fund recipients — provides mixed evidence .

at first , tarp funds were widely disbursed , and recipients included all the major banks .

at that point , there was no perceived stigma to tarp participation .

subsequently , many banks repaid tarp shares at the first opportunity , and several remaining participants have expressed concern that if they did not repay soon , investors would perceive them as weak .

the granularity of information to be disclosed is a policy issue .

aggregate information about programs and activities that does not require the identification of borrowers tends to be more useful for broad policy purposes , while current information on specific transactions within the programs is of interest to investors .

the fed voluntarily released the former , but only reluctantly released the latter when compelled to by legislation and lawsuits .

for oversight purposes , the former would suffice for answering most questions about taxpayer risk exposure , expected profits or losses , potential subsidies , economic effects , and evaluating the state of the financial system .

the latter would be necessary for transparency around issues such as favoritism ( certain firms receiving preferential treatment over similar firms ) .

although preventing favoritism is a valid policy goal , releasing the identities of borrowers to "name and shame" them is more questionable , especially if one believes that these programs were helpful for providing liquidity and maintaining financial stability .

naming and shaming is likely to result in less uptake of the programs in the future .

if one believes that these lending programs are not helpful , eliminating the programs would be more effective than undermining their effectiveness by stigmatizing recipients .

greater disclosure and outside evaluation , such as gao audits of monetary policy , could potentially help congress perform its oversight duties more effectively .

an argument against increasing fed oversight would be that it could be perceived as reducing the fed's operational independence .

most economists believe that the fed's independence to carry out day - to - day decisions about monetary policy , unburdened by short - term political considerations , strengthens the fed's credibility in the eyes of the private sector that it will achieve its mandated goal of price stability .

greater credibility is perceived to strengthen the effectiveness of monetary policy on the economy .

this independence is seen as consistent with the democratic process because the fed's mandate to pursue price and economic stability has been given to it by congress , and the use of policy instruments to achieve these goals is viewed as relatively technocratic in nature .

 ( note that these arguments apply to the fed's role as the nation's central bank , and not to its roles as bank regulator or in the payment system. ) .

the fed's unprecedented response to the financial crisis moved it into new policy areas involving decisions that were arguably more political in nature , such as deciding which financial actors should be eligible to access fed credit .

new policy instruments were also potentially riskier than the discount window , and , unlike the discount window , were not explicitly endorsed by legislation at the time ( many were authorized under its broad emergency authority ) .

for those reasons , congress decided , with the support of then - chair bernanke , in the dodd - frank act that enhanced oversight and disclosure of emergency activities was warranted .

at this point , the emergency programs have been terminated , loans under those programs repaid , and fed activities have shifted back to the traditional buying and selling of u.s. treasury securities .

as a result , some rationales raised during the crisis for greater oversight and disclosure are waning .

were another crisis to occur , fed lending could potentially scale up quickly again , however .

although few policymakers argue for total independence or total disclosure and oversight , the policy challenge is to strike the right balance between fed independence and fed accountability .

the fed has opposed legislation subsequent to the dodd - frank act that would remove remaining gao audit restrictions .

ben bernanke , fed chairman at the time , argued that the general repeal of ( the audit ) exemption would serve only to increase the perceived influence of congress on monetary policy decisions , which would undermine the confidence the public and the markets have in the fed .

in july 2012 , bernanke testified , i want to agree with the basic premise that the federal reserve should be thoroughly transparent , thoroughly accountable .

i will work with everyone here to make sure that that's the case .

but i do feel it's a mistake to eliminate the exemption from monetary policy and deliberations which would effectively , at least to some extent , create a political influence or a political dampening effect on the federal reserve's policy decisions… .

the one thing which i consider to be absolutely critical , though , about the bill is that it would eliminate the exemption from monetary policy in deliberations .

and the nightmare scenario i have is one in which some future fed chairman would decide and say to raise the federal funds rate by 25 basis point , and somebody in this room would say i don't like that decision , i want the gao to go in and get all of the records , get all the transcripts , get all the preparatory materials and give us an independent opinion whether or not that was the right decision .

and i think that would have a chilling effect and would prevent the fed from operating on the apolitical independent basis that is so important in which experience shows is likely to lead to a low inflation healthy currency kind of economy .

in a letter to congress , chair yellen opposed h.r .

3189 in the 114 th congress .

she stated that its policy rule provision would effectively put the congress and the gao squarely in the role of reviewing short - run monetary policy decisions and in a position to , in real time , influence the monetary policy deliberations leading to those decisions .

with regard to its gao audit provision , she stated that the bill would politicize monetary policy and bring short - term political pressures into the deliberations of the fomc by putting into place real - time second guessing of policy decisions… .

the provision is based on a false premise — that the fed is not subject to an audit .

similarly chair yellen opposed s. 1484 in the 114 th congress on the grounds that we've placed high priority on being an accountable and transparent central bank and i think that if you compare the transparency of monetary policy decisions in the federal reserve with other central banks , we are one of the most transparent central banks in terms of the information we provide to the public in a whole variety of ways .

i'm not certain what the problem is that needs to be addressed .

