laws prohibiting women from serving in air and naval combat units were repealed in the early 1990s .

howeve r , until recently , it has been department of defense ( dod ) policy to restrict women from certain combat - related units and military occupations , especially ground combat units .

despite the official policies barring women from ground combat positions , many female servicemembers have served in combat environments for much of the recent history of the u.s. military .

in the past two decades of conflict in iraq and afghanistan , the lines between combat and noncombat roles have become increasingly blurred and as a result dod's combat exclusion policies have been called into question .

on january 24 , 2013 , then - secretary of defense leon panetta rescinded the rule that restricted women from serving in combat units and directed the military departments to review their occupational standards and assignment policies for implementation no later than january 1 , 2016 .

on december 3 , 2015 , secretary of defense ashton carter ordered the military to open all combat jobs to women with no exceptions .

this most recent policy change followed extensive studies that were completed by the military departments and by the special operations command ( socom ) on issues such as unit cohesion , women's health , equipment , facilities modifications , propensity to serve , and international experiences with women in combat .

this report starts with background on women's service in the united states armed forces and associated changes to law and policy regarding women's roles .

the next section discusses more recent changes that have resulted in the removal of all restrictions on women's service in combat roles .

finally , this report will address oversight issues for congress as dod implements new policy changes .

while dod policy has only recently opened combat roles to female servicemembers , women have been recognized for military service in combat since the american revolutionary war .

in 1776 , margaret cochran corbin became the first woman to receive a military pension from congress for an injury sustained while helping to defend fort washington against british troops .

however , for most of the history of the u.s. military , women's roles were primarily clerical in nature or in support of military medical services .

women did not serve formally in the military until congress established the army nurse corps as a permanent organization within the medical department under the army reorganization act of 1901 .

in 1908 congress enacted language which led to the creation of the navy nurse corps .

by 2013 , the military departments had opened 14,325 positions to women under the new exceptions to the exclusion rule .

in 2015 , women accounted for 17.0% of the active duty officer corps and 15.2% of the enlisted corps across all dod .

the percentage of women varies across services ( see table 2 ) .

the marine corps and army have a lower percentage of women in the service than the navy and air force , but also have a higher number of combat arms positions that have historically been closed to women .

for example , in 2013 the army reported that approximately 237,000 positions were closed to women , with over 105,000 positions in artillery , infantry , and armor occupations .

the air force , on the other hand , reported less than 5,000 closed positions .

on january 24 , 2013 , then - secretary of defense leon panetta announced dod was rescinding the direct combat exclusion rule on women serving in previously restricted occupations ( i.e. , combat ) .

this policy change opened two categories of positions , previously closed combat arms occupational specialties and non - combat specialties assigned to combat units ( eg , a medic serving in an infantry company ) .

the implementation of this policy change was to be guided by the following principles: ensure the success of our nation's warfighting forces by preserving unit readiness , cohesion , and morale .

ensure all service men and women are given the opportunity to succeed and are set up for success with viable career paths .

retain the trust and confidence of the american people to defend this nation by promoting policies that maintain the best quality and most qualified people .

validate occupational performance standards , both physical and mental , for all military occupational specialties ( mos ) , specifically those that remain closed to women .

eligibility for training and development within designated occupational fields should consist of qualitative and quantifiable standards reflecting the knowledge , skills , and abilities necessary for each occupation .

for occupational specialties open to women , the occupational performance standards must be gender - neutral as required by p.l .

103-160 , section 542 ( sic ) ( 1993 ) .

ensure that a sufficient cadre of midgrade / senior women enlisted and officers are assigned to commands at the point of introduction to ensure success in the long run .

this may require an adjustment to recruiting efforts , assignment processes , and personnel policies .

assimilation of women into heretofore "closed units" will be informed by continual in - stride assessments and pilot efforts .

as part of this announcement , the secretary of defense directed the military departments to conduct a "women in the service review" ( wisr ) of service - level policies and standards between 2013 and the end of 2015 , and to expeditiously move forward in the integration of women into previously closed positions .

on march 2 , 2015 , the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness directed the secretaries of the military departments to […] certify that their occupational standards were occupationally specific , operationally relevant , and in accordance with federal law , pursuant to requirements set forth in fy2015 ndaa ( p.l .

113-291 ) .

additionally , the secretaries of the military departments were directed to require his or her inspector general to implement a compliance inspection program to assess whether the services' occupational standards , together with their implementing methodologies , were legally compliant .

in july 2015 , gao reported that the office of the secretary of defense and the military departments had conducted 41 studies as part of their women in the services reviews .

the issue areas studied included: unit cohesion women's health equipment , gear , and uniforms facilities modification interest in serving in combat roles ( propensity ) international issues on september 30 , 2015 , the secretaries of the military departments submitted their final recommendations for all occupations and positions that remained closed to women along with the certifications of their occupational standards .

the commandant of the marine corps requested two exceptions to policy consisting of 48,779 positions in the active and reserve components of the marine corps and navy .

these requested exceptions were for ( 1 ) specific occupational specialties , and ( 2 ) types of units ; however , the secretary of the navy did not approve the marine corps' request for exceptions .

on december 3 , 2015 , secretary carter ordered the military to open all combat jobs to women who meet the validated occupational standards with no exceptions .

the secretary directed the directors of military departments and the chiefs of the military services to provide detailed plans and timelines for integrating newly opened positions and to begin executing these implementation plans not later than april 1 , 2016 .

on march 10 , 2016 , secretary carter approved the final implementation plans .

the opening of these positions will likely have the largest impact on the army , marine corps , and the special operations community , where infantry , armor , artillery , and other specialized combat positions were previously closed to women under the direct ground combat definition and assignment rule .

dod's decision to open all combat roles to women and the subsequent implementation is subject to congressional oversight , and has been an area of some controversy .

there are some in congress , the military , and advocacy organizations who are opposed to women serving in combat or would like to reinstate the restrictions on women in close ground combat roles .

others in the military and outside advocacy groups have praised the new policy , and some argue that even more can be done to push forward dod's integration efforts .

both those in favor of and opposed to women in combat acknowledge that there are likely social , cultural , and administrative barriers that need to be overcome for integration to be successful .

two key legislative issues that may arise are the implementation of gender - neutral occupational standards , and laws requiring registration for selective service .

other issues that may be of concern to congress during implementation are the impacts of the policy change on readiness and career management for women in combat roles .

one of the issues for congress to consider with the opening of combat roles to women is how gender - neutral standards are validated and applied .

the military departments , as part of their wisr studies , have made efforts to validate the physical standards for all combat - related occupations .

congress has the authority to review changes , provide oversight for implementation , and amend the definition of gender - neutral occupational performance standards as needed in the national defense authorization act for fy1994 ( p.l .

103-160 section 543 , as amended by p.l .

113-66 section 523 ) , congress established requirements for gender - neutral occupational performance standards: ( 1 ) gender - neutral occupational standard .

the term "gender - neutral occupational standard" , with respect to a military career designator , means that all members of the armed forces serving in or assigned to the military career designator must meet the same performance outcome - based standards for the successful accomplishment of the necessary and required specific tasks associated with the qualifications and duties performed while serving in or assigned to the military career designator .

sec .

543 .

gender - neutral occupational performance standards .

 ( a ) gender neutrality requirement .

in the case of any military career designator that is open to both male and female members of the armed forces , the secretary of defense ( 1 ) shall ensure that qualification of members of the armed forces for , and continuance of members of the armed forces in , that occupational career field is evaluated on the basis of an occupational standard , without differential standards of evaluation on the basis of gender ; ( 2 ) may not use any gender quota , goal , or ceiling except as specifically authorized by law ; and ( 3 ) may not change an occupational performance standard for the purpose of increasing or decreasing the number of women in that occupational career field .

 ( b ) requirements relating to use of specific physical requirements .

 ( 1 ) for any military career designator for which the secretary of defense determines that specific physical requirements for muscular strength and endurance and cardiovascular capacity are essential to the performance of duties , the secretary shall prescribe specific physical requirements as part of the gender - neutral occupational standard for members in that career designator and shall ensure ( in the case of a career designator that is open to both male and female members of the armed forces ) that those requirements are applied on a gender - neutral basis .

 ( 2 ) whenever the secretary establishes or revises a physical requirement for a military career designator , a member serving in that military career designator when the new requirement becomes effective , who is otherwise considered to be a satisfactory performer , shall be provided a reasonable period , as determined under regulations prescribed by the secretary , to meet the standard established by the new requirement .

during that period , the new physical requirement may not be used to disqualify the member from continued service in that military career designator .

all of the military departments establish testable minimum physical fitness standards for their personnel regardless of the military occupational specialty or career designator .

these physical fitness tests are administered upon entry and annually thereafter and are intended to encourage a minimum standard of physical fitness and health across the military forces .

the standards and scoring table vary by both age and gender to account for physiological differences — a process sometimes referred to as "gender - norming" and "age - norming" .

for example , a 22-year - old male is required to run 2 miles in a maximum time of 17:30 in order to pass the army physical fitness test ( pft ) .

the maximum time for a 22-year - old female is 20:36 .

in both instances , the individuals who achieve a passing time on the run receive the same score .

the scoring tables differ under the principle that a woman who is able to run two miles in 17:30 is , on average , more physically fit ( in terms of muscular strength and endurance , and cardiovascular capacity ) than a man of the same age who is able to complete the run in the same time .

while all servicemembers must maintain basic physical fitness standards , the military departments have also established additional standards for screening or entry into certain occupational fields based on the capabilities needed to complete tasks associated with that occupation .

whereas basic physical fitness standards described above reflect gender - normed inputs in terms of effort , occupational standards are used to measure the ability to meet job requirements and are outcome - based .

these standards must be gender - neutral , meaning that men and women are required to meet the same physical standards in order to be similarly assigned .

it follows , for example , that if the occupation requires the service member to run two miles in 17:30 minutes , both men and women must meet that standard regardless of relative fitness levels or the level of effort expended .

some have expressed concerns that the physical occupational standards and testing for certain career fields may not accurately reflect the actual job requirements and may be set unnecessarily high , creating artificial barriers to women's entry into some career fields .

in the carl levin and howard p. "buck" mckeon national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 ( p.l .

113-291 section 524 ) , congress gave further direction to the secretaries of the military departments regarding the development and validation of gender - neutral occupational standards , requiring that the standards ( 1 ) accurately predict performance of actual , regular , and recurring duties of a military occupation ; and ( 2 ) are applied equitably to measure individual capabilities .

the first validation criteria would require evidence that the tested standard is predictive of the actual task required to serve in that occupational field .

for example , one occupational requirement might be the ability to rappel down a rope from a helicopter in a certain amount of time .

for practical reasons ( i.e. , cost , risk of injury , resource availability ) it may not be in the military's best interest to test servicemembers in a live environment .

however , the number of pull - ups a service member can achieve may be predictive of their performance in rappelling .

on the other hand , the second criterion speaks to individual capabilities .

while the number of pull - ups a man can do might be predictive of his ability to conduct the operational task , a woman who is unable to do a certain number of pull - ups may also be able to successfully rappel out of the helicopter using different techniques or muscle groups .

in this case the pull - up test might be predictive for a man , but another test , such as a rope climb , might be more predictive for a woman .

under the two criteria above , the services would be required to demonstrate both that rappelling from a helicopter is a regular requirement for the occupational specialty , and that the pull - up standard is an accurate measure of a service member's ability to achieve that task regardless of gender .

in the national defense authorization act for 2016 , an additional criterion was added that requires that occupational standards ( 3 ) measure the combat readiness of combat units , including special operations forces .

this criterion might require dod to undertake reviews or validation of occupational standards with regard to unit performance .

in december 2015 , following the secretary of defense's announcement opening all combat roles to women , dod publicly released a series of wisr studies that had informed the final decision .

these studies included discussion of the methodology for validating occupational standards and recommendations for maintaining , modifying , or developing new occupational standards .

each military service branch and socom conducted independent validation efforts for occupational standards , thus the applied methodology differs by service within the statutory framework discussed previously .

the army and marine corps also provided results of experiments in combat arms training courses that measured individual and unit - level performance in an integrated environment .

in general , for all of the services , the validation processes included the physical standards for initial screening into career fields and for screening and completion of specialty training pipelines .

some combat - related career fields can be selected at the point of commissioning or enlistment ( eg , infantry , armor , navy seals ) .

other specialties do not allow direct commissioning , but draw from those servicemembers in existing communities using competitive selection processes .

for example , an individual might be commissioned as an army infantry officer , and then later apply and be selected for the training pipeline to be a special operations officer .

the following sections present an overview of the research and experimental findings and recommendations on initial screening standards .

prior to the wisr directive , soldiers enlisting or being commissioned in the army were not selected for their military occupational specialty based on their ability to perform the physical tasks necessary for that mos .

however , some specialty schools like the army ranger course had physical screening components for applicants and specific requirements for completing the course and earning the qualification .

between 2013 and 2015 , the u.s. army research institute of environmental medicine ( usariem ) conducted research to develop an optimized physical screening test for initial entry into seven combat arms military occupational specialties .

the army training and doctrine command first identified the most physically demanding tasks in these seven combat moss .

then the research team measured the physiological requirements for each task .

the researchers developed a set of proxy tests that would meet the physiological demands of all the actual mos - related tasks .

finally , the researchers developed physical tests that would meet the criterion within cost , space , and time constraints .

as a result of these studies , usariem proposed three options for predictive gender - neutral occupational physical assessment tests ( opats ) that could be used to screen for entry into seven combat moss .

the army announced that implementation of gender neutral opats would begin in june 2016 .

the test includes a standing long jump , seated medicine - ball throw , strength deadlift , and interval aerobic run .

the opat scores are divided into categories based on level of physical demand .

all soldiers must meet the moderate ( gold ) standard ; however , those who would like to select more physically demanding moss ( eg , infantry , armor , and combat engineer ) would be required to meet the heavy ( black ) opat standard ( see table 4 ) .

the opat standards are only the initial standards required to contract for / select an occupational specialty .

individuals who successfully screen into combat moss must still successfully complete all of the training requirements for these career pipelines .

prior to the 2015 policy change integrating women into ground combat roles , every prospective enlisted marine was screened for entry into the marine corps using a standard initial strength test ( ist ) .

enlisted marines and officers were also required to successfully meet all of the training requirements in their selected mos .

the u.s. marine corps training and education command ( tecom ) and the naval health research center ( nhrc ) conducted analysis on the validity of initial entry physical standards for closed combat positions .

the nhrc study recommended that the minimum readiness standards for the ist remain the same for non - combat moss but be enhanced ( ist+ ) for entry into combat moss .

the marine corps implementation plan includes new classification standards based on the ist+ recommendations for officers and enlisted recruits seeking to be assigned to ground combat arms moss .

all enlisted applicants desiring a ground combat arms mos will be screened using a gender - neutral ground combat arms ist ( gca ist ) in order to contract and ship to recruit training for that mos .

all other candidates will be screened using a gender - normed standard ist as shown in table 5 .

enlisted marines will then be tested again between 55 and 60 days into their training using ground combat arms mos classification standards ( mcs ) that are more rigorous than the initial gca ist screening standard .

officers will be required to meet the minimum mcs scores during the basic officer course to qualify for a ground combat arms mos .

following successful screening into a ground combat arms mos , marines then must successfully complete the course requirements and meet the mos - specific physical standards ( msps ) .

for marine corps infantry moss this training occurs in the infantry training battalion ( itb ) for enlisted members and the infantry officer course ( ioc ) for officers .

with the exception of enlisted submarine occupations , the navy's closed specialties and units were in the special warfare community .

as such , socom led many of the integration assessments related to these positions .

navy's closed combat positions included the navy seal ( sea , air , and land ) and special warfare combatant craft crewmen ( swcc ) occupational specialties .

unlike other special operations specialties in the army , marine corps , and air force , individuals may directly select navy seal and swcc occupations at the time of enlistment or commissioning .

during the review period , socom did not open its elite seal / swcc course , the basic underwater demolition / seal ( bud / s ) for participation by female volunteers .

the naval health research center warfighter performance department in san diego california , conducted the physical standards validation for the naval special warfare command .

existing physical standards included the initial physical screening test ( pst ) and physical test gates during the different phases of training .

in order to evaluate whether these standards were related to job performance , the researchers scrutinized three key assumptions: 1 .

selection tests ( eg , pst ) are predictive of the physical capabilities needed to be successful in the initial phase of training ; 2 .

training evolutions are related to training assessments and prepare candidates for success in physical training assessments ; and 3 .

the physical abilities selected for , cultivated , and assessed during training are required for successful operational performance .

the researchers found that , with regards to the first assumption , those candidates who performed better on the pst swim and run components performed better in the most difficult parts of training .

they also found that performance on the pst pull - up and sit - up components were not predictive of training success .

to validate the second two assumptions , researchers relied on interviews and surveys with subject matter experts ( smes ) .

based on the data from sme surveys , the researchers determined that successful operators should exhibit certain whole - body physical fitness attributes .

they also concluded that physical screening and training assessments reflect that actual intensity of occupational demands .

researchers noted that while the pst has some predictive capability , it is not sufficient on its own to predict success in the seal / swcc training pipeline or to predict mission success .

for example , smes rated "mental toughness" and "situational awareness" as the two most important attributes for mission success .

given these findings , researchers also suggested that the practice of using other non - physical screening tests for special warfare candidates should be continued .

the special warfare community has maintained the same pst standards that were in place prior to the wisr studies .

in a january 2016 memo to the secretary of defense , socom reported that the third party review process had validated "existing assessment , training , and occupational standards as operationally relevant and gender - neutral. .

socom further stated that "adherence to these rigorous standards is crucial to our combat effectiveness and the preservation of unit readiness , cohesion , and morale. .

as in the navy , a majority of air force occupations were previously open to women with the exception of certain special operations - related specialties .

as part of the wisr process , the air force validated mental and physical standards for initial accession screening of new recruits and the training , and assessment standards for closed specialties .

as a result of these studies the air force did not raise , lower or change any accession , training or operational standards that were in existence prior to the policy change opening career fields to women .

the air force uses a weight - lifting test called the strength aptitude test ( sat ) to screen and classify new enlisted recruits for air force career fields .

a majority of career fields require a minimum sat score of 40 lbs. , while a score of 80 lbs .

is required for previously closed "battlefield airmen" positions .

a review of the sat standards during the wisr process found "strong evidence for the validity of the sat. .

however , this review , and a previous study of the sat standards completed in 2014 , suggested that improvements could be made to the development and administration of standards and testing .

individuals initially screened for certain special operations and combat - related training pipelines must also pass an additional physical screening called a physical ability stamina test ( past ) .

this test is administered over a 3-hour period and includes two 25m underwater swims , a timed surface swim ( 500m or 200m ) , a timed 1.5 mile run , and two minutes each of pull - ups , push - ups and sit - ups .

although minimum standards are in place for all of these evolutions , the air force encourages participants to exceed these physical standards to ensure successful completion of the training pipeline .

combat rescue officers and special tactics officers candidates and combat control and special operations weather enlisted candidates must also successfully complete a one - week assessment program .

this program requires members to conduct a series of events that include , for example , job - related simulations , physical training and leadership exercises .

the air force's findings from this review also supported the existing physical assessment standards for these career fields .

some in the military , congress , and outside groups have expressed concern that there will be pressure from advocacy groups to lower standards in order to increase the number of women eligible for combat roles .

senior military leaders have emphasized the importance of maintaining standards .

for example , as stated by secretary of the navy , ray mabus , in 2016 testimony in response to congressional concerns about lowering standards to meet quotas , "it's unacceptable under the law , to me , [and] to every other senior leader in the pentagon because it would endanger not only the safety of marines , but the safety of our nation .

standards can never be lowered for any group or any job .

standards will evolve as threats evolve , but they will evolve for everyone equally. .

women's advocacy groups and other military and veterans' groups are likely to closely monitor any future changes to standards for entry into combat moss .

by law ( p.l .

103-160 section 543 ) , dod must notify congress of changes to occupational standards that would either increase or decrease the number of women in any career designator: ( c ) notice to congress of changes - whenever the secretary of defense proposes to implement changes to the gender - neutral occupational standards for a military career designator that are expected to result in an increase , or in a decrease , of at least 10 percent in the number of female members of the armed forces who enter , or are assigned to , that military career designator , the secretary of defense shall submit to congress a report providing notice of the change and the justification and rationale for the change .

such changes may then be implemented only after the end of the 60-day period beginning on the date on which such report is submitted .

following notification , congress may act to postpone implementation ; request further studies , reviews , or justification ; or allow the changes go into effect .

some military leaders , members of congress , and other commentators have been concerned about how the new policy changes might affect readiness .

readiness is typically described as the capability of a military force to accomplish specified missions or goals .

total force readiness depends on unit readiness which is affected , in part , by personnel readiness .

personnel readiness is often measured by the qualifications , experience , and availability of personnel assigned to a unit .

other , less quantifiable measures include the stability and morale of individuals within a unit and overall cohesiveness of the unit .

supporters argue that by opening more roles to women there is potentially a bigger pool of eligible recruits to compete for occupational assignments .

this could facilitate the selection of more qualified personnel for combat assignments and allow the services to harness additional "skills and perspectives. .

for example , surveys conducted with special operations forces ( sof ) personnel found that about four in 10 respondents thought that opening sof units to women could be helpful for sensitive operations where it was important to be able to communicate with the local female population .

in addition , a marine corps study on the effectiveness of integrated units found that gender - integrated teams performed better than all - male teams on problem sets that were the most cognitively challenging .

others contend that military readiness has been and would be further weakened due to physiological differences between men and women .

they argue that , on average , an all - male unit would always be higher - performing in close combat engagements due to average physical differences between men and women .

in response , some have argued that decisions about whether or not women should be allowed to serve in combat should not be based on average capabilities , but instead on individual capabilities .

for example , under previous ground combat restrictions , a female marine who was capable of meeting or exceeding all occupational standards would be prohibited from serving in a combat occupation only because she was female .

to better understand the execution of individual and collective tasks in an operational environment , the marine corps conducted an assessment of integrated units that included both male and female volunteers .

the study found that females and female - integrated units excelled in some areas ( eg , .50 caliber marksmenship ) ; however , all - male groups performed significantly better in a majority of the tasks — particularly in the most physically demanding tasks .

the final report of the ground combat element integrated task force ( gceitf ) concluded that , "integrated units , compared with all - male units , showed degradations in the time to complete tasks , move under load , and achieve timely effects on target. .

non - availability of servicemembers — particularly medical non - availability — has a negative impact on unit readiness .

medical absences can lead individuals to miss critical training and can lead to undermanned or underskilled units for military exercises , operations , or deployments .

in the army , an estimated 10% of all active duty servicemembers are non - available each month due to temporary or permanent musculoskeletal profiles .

although there are women who can meet and exceed the existing physical standards for men , forcing all women to meet these standards has been found in some cases to increase their injury and attrition rates .

in the canadian experience , in which women were recruited for a 16-week infantry training course that was identical to the men's course , the outcome was described as the "high cost of recruiting women that yielded poor results. .

additionally , a recent study of women in close ground combat from the united kingdom ministry of defence ( mod ) found that in initial military training , women have twice as much risk of musculoskeletal injury as men , and 15% to 20% higher rates of non - battle injuries in recent operations .

however , the mod report also acknowledged that women who would be capable of passing the close ground combat training might be more physically fit and less prone to injury than a cohort of women entering initial basic training .

the u.s. army and marine corps examined these concerns as part of their wisr studies .

the army found that musculoskeletal injury rates ( eg , shin splints , sprained ankles ) are higher for women than men during basic combat training and slightly higher in a deployed environment ; however , injury rates are similar for men and women in the operational army .

the army also found that incidence rates of some behavioral health disorders ( adjustment , depression , anxiety ) are higher among female than male solders , while men had higher rates of alcohol disorders .

both men and women had similar rates of ptsd .

the army studies concluded that ( 1 ) the appropriate use of physical standards should reduce injuries and medical attrition , and ( 2 ) there is no medical basis to prohibit any mos opening to females .

the marine corps gender - integrated unit assessment found that 40.5% of the women participating suffered a musculoskeletal injury relative to 18.8% of the men .

while females in the experiment were more likely to be unavailable for training , those that were unavailable were out for fewer days than their male counterparts .

the study also found that males were more likely to be unavailable for non - occupational injuries .

over the course of the experiment , males were available 98.4% of the time and females were available 96.8% of the time .

both the army and marine corps studies found that higher musculoskeletal injury rates were associated with load - bearing activities .

teams with high levels of cohesion generally have less conflict and stronger support networks that may help individuals to better cope with stress .

there is behavioral research that supports the notion that interpersonal relationships — an element of social cohesion — are established more readily between individuals with similar backgrounds , experiences and demographic characteristics .

nevertheless , research also indicates that other factors , beyond unit homogeneity , contribute to positive unit cohesion such as shared experiences , leadership , and command climate .

for example , some studies have found that "task cohesion," developed through shared experiences within a group , is a stronger predictor of group performance than interpersonal relationships .

research on cohesion and performance in mixed - gender groups is inconsistent , with some studies finding higher levels of conflict and tension , and some studies showing no effects from gender diversity .

nevertheless , other studies have shown that women in predominantly male settings are "treated with hostility and less socially integrated by their male co - workers. .

based on past experience , this integration research , and prevailing attitudes within the military , some have expressed concerns that the integration of women into traditionally male units could be detrimental to unit cohesion and morale .

for example , one of the main concerns cited by sof personnel was that integrating women would erode unit cohesion .

surveys and focus groups administered to u.s. special operations forces ( sof ) found that , [t]here is strong , deep - seated , and intensely felt opposition to opening sof specialties that have been closed to women .

overall , 85 percent of survey participants opposed letting women into their specialties , and 71 percent opposed women in their units .

in particular , those surveyed were concerned that the lack of privacy and close physical contact could lead to problematic male - female relationships .

in response to these concerns , some have noted that women have been integrated into military units for extended deployment periods with close - quarter environments for much of the recent history of the military .

a review of the literature by the joint special operations university ( jsou ) found that , "considerable research has been done of gender - integrated military groups in noncombat roles .

in general , the research found no negative impact on cohesion. .

although prior research on cohesion in integrated combat units is limited , the integrated experiments conducted during the wisr evaluation period did not raise serious concerns about cohesion in gender - integrated combat units .

accordingly , the army's assessment of the integrated ranger course did not uncover "any overt incidents of sexual harassment , sexual assault , or concerns about incidental physical contact due to the close proximity of soldiers in light infantry operations. .

an overarching finding of the studies done across the marine corps , army , and socom , was that positive unit cohesion was more likely when and if physical standards and professional standards of conduct were applied equally to men and women .

any differential treatment of women was seen as reinforcing negative perceptions about women in combat roles .

this finding seems to support adherence to valid and transparent gender - neutral standards .

as the services implement gender integration , congress may continue to monitor unit readiness through regular hearings or reports .

in the fy2014 ndaa , congress directed the secretaries of each military department to ensure that combat equipment distributed to female members of the armed forces is "properly designed and fitted," and meets "required standards for wear and survivability. .

congress may consider the extent to which it could provide funding for additional research , development , and acquisition of equipment adaptations that reduce injury rates , enhance safety , increase survivability , and reduce other barriers to performance of physically demanding tasks for all servicemembers .

some examples include light - weight body armor and helmets , or adjustable pack systems to improve mobility and assist in load - bearing activities .

one of the arguments for opening combat roles to women was that without the ability to serve in combat occupations , women would not have equal career leadership opportunities .

some have argued that a lack of combat experience does not adversely affect career advancement and promotions for women .

although combat roles are now open to women , it may still be many years before women have senior leadership positions in combat occupations .

this is because , while some women may be allowed to lateral transfer from other military communities , most women will fill positions at the entry level .

in a recent survey of military women and women veterans , 43% of the respondents cited job and assignment opportunities as a personal challenge .

for women who are now entering previously closed occupations , there are concerns about the service's assignment policies and developing a "critical mass" of women in combat units .

critical mass theory suggests that satisfaction and resilience of a minority group shifts in response to the level of minority representation in a group .

developing this "critical mass" in combat roles may be challenging as the number of women able to qualify under existing physical standards ( particularly for infantry and sof ) may be very small as a percentage of the total force .

for example , in the marine corps , where women account for only about 8% of the total force , an infantry squad might consist of only one or two women out of 12 marines , while other squads might have no women at all .

however , while theory suggests that a lack of critical mass may be detrimental to minority groups , a survey of female volunteers for the marine corps' ground combat element integrated task force found that respondents "tended to be unconcerned about being the only woman in a unit. .

in past gender integration efforts , the services have sought to assign senior female officers and noncommissioned officers to units prior to the assignment of more junior enlisted women and attempted to avoid assigning only one woman to a unit .

these actions were taken in part to ensure that more junior women had mentorship and support and that individuals did not feel isolated .

nevertheless , a recent study by the rand corporation found that previously , critical mass concepts were not generally included in military personnel assignment policies across the services .

assignment policies are considered the services' implementation plans for integrating women into combat units and occupations .

for example , the army has stated that female officers or noncommissioned officers ( ncos ) will be placed in infantry and armor units prior to assignment of more junior soldiers .

current law precludes dod from establishing "any gender quota , goal , or ceiling" for any career designator .

congress could amend this law to allow dod to set targets for female participation in various moss .

however , dod officials have not shown particular interest in establishing a quota system , and many in the military and in outside advocacy groups have suggested that such a system would call into legitimacy the existing standards and criteria for entry .

as the services move forward with implementation , congress could continue to rely on dacowits for oversight and periodic requests for information on the number of women assigned to various combat specialties , their retention and promotion rates , and other talent management issues .

congress could also impose formal reporting requirements on dod for information on these issues .

section 597 of the fy2017 ndaa ( s. 2943 ) would require the secretary of defense to report to congress on the career progression track for all entry - level women ( officers and enlisted ) entering a combat arms unit or those women laterally transferring into a combat arms unit .

many of those who emphasize equal rights say it is more difficult for servicemembers to advance to top - ranking positions in the armed services without combat experience .

the inability of women to serve in combat roles is thus seen as a barrier to equal opportunity for promotion and selection for leadership roles .

some carry the argument further to say women cannot be equal in society as long as they are barred from full participation in all levels of the national security system .

in their view , modern weapons have equalized the potential for women in combat since wars are less likely to be fought on a hand - to - hand basis .

in this regard , properly trained women would be able to perform successfully in combat and exempting them from serving in combat is unfair to men .

this leads some to argue that equal access to combat jobs also obliges women to take equal responsibility for registering for selective service and being subject to the draft .

women are divided on this issue with some saying they should be allowed in combat but many saying they should not be forced into combat .

critics contend it would be unfair to permit women a choice that is not available to men and to make the choice available to both men and women would make it difficult for the services to function , especially in the event of war or national emergency .

given this argument , congress may consider not only whether women who want to serve in combat roles are allowed to , but if women should be required to serve in combat roles .

the question of whether women should be required to register for selective service under current law was previously decided in 1981 by the supreme court in rostker v. goldberg .

in the majority opinion , justice william rehnquist wrote: [t]he existence of the combat restrictions clearly indicates the basis for congress' decision to exempt women from registration .

the purpose of registration was to prepare for a draft of combat troops .

since women are excluded from combat , congress concluded that they would not be needed in the event of a draft , and therefore decided not to register them .

congress has a number of options in addressing this issue .

congress has the authority to change draft registration laws ( that currently pertain only to males ) to include women .

the senate version fy2017 ndaa ( section 591 of s. 2943 ) included a provision that would have required women to register for the draft .

this provision was not adopted in conference .

it has also been suggested that this issue can be made moot by terminating selective service registration .

the fy2017 ndaa includes provisions ( sections 551-557 ) that will required dod to provide a preliminary report on the purpose and utility of the registration system and would also establish a national commission on military national , and public service to review these questions and others .

the military services are still in the early phases of implementing the new policy .

hundreds of women have entered some previously closed occupational specialties within the armor , field artillery , ordnance and combat engineer career fields , and women are beginning to enter the operational infantry and training pipelines for special operations careers across the services .

both women and men who apply for combat - related occupations must meet all of the validated standards for those occupations , and military leaders have emphasized the importance of maintaining and adhering to the standards .

section 593 of the fy2017 ndaa ( s. 2943 ) would require the chief of staff of the army , the commandant of the marine corps , and the commander of the united states special operations command ( socom ) to each submit to the armed services committees an annual report on the status of the each department's implementation of the secretary of defense's policy to open to women the military occupational specialties / units that were previously closed to women .

this first report would be required no later than april 1 , 2017 with annual reports through 2020 and would include the following elements: ( 1 ) the status of gender - neutral standards throughout the entry level training continuum .

 ( 2 ) the propensity of applicants to apply for and access into newly - opened ground combat programs , by gender and program .

 ( 3 ) success rates in initial screening tests and military occupational specialty ( mos ) classification standards for newly - opened ground combat military occupational specialties , by gender .

 ( 4 ) attrition rates and the top three causes of attrition throughout the entry level training continuum , by gender and military occupational specialty .

 ( 5 ) reclassification rates and the top three causes of reclassification throughout the entry level training continuum , by gender and military occupational specialty .

 ( 6 ) injury rates and the top five causes of injury throughout the entry level training continuum , by gender and military occupational specialty .

 ( 7 ) injury rates and non - deployability rates in newly - opened ground combat military occupational specialties , by gender and military occupational specialty .

 ( 8 ) lateral move approval rates into newly - opened military occupational specialties , by gender and military occupational specialty .

 ( 9 ) reenlistment and retention rates in newly - opened ground combat military occupational specialties , by gender and military occupational specialty .

 ( 10 ) promotion rates in newly - opened ground combat military occupational specialties , by grade and gender .

 ( 11 ) actions taken to address matters relating to equipment sizing and supply , and facilities , in connection with the implementation by such armed force of the policy referred to in paragraph ( 1 ) .

as the new policy is implemented , congress may continue to monitor the impact of change on recruitment , retention , assignments , and force readiness .

