the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) provided food assistance to a monthly average of 40.3 million persons in 20.1 million households in fy2018 .

total benefit costs were $60.6 billion in fy2018 .

snap participation and costs increased markedly from fy2007 to fy2013 , mostly as a result of automatic and legislated responses to the recession .

in fy2014 , both participation and costs declined from peak fy2013 levels and have continued to decline .

while much of the fy2007 to fy2013 increase in participation and costs was attributable to the poor economy , states during this period also increasingly adopted more expansive "categorical eligibility" rules — a set of policies that make a snap applicant eligible based on the applicant's involvement with other low - income assistance programs: benefits from the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant , supplemental security income ( ssi ) , and state - financed general assistance ( ga ) programs .

this report discusses categorical eligibility and some of the issues raised by it .

it first describes the three different types of categorical eligibility: traditional categorical eligibility conveyed through receipt of need - based cash assistance , and the newer "narrow" and "broad - based" categorical eligibilities conveyed via tanf "noncash" benefits .

it also provides recent information on current state practices with regard to categorical eligibility .

under current law and regulation , it is a state option to implement broad - based categorical eligibility for snap .

as a result , potential changes to curtail ( or expand ) categorical eligibility may impact some states more than others .

this report includes state - by - state information to assist in gauging these disparate impacts .

snap is typically reauthorized in an omnibus farm bill law , and neither of the last two farm bills ultimately included changes to categorical eligibility rules .

the agriculture act of 2014 ( 2014 farm bill , p.l .

113-79 ) made no changes to snap categorical eligibility rules .

the house - passed version of the bill that became the 2014 farm bill would have eliminated "narrow" and "broad - based categorical eligibility," retaining only "traditional" categorical eligibility for recipients of cash assistance .

however , the house - passed provision was not included in the bill's conference agreement .

the most recent farm bill , agriculture improvement act of 2018 ( "2018 farm bill," p.l .

115-334 ) made no changes to snap categorical eligibility rules .

the house - passed version of the bill would have made changes to limit but not eliminate broad - based categorical eligibility .

these changes were not included in the conference agreement .

while the statute on categorical eligibility has not changed in recent years , the trump administration has plans to change the policy via regulation .

these proposals are discussed further in " recent proposals to change categorical eligibility . .

federal law provides the basic eligibility rules for snap .

there are two basic pathways to gain financial eligibility for snap: ( 1 ) having income and resources below specified levels set out in federal snap law ; and ( 2 ) being "categorically," or automatically , eligible based on receiving benefits from other specified low - income assistance programs .

as discussed , in instances of categorical eligibility , snap applicants can be found eligible for snap based on their receipt of benefits from other specified means - tested programs .

at minimum , households that receive temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) cash assistance , supplemental security income ( ssi ) , or state - funded general assistance cash benefits must be found categorically eligible for snap .

however , the 1996 welfare reform law's creation of tanf as a broad - based block grant has allowed for a state option to include a long list of benefits / services that can convey snap eligibility .

this section discusses state choices in this area as of october 2018 .

neither of the last two farm bills ultimately included changes to categorical eligibility rules .

the enacted 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) did not change categorical eligibility , although the house - passed version would have eliminated broad - based categorical eligibility .

also , and more recently , the enacted 2018 farm bill ( p.l .

115-334 ) did not make changes , although the house - passed bill proposed some .

the 115 th congress house - passed policy is discussed further below .

the house - passed bill , the agriculture and nutrition act of 2018 ( h.r .

2 , as passed june 21 , 2018 ) would have made changes to limit but not eliminate broad - based categorical eligibility .

debate during the house committee on agriculture's april 18 , 2018 , markup was substantially focused on the bill's snap provisions , including the changes to categorical eligibility .

the senate - passed bill , agriculture improvement act of 2018 ( h.r .

2 , as passed june 28 , 2018 ) would not have made any changes to categorical eligibility .

section 4006 of h.r .

2 , as passed by the house , would have changed broad - based categorical eligibility in a few ways .

in states with broad - based options in place , some but not all households would be affected by this change .

under the proposal , to be categorically eligible , households would have had to receive ssi , state general assistance , or "cash assistance or ongoing and substantial services" through a state program funded by tanf .

while these terms would be subject to implementation , it was to be expected that a brochure may not meet this more specific tanf - funded benefit .

there would have been two gross income limits for broad - based categorical eligibility: 1 .

households with an elderly or disabled member must be at or below 200% of the federal poverty line .

2 .

households without an elderly or disabled member must be at or below 130% of the federal poverty line .

households meeting respective gross income limits and receiving a tanf - funded benefit or other benefit that conveys categorical eligibility would not have had to meet the law's asset tests .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that the amendments to categorical eligibility in the house committee's reported bill would reduce snap spending by $5.035 billion dollars over 10 years ( fy2019-fy2028 ) .

cbo also estimated that in an average year , about 400,000 households would lose snap eligibility .

as snap recipients are also eligible for free school meals , cbo estimated that in an average year , 265,000 children would lose access to free meals .

on the house floor , section 4006 of the reported bill was amended by h.amdt .

606 to include a later implementation date , october 1 , 2020 , so the house - passed bill's cost and participation estimates could be different than those of the reported bill .

as discussed earlier , the current "broad - based" categorical eligibility state option is in part created by usda food and nutrition service regulations finalized in 2000 .

in the fall 2018 unified agenda , the trump administration indicated plans to change these regulations .

in the fall 2018 unified agenda , the administration stated that it plans to publish a proposed rule "pertaining to categorically eligible tanf households by limiting categorical eligibility to households that receive cash tanf or other substantial assistance from tanf. .

as of the date of this report , the proposed rule has not yet been published .

the unified agenda exists primarily for transparency and is not binding on agencies , meaning that the administration could still change its plans for moving forward with the proposed rule .

one question will be how substantial assistance would be defined , since the tanf block grant can fund an array of programs and services .

the plan indicates that "categorical eligibility conferred by any non - cash assistance would be limited to substantial ongoing assistance or services , such as child care , that have an eligibility determination process similar to cash tanf. .

like the farm bill proposals discussed above , the change is expected to leave "traditional" categorical eligibility in place .

the unified agenda entry says , "this rule would not alter categorical eligibility for supplemental security income ( ssi ) households or general assistance ( ga ) households. .

