more than 4 billion incandescent light bulbs ( technically referred to as "lamps" ) are in use in the united states .

the basic technology in these bulbs has not changed substantially in the past 125 years , despite the fact that they convert less than 10% of the energy they use into light .

improving light bulb performance can reduce overall u.s. energy use .

as much as 20% of the electricity consumed in the united states is used for lighting homes , offices , stores , factories , and outdoor spaces .

lighting represents about 14% of all u.s. residential electricity use .

in the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l .

110-140 ) , congress imposed higher efficiency standards for manufacturers and importers of general use , screw - base light bulbs commonly used in residential fixtures , beginning on january 1 , 2012 .

the department of energy ( doe ) estimates that the federal lighting standards should reduce energy use for lighting per household in 2020 by 33% below the 2009 level .

doe has also estimated that the more energy - efficient bulbs , some of which are estimated to last 10 to 20 times longer than conventional bulbs , could save consumers nearly $6 billion in 2015 alone , when the law is fully phased in — taking into account the initial price of the bulbs , their expected life , and electricity costs .

eisa did not ban incandescent light bulbs .

instead , the law mandated that bulbs manufactured or imported after phase - in dates specified in the bill meet higher efficiency standards — about 25% - 30% more efficient on average .

the law left it up to the lighting industry to determine what type of product best met those requirements .

energy - efficient alternatives such as compact fluorescent bulbs ( cfls ) and light emitting diodes ( leds ) are expected to gain a larger u.s. market share after eisa is implemented , but government estimates project that incandescent bulbs will be widely available , and widely used , for years to come ( see figure 1 ) .

u.s. and foreign manufacturers have developed higher - efficiency halogen incandescent bulbs , available at many u.s. retailers , which meet the law's minimum standards for electricity savings .

the total number of light bulbs purchased annually is forecast to decline in future years as technological advances increase the life of the products .

the lighting provisions of eisa have created controversy , however .

opponents say the federal government should not mandate the type of light bulbs consumers should buy , or the market should produce .

previous lighting conservation efforts carried out by states and utilities have had limited success , in part , because people have not been satisfied with the quality of light produced by replacement products , mainly compact fluorescent bulbs ( cfls ) , and have been concerned about the fact that small amounts of mercury are contained in the bulbs .

consumers also have expressed concerns about possible lack of access to affordable light bulbs .

the initial cost of cfl or led bulbs can be substantially higher than conventional incandescent bulbs , even though they are cheaper in the long run due to long life and lower energy consumption .

some companies shut down domestic incandescent bulb factories rather than retool machinery to make more efficient products .

on the state level , texas governor rick perry in july 2011 signed hb 2510 , to allow continued sale , within the state , of incandescent light bulbs produced in texas even if they did not meet federal standards .

south carolina has been debating similar legislation: a bill was introduced in 2011 but died in the state senate .

arizona passed a similar bill in 2010 , which was vetoed by governor jan brewer .

by comparison in california , which began implementing the eisa standards a year early in january 2011 , the california energy commission has reported no significant consumer complaints about cost or performance of replacement products .

that may be in part because many stores in california still have stocks of traditional incandescent bulbs , purchased before the new standards went into effect .

the house , by voice vote on july 15 , 2011 , passed an amendment offered by representative burgess to the fy2012 energy and water development appropriations bill ( h.r .

2354 , amendment 29 ) to prohibit doe from using funding to implement and enforce the incandescent light bulb standards .

on december 23 , 2011 , president barack h. obama signed the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) .

title iii provided fy2012 appropriations for doe , including identical language to the burgess amendment that bars the use of any fy2012 doe funds to enforce the standards .

continuing resolutions for fy2013 and fy2014 kept the prohibition intact .

for fy2015 , the same prohibition was adopted into the house - passed energy and water development appropriations bill ( h.r .

4923 ) .

the doe enforcement amendment may have only limited impact .

the eisa provisions remain in effect .

executives of major lighting companies have said they will comply with the 2007 statute .

further , the funding limitation does not appear to curtail the ability of the ftc or state attorneys general , for example , to enforce provisions of the law .

major lighting industry executives argue that outright repeal of the lighting provisions of eisa could undercut energy conservation efforts as well as efforts to manufacture next - generation products such as leds , where u.s. companies have a technological edge .

indeed , the standards are taking effect at a time when the lighting industry is undergoing another , revolutionary change .

venture capital is flowing into companies in the united states , and abroad , that are developing led products .

leds are not only more energy - efficient — most exceeding standards in eisa — but they allow the industry to devise integrated fixtures that can be specially programmed to emit differing colors and types of light for various needs .

the technology also has potential for communications and other applications .

the led industry already is the fastest - growing part of the global lighting market , propelled by technological breakthroughs and higher demand spurred in part by energy - efficiency laws in the united states and other nations .

some analysts project that leds could make up about half the global lighting market by 2020 .

the obama administration opposed efforts to repeal eisa , noting that the industry has invested to prepare for the new standards and to develop next - generation lighting .

through various research and development , loan , and grant programs , doe has invested millions of dollars into building the domestic led manufacturing industry , noting that the u.s. lighting industry has lost "most , if not all , of its incandescent and cfl manufacturing to asian countries in the last two decades," because it could not match production costs and other incentives offered by foreign governments .

with the industry looking past existing technologies such as cfls and halogen bulbs , leds present new u.s. manufacturing possibilities .

led technology already has reached a point where large and small manufacturers have access to investment capital and competition is fierce , but public policy could play an important role by stimulating demand , and providing research and development and startup assistance .

doe predicts that the lighting provisions of eisa will reduce energy use and provide cost savings to consumers .

u.s. primary energy consumption could fall by 21 quadrillion british thermal units ( btu ) and greenhouse gas emissions could decline by 330 million metric tons over the next 30 years .

those forecasts depend on factors including consumer choice of bulb , which in turn depends on variables like purchase price and product satisfaction .

other considerations in terms of total energy savings include whether more efficient bulbs are placed in high usage areas of a home , and whether the bulb actually meets forecasts for efficiency and longevity .

experience shows that it can be difficult to get consumers to embrace new lighting products .

significant energy savings can be realized only when there is widespread acceptance of energy - saving technology .

that has been the case with cfls , which have been on the u.s. market since the 1970s .

states and utilities have promoted cfls as part of programs to reduce energy use .

some utilities gave cfls to customers at no cost , while others provided millions of dollars in subsidies for purchase of the products .

american consumers increased purchases of cfls , as shown by import and usage data ( figure 1 and figure 2 ) , but still used incandescent bulbs for most of their lighting , citing factors including the higher price for the cfls and concerns about light quality and mercury contained in the products .

cfl sales declined in 2009 to 272 million units , from 397 million units in 2007 .

the recent decline may be due to a number of factors .

sales figures may have been affected by the recession , which made consumers less likely to switch to bulbs with a higher up - front cost .

shipments may also be affected by the fact that cfls last longer , meaning consumers do not buy as many bulbs .

also , some subsidy and promotion programs ended .

the lighting industry appears to have responded to consumer concerns by producing a range of replacement options for traditional incandescent bulbs .

u.s. and foreign manufacturers have developed higher - efficiency halogen incandescent bulbs , available at many retailers , that meet the requirements for 25% - 30% energy savings and may overcome some consumer reluctance to embrace energy - saving lighting technologies such as cfls .

indeed , energy savings under eisa could be near the low end of doe projections if halogen incandescent bulbs , which sell for a price near that of conventional incandescent bulbs , turn out to be consumers' main replacement choice .

in addition , eisa exempts a number of commonly used incandescent bulbs from efficiency standards .

some of the exempted bulbs can also be used as replacements for standard incandescent products , which would negate some potential energy savings from more efficient technologies ( see appendix ) .

the lighting sector is going through another potentially historic transformation with advances in led technology .

led efficiency depends both on the light source and the fixture in which it is placed .

depending on the package , some leds can be about 10 times as efficient as incandescent bulbs and as much as twice as efficient as cfls .

solid - state lighting , a semiconductor - based technology that coverts electrical energy into light , is already the fastest - growing part of the global lighting industry and is expected by some analysts to make up one - third of the u.s. lighting market , on a unit basis , and three - fourths of the market , on a revenue basis , by 2015 .

solid - state lighting has been adopted by industry , commercial businesses , and municipalities , with the main applications currently in electronics such as tvs , computers and smart phones , traffic lights and auto tail lights .

leds are starting to move into the residential market .

while 40-watt and 60-watt equivalent replacement bulbs appeared in the marketplace during 2013 , products at higher 75-watt and 100-watt equivalent levels just began to appear during the spring and summer of 2014 .

retail prices of leds are still much higher than for traditional incandescent bulbs , but are falling .

since the late 1960s , led light output has increased by a factor of 20 each decade , while the cost per lumen has fallen by a factor of 10 .

the industry projects similar or faster cost reductions going forward .

with technology advancing , some analysts project that general use led bulbs could fall to a price of $5 within 10 years .

however , because led prices are still significantly more than for other replacements for incandescent lamps , consumer adoption initially could be limited .

the development of led technology and markets is a global pursuit .

major companies investing in the led arena include philips lighting , ge , and osram sylvania .

among u.s. companies are cree of north carolina ; the lighting science group in florida ; feit electric of california ; switch of california ; vu 1 lighting in new york ; and bridgelux in california .

the firms are competing with start - up companies and established manufacturers like toshiba and other foreign firms .

u.s. - based manufacturers cree and philips lumileds together have about 11.5% of worldwide led production .

the north american led bulb market is expected to grow from $3.6 billion in 2010 to more than $11 billion in 2015 , partly due to stricter lighting efficiency standards that are being introduced in the united states , canada , and mexico , according to analysts .

in 2010 , global led production had a projected value of $9.9 billion .

global value could reach $18 billion by 2015 .

major led manufacturing nations are shown in figure 4 .

leds magazine , which produces an annual guide to solid state lighting industry suppliers , lists hundreds of affiliated makers and suppliers in the united states .

the companies run the gamut from semiconductor producers to specialty firms that make hospital and other lighting .

another lighting technology under development is organic light - emitting diodes , or oleds , where light is produced by a chemical reaction .

the oled technology is used in commercial electrical appliances such as color display screens .

while the lighting market has been divided between companies producing light bulbs and companies producing fixtures , the two sectors will become more integrated if led usage expands as forecast .

according to doe: the ultimate value of ssl [solid state lighting] , including its energy efficiency potential , is not in the production of replacements for incandescents or cfls , but in the development of integrated luminaires that serve a particular function .

fixtures and even replacement lamps must be specifically designed to accommodate light - emitting diode ( led ) light sources properly ; failure to do so will result in poorly performing , unreliable products .

the lighting industry has spent billions of dollars to meet the requirements of eisa and to advance led research and development .

the rapid technological pace of change in an industry that largely relied on incandescent technology for more than 100 years has created some unease among businesses , lawmakers , and consumers about product availability and cost ; possible job loss ; and more broadly about the role of government in mandating consumer product choices .

congress has a long - established record in the energy - efficiency area .

the recent lighting standards are one in a series of home appliance and commercial equipment standards mandated by congress to reduce overall energy use .

the eisa lighting provisions , in concert with tighter standards in other countries , are helping to spark increased demand for new , more efficient products worldwide .

industry analysts add , however , that many changes now underway in the u.s. lighting industry would have occurred without eisa because of existing requirements in other countries and the pace of led technology developments .

early indications are that the lighting industry has developed a range of products , including halogen incandescent bulbs , that meet the eisa efficiency standards and are widely available at a price point close to that of conventional incandescent bulbs .

consumers will have more and possibly confusing choices about purchasing replacement light bulbs , some of which are likely to perform better than others .

going forward , one major question is how much led manufacturing will stay in the united states .

u.s. manufacturers have been moving operations overseas for decades to capture lower production costs and secure necessary materials .

long - term manufacturing trends are unclear given major efforts in china and other asian countries to increase production ( see figure 4 ) .

industry officials have called for an expanded federal - business effort to build led fabrication facilities and increase domestic capacity and have warned that delaying the eisa implementation could reduce energy savings and delay the transition to next - generation lighting products .

eisa exempts 22 types of traditional incandescent bulbs , or lamps , from the energy - efficiency standards .

doe will monitor sales of these exempted products as the legislation is implemented .

if any one of the exempted lamp types doubles in sales , eisa requires doe to establish an energy conservation standard for the particular bulb type .

the provision is designed to ensure that none of the exempted products take market share from bulbs affected by the new efficiency standards .

appliance lamp black light lamp bug lamp colored lamp infrared lamp left - hand thread lamp marine lamp marine's signal service lamp mine service lamp plant light lamp reflector lamp rough service lamp shatter - resistant lamp ( including shatter - proof & shatter - protected ) sign service lamp silver bowl lamp showcase lamp 3-way incandescent lamp traffic signal lamp vibration service lamp g shape lamp ( as defined in ansi c78.20-2003 and c79.1-2002 ) with a diameter of 5" or more t shape lamp ( as defined in ansi c78.20-2003 and c79.1-2002 ) and that uses no more than 40w or has a length of more than 10" b , ba , ca , f , g16-1 / 2 , g - 25 , g - 30 , s , or m - 14 lamp ( as defined in ansi c78.20-2003 and c79.1-2002 ) of 40w or less .

