this question has dogged u.s. public policy debates for ten years .

at this point , there is no statutory definition of homeland security .

what conventional wisdom defines as "homeland security missions" and the missions undertaken by the department of homeland security are not the same .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) was established by the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) , which was signed into law on november 25 , 2002 .

the new department was assembled from components pulled from 22 different government agencies and began official operations on march 1 , 2003 .

since then , dhs has undergone a series of restructurings and reorganizations to improve its effectiveness and efficiency .

although at this point , dhs does include many of the homeland security functions of the federal government , many of these functions or parts of these functions remain at their original executive branch agencies and departments , including the departments of justice , state , defense , and transportation .

not all of the missions of the department are officially "homeland security" missions , either .

some components have historical missions that do not directly relate to conventional homeland security definitions , such as the coast guard's environmental and boater safety missions , and congress has debated whether fema and its disaster relief and recovery missions belong as a part of the department .

some issues have implications for homeland security , such as the role of the military in law enforcement , monitoring and policing transfers of money , human trafficking , explosives and weapons laws , and several aspects of foreign policy , trade , and economics .

rather than trying to resolve this debate , this report is limited to topics that generally fall within the four mission study areas used to develop the quadrennial homeland security review mandated by the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) : counterterrorism and security management border security and trade immigration disaster preparedness , response , and recovery a fifth section covering management issues at dhs rounds out the discussion .

the issues included in this report do not represent a comprehensive list of possible issues — they represent a broad array of issues likely to be addressed by congress in the coming months .

immigration policy is multi - tiered and has a variety of key elements: border control and visa security ; legal immigration ; documentation and verification ; interior immigration enforcement ; integration , status , and benefits ; and refugees and other humanitarian populations .

this portion of the report summarizes several immigration issues related to boder security and passenger screening at ports of entry by u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the agency within dhs within dhs responsible for these activities .

title i of the homeland security appropriations bill contains the funding for the primary management functions of the department of homeland security .

originally envisioned as a skeleton staff , the headquarters and management functions have grown in response to criticism of the department's ability to effectively oversee its own activities .

in debates over departmental funding , questioning the size and effectiveness of the department's management cadre is a common theme .

in fy2003 , the first year of dhs operations , $195 million was provided for management accounts .

in fy2011 , those accounts were funded at $839 million .

this growth is due to several factors , including increases in staff size required to perform oversight functions , rising personnel costs , technology investments , and increasing real estate expenses for the department's headquarters offices .

in recent years , these accounts have been requested at artificially high levels due to significant capital initiatives , such as headquarters consolidation and data center migration , and personnel initiatives aimed at boosting the department's cadre of acquisition oversight staff and reducing the number of contractors in sensitive positions .

the house and senate appropriations committees recommended funding the management accounts for fy2012 at $674 million and $692 million , respectively .

the administration had already expressed concern about the house funding levels prior to floor action , noting that "the funding provided in the bill for the office of the secretary and executive management would result in a reduction - in - force. .

despite that warning , house amendments reduced the funding in the bill by nearly $332 million from the committee's recommendation .

from its inception , dhs has faced financial management challenges .

transferring components and their budgets between agencies is a complex process in the best of situations , but doing it in the process of establishing a new department that is performing important national security missions from its first day of operations adds additional complexity .

this was further compounded by inherited financial management problems that existed at several major components , including the coast guard , fema and ice .

the department tried to develop its own financial management system in - house through a project known as "emerge2," but failed .

a second attempt was made to implement a department - wide system through contracting with outside developers under the transformation and systems consolidation initiative , or tasc .

after gao ruled that dhs had improperly awarded the initial $450 million contract — the latest result from a series of protests and legal challenges that had delayed the project — the award was cancelled and the project shelved .

although the department has been on the gao high risk list since it was created , progress has been made on reducing the number of material weaknesses in the department's financial controls .

according to recent testimony by deputy chief financial officer peggy sherry , the department inherited 30 significant deficiencies in its financial systems , including 18 material weaknesses across the entire enterprise .

as of may 2011 , she testified that are now only six material weaknesses , and problems that stand in the way of receiving an opinion on the department's consolidated balance sheet for fy2011 are limited to the coast guard .

congress will likely continue its interest in dhs's efforts to improve its internal financial systems , given the relative size of the department's budget and the current drive for stricter budgetary oversight .

the department of homeland security's headquarters footprint occupies more than 7 million square feet of office space in about 45 separate locations in the greater washington , dc area .

this is largely a legacy of how the department was assembled in a short period of time from 22 separate federal agencies who were themselves spread across the national capital region .

the fragmentation of headquarters is cited by the department as a major contributor to inefficiencies , including time lost shuttling staff between headquarters elements ; additional security , real estate , and administrative costs ; and reduced cohesion among the components that make up the department .

to unify the department's headquarters functions , the department approved a $3.4 billion master plan to create a new dhs headquarters on the grounds of st elizabeths in anacostia .

according to gsa , this is the largest federal office construction since the pentagon was built during world war ii .

$1.4 billion of this project was to be funded through the dhs budget , and $2 billion through the gsa .

thus far $375 million has been appropriated to dhs for the project and $871 million to gsa .

phase 1a of the project – a new coast guard headquarters facility – is nearing completion with the funding already provided by congress .

the administration requested $215 million for headquarters consolidation through the dhs budget , including $160 million for new construction at st. elizabeths .

they also requested $217 million through gsa for the project , including funding for a planned highway alterations to provide better motor vehicle access to the campus .

the house provided no funding for either request in fy2012 , while the senate provided $56 million in their version of the dhs appropriations bill to complete the coast guard headquarters facility .

the senate also included in their bill a requirement that dhs provide within 60 days of enactment an expenditure plan and an initial analysis of the mix of offices to be housed at the headquarters complex .

with headquarters consolidation remaining a priority for the administration , appropriated funds dwindling for the project , and current budgetary constraints altering both the growth projections that were the basis for dhs's consolidation plans and the prospects for funding in coming fiscal years , legislative action in the 112 th congress will help clarify the future for this project — through reaffirmation of the original plan or changes to its schedule , scope , or scale that could be required by the level of funding for the coming year .

from the establishment of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) in january 2003 through 2007 , the president and the secretary of homeland security used provisions of the homeland security act of 2002 , most notably section 872 , to implement a number of major and minor departmental reorganizations .

some reorganization activities under these authorities were carried out in conjunction with the implementation of the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 .

since may 2007 , congress has limited the use of appropriated funds for carrying out section 872 reorganizations .

section 3501 of the u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act , 2007 , enacted on may 25 , 2007 , instituted such limitations for the balance of fy2007 , stating: none of the funds provided in this act , or p.l .

109-295 [department of homeland security appropriations act , 2007] , shall be available to carry out section 872 of p.l .

107-296 [homeland security act of 2002] .

succeeding dhs appropriations acts up through and including that for fy2010 have included similar provisions .

the final continuing resolution for fy2011 appears to carry the fy2010 provision forward for the fiscal year ending september 30 , 2011 .

the scope and effect of this limitation were the subject of a july 2008 government accountability office ( gao ) opinion .

this opinion raised the question of whether a reorganization could be undertaken under authorities that , absent section 872 , might be available to the secretary .

these include the authorities identified by the department: implied authority to organize and manage the department ; redelegation authority ; and authority under 5 u.s.c .

§ 301 , which authorizes an agency head to "prescribe regulations for the government of his department , the conduct of its employees , the distribution and performance of its business , and the custody , use , and preservation of its records , papers , and property. .

since the appropriations acts are annual , the decision of whether or not to carry over the limitation arises each year .

more broadly , the question of whether and how section 872 might be amended may be at issue as part of a reauthorization process .

such decisions might hinge , in part , on a congressional determination of the impact of section 872 and the appropriation limitation on the management and functioning of the department .

human resources management ( hrm ) has been an important consideration underlying the mission and performance of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) since its creation .

responsibility for hrm is vested in the office of the chief human capital officer ( ochco ) , an entity organizationally and for appropriations purposes located within the undersecretary for management .

the ochco is expected to play a critical role in supporting and enabling the department's workforce strategy for fiscal years 2011-2016 .

the current chco announced his retirement effective on august 3 , 2011 , and a new chief has been named .

the chco position has also been changed from a political appointment to a career appointment .

issues that relate to hrm for which congress may conduct oversight during the second session of the 112 th congress include workforce planning , leadership development and training , and human resources information technology .

two goals included in the dhs workforce strategy are "[r]ecruiting a highly qualified and diverse workforce" and "[r]etaining an engaged workforce. .

a four - day summit convened in may 2011 discussed strategic workforce planning for the department and focused on such issues as a framework and tools for planning , identifying strategic and core mission critical occupations and key workforce planning indicators to be tracked and reported , and methods to be used to measure employee competencies .

a prototype that will be used to report to the secretary on emerging trends in , and the characteristics of , the dhs workforce is being developed .

the draft prototype includes such indicators as projected staffing needs , progress made against hiring goals , attrition rates , and selected dhs results from the office of personnel management's annual employee viewpoint survey .

with regard to measuring employee competencies , 'a competency model library' that will be available to the dhs workforce planning council via a sharepoint site is under development .

another goal under the department's workforce strategy is "[b]uilding an effective , mission - focused , diverse and inspiring cadre of leaders. .

the dhs congressional justification for fy2012 states that the ochco will develop "a comprehensive proposal" that will "identify executive resource requirements for fy2012 and fy2013. .

additionally , a formal mentoring program and a rotation program , both across dhs components and government - wide , is being established to enhance and sustain the institutional knowledge of executives , managers , and supervisors and develop their leadership skills in core areas of management and administration .

a succession plan for senior executive service positions will also be prepared .

the justification also states that the "ochco will design and deliver comprehensive leadership and workforce training programs for all personnel. .

any gaps in employee competencies that are critical to the dhs mission , including skills in foreign languages , labor management , and preparedness , will continue to be identified and addressed by remedial actions .

legislation introduced , but not enacted , in the 110 th congress to authorize the department ( s. 3623 ) included a provision that would have created an office of the chief learning officer ( clo ) for dhs .

the clo's responsibilities would have included establishing and managing the implementation of a learning and development strategy for the department , coordinating with dhs components about training and education activities at the component level , and creating courses or programs .

congress may reconsider this approach as part of an overall review of how dhs coordinates and manages the development of its employees .

hrit is an account under the ochco appropriation .

a long - term strategic plan for hrit is being redefined and implemented by the chco , the chief information officer , and other department officials .

dhs operates four enterprise solutions related to human resources ( hr ) : national finance center corporate for payroll and personnel , empowhr for personnel , webta for time and attendance , and the eopf for electronic personnel folders .

the department's congressional justification notes , however , "the critical need for enterprise solutions" for "staffing , learning management , performance management , and personnel accountability for continued operation , in the event of a declared emergency. .

increased efficiencies in the delivery of hr services across the department is a goal underlying the strategy .

hrm at dhs will likely continue to be an issue for oversight by congress .

suggestions for regular review and evaluation of the ochco have been previously mentioned .

to further inform congress about the relationship between the department's workforce planning policies and processes , dhs could be directed to include , in its annual congressional justification , or as an electronic file on its website , an easily understood crosswalk table that illustrates how those plans , in both the short - and long - term , coordinate with the quadrennial homeland security review and the overall national security strategy .

a goal of the workforce strategy is "[s]olidifying a unified dhs culture of mission performance , adaptability , accountability , and results. .

several initiatives to foster "one dhs," including the completion of a comprehensive correspondence and style guidance handbook , are currently underway .

congress may choose to specifically review , on an annual basis , the mechanisms for , and operation of , collaboration and coordination within the department as part of its consideration of the dhs budget submission .

the department of homeland security ranked seventh in procurement spending in fy2010 , but it experienced the largest growth among major federal agencies for the period fy2002 to fy2010 .

in constant dollars ( fy2010 ) , dhs spent $1.1 billion in fy2002 and $13.6 billion in fy2010 .

approximately 22 executive branch organizations were pulled together to form the department of homeland security .

to some extent , the structure of procurement operations within dhs is a legacy of how the department was created .

the following eight dhs components have their own contracting activities: customs and border protection ( cbp ) ; federal emergency management agency ( fema ) ; federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) ; immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) ; office of the chief procurement officer ( ocpo ) , which has two contracting activities ; transportation security administration ( tsa ) ; u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) ; and u.s. secret service .

some observers have questioned whether this structure , where responsibility is shared by the chief procurement officer and the other components , is optimal .

for example , the government accountability office ( gao ) has noted that the department's acquisition function "creates ambiguity about who is accountable for acquisition decisions because it depends on a system of dual accountability and cooperation and collaboration between the cpo and the component heads. .

as the services acquisition reform act ( sara ) panel noted in its 2007 report , the federal acquisition workforce has "shortcomings in terms of size , skills , and experience...." and dhs is no exception .

gao has reported that the department does not have "adequate staff to effectively plan and execute contracts. .

in the same report , gao acknowledged that "dhs's initiatives are positive steps toward building an effective acquisition workforce," but also noted that the department needs to engage in long - term strategic workforce planning .

in an effort to address its acquisition workforce needs , the department's fy2012 budget request included $24.2 million for an acquisition workforce initiative .

the house committee on appropriations declined to provide funding for the initiative , stating that the information it has received from dhs was "insufficient to enable the committee to understand the basis for the proposed increase.... .

in early 2009 , dhs announced that , as part of its efficiency review , department components would examine how to achieve a proper balance between federal employees and contractor employees .

achieving the proper balance generally involves determining which agency functions , if any , are to be reserved for federal employee performance .

for example , only federal employees are to perform inherently governmental functions .

approximately one year later , this particular effort had been renamed the balanced workforce initiative .

the initiative involves "ensur[ing] that no inherently governmental functions are performed by contractors ... put[ting] in place rigorous review procedures to ensure that future contract actions do not increase our [the department's] reliance on contractors ; and ... coordinating workforce assessments across the department to seek economies and service improvements and reduce our reliance on contractors. .

to aid department personnel in determining whether a function should be reserved for performance by federal employees , dhs has developed an instrument known as the balanced workforce strategy tool ( or survey ) .

the topics discussed here suggest several questions that may be of interest to the 112 th congress .

regarding the structure of dhs' acquisition function , has the department satisfactorily addressed concerns about its system of dual accountability ? .

has the department considered other options for organizing its acquisition function ? .

turning to the department's acquisition workforce , what are the possible consequences of being unable to fund its acquisition workforce initiative in fy2012 ? .

what acquisition tasks , or activities , are most likely to be affected by the lack of a fully staffed and trained acquisition workforce ? .

under its balanced workforce initiative , has dhs discovered contractor employees performing inherently governmental functions ? .

has the department identified any situations where it had ceded control over its mission and operations to contractor employees ? .

how many contractors , and which contracts , might be affected by the agency's efforts to achieve a balanced workforce ? .

prior to the 9 / 11 attacks , terrorist watch lists were maintained by several agencies primarily to prevent foreign terrorists from entering the united states .

in september 2003 , under the homeland security presidential initiative 6 ( hspd - 6 ) , the u.s. government's use of watch lists was consolidated and expanded to better screen such persons at consular offices and international ports of entry , and to better track them if they manage to enter the united states .

while the post - 9 / 11 terrorist screening policies have resulted in valid watch list matches , misidentifications have also been a recurring issue for congress .

initially , such problems were most frequently associated with the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , but misidentifications have also emerged as a problem for the u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) .

in december 2010 , however , tsa fully implemented its secure flight program and the frequency of terrorist watch list misidentifications is expected to abate .

in addition , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has established a "watchlist service," which is a mirror database of the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) consolidated database of terrorist watch list records .

while this move brings the u.s. government closer to the goal of employing a single , consolidated terrorist watch list , it arguably further diffuses responsibility for terrorist watch list records under an arrangement that could have already been justifiably described as byzantine .

under hspd - 6 , the terrorist identification and watch list functions previously performed by state's bureau of intelligence and research ( inr ) were split between the terrorist threat integration center ( ttic ) , later renamed the national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) , and the then newly established terrorist screening center ( tsc ) .

the nctc is responsible for indentifying international terrorists and collating all available information on those persons in the terrorist identities datamart environment ( tide ) .

federal agencies within the u.s. intelligence community forward nominations to the nctc to include known and suspected international terrorists into tide based upon both foreign and criminal intelligence .

the fbi , on the other hand , is responsible for identifying both international and domestic terrorists ( in the latter case , based upon criminal intelligence ) .

the fbi - administered tsc is responsible for maintaining the consolidated terrorist screening database ( tsdb ) , into which both international and domestic watch list records are consolidated .

the tsc tailors watch list records to meet the missions of frontline screening agencies and downloads them from the tsdb into their screening systems .

consequently , these watch lists are in most cases only subsets of the tsdb .

in addition , the tsc has developed comprehensive procedures for handling encounters with known and suspected terrorists and their supporters , and provides terrorist screening agencies with around - the - clock operational support in the event of possible terrorist encounters .

by providing tailored watch list records from the tsdb , the tsc supports the terrorist screening activities of the dhs's tsa and cbp , as well as the department of state's bureau of consular affairs ( ca ) .

similar terrorist watch list records are also shared with the department of defense and selected foreign governments .

as of may 2010 , the tsdb contained information on 422,674 individuals , who are known or suspected of being international or domestic terrorists .

due to aliases and name variants , however , the tsdb included over 1.7 million records related to watch - listed individuals .

under hspd - 6 , the tsc director is responsible for developing policies and procedures related to the criteria for including terrorist identities data in the consolidated tsdb and for measures to be taken in regard to misidentifications , erroneous entries , outdated data , and privacy concerns .

however , the tsc does not collect intelligence , and has no authority to do so .

in fact , all intelligence or data entered into the tsdb are actually collected by other agencies with the u.s. intelligence community in accordance with applicable , pre - existing authorities .

as a consequence , the tsc is limited in its ability to address certain issues related to misidentifications because it is restricted from divulging classified or law enforcement - sensitive information to the public under certain circumstances .

dhs , as well as its frontline screening agencies ( such as tsa and cbp ) , arguably confronts the same limitation , because many terrorist watch list records , while possibly declassified , are based on classified intelligence collected by other agencies .

such records would probably be considered security sensitive information .

despite these limitations , congress required the tsa and dhs to establish appeals procedures .

under these requirements , persons who are identified as terrorism - related security threats based on records in the tsdb would have the ability to appeal such determinations and have such records , if warranted , modified to alleviate such occurrences in the future .

congress also required dhs to establish an office of appeals and redress where individuals , who believe they have been delayed or prohibited from boarding a commercial aircraft because they were wrongly identified as a threat , would have a timely and fair process for redress .

to meet these requirements , dhs established the traveler redress inquiry program ( trip ) as a mechanism for addressing watch list misidentification issues and other situations where passengers feel that they have been unfairly or incorrectly delayed or denied boarding or identified for additional security screening at airport screening checkpoints , ports of entry or border checkpoints , or when seeking to access other modes of transportation .

nevertheless , many civil libertarians and privacy advocates do not view either the tsc or dhs as being in a position under current law to provide adequate and timely redress to persons misidentified as terrorists or improperly watch - listed as terrorists .

in july 2010 , the transmission of terrorist watch list records from the fbi / tsc to dhs / tsa was reengineered , when a "secure" system - to - system arrangement was established that allows the entire contents of the tsdb to be made available to dhs on a "near real - time" basis .

at dhs , this mirror database is known as the "watchlist service ( wls ) . .

in july 2011 , dhs proposed exempting its wls from the privacy act of 1974 in the same way that the fbi did the tsdb , a move that caused privacy advocates to renew calls for a more transparent and robust terrorist watch list redress process and to question again the u.s. government's expanded use of terrorist watch list records under hspd - 6 .

many stakeholders have identified advances in research and development ( r&d ) as key to creating new or improved technologies that defend against homeland security threats .

r&d is generally a multi - year endeavor with significant risk of failure .

additionally , it may take years to realize any benefits from r&d investments .

the administration and congress have differing visions regarding performance of r&d in dhs .

in both fy2011 and fy2012 , dhs requested to consolidate its r&d activities .

congress denied the dhs request in fy2011 and is considering the fy2012 request .

in addition , some congressional and stakeholder expectations regarding the effectiveness and efficiency of agency performance have not been met .

the 112 th congress may continue to focus attention on whether investments in homeland security research and development net appropriate rewards , how the distribution of investments among homeland security topics and between research and development activities leads to a balanced portfolio , and what the appropriate funding level for dhs r&d is during a time of fiscal constraint .

the dhs homeland security r&d activities have substantial scope , as these activities must attempt to meet the needs of both dhs component agencies and other customers outside of the agency , such as first responders .

stakeholders continue to debate the optimal approach to maximizing dhs r&d effectiveness .

some advocates call for substantial increases in particular areas of research and development , citing that a dedicated research effort with significant investments as more likely to yield technology breakthroughs .

some stakeholders call for a rebalancing of the investment portfolio with an increased focus on technology development , arguing that many prototypes under development in the private sector need only a small boost to convert them to procurable technologies .

other stakeholders call for a rebalancing of the investment portfolio towards long - term research activities , warning that dhs will lack research outcomes to develop into prototypes if long - term research languishes .

finally , portions of the stakeholder community suggest using a high - risk , high - reward investment strategy similar to that undertaken by the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) so as to make "leap - ahead" advances relative to terrorist capabilities .

the dhs is not the sole federal funder of homeland security r&d , but the dhs under secretary for science and technology ( s&t ) is responsible for coordinating homeland security r&d activities across the federal government .

the dhs under secretary for s&t has experienced challenges in attempting to coordinate these activities and has failed to develop a federal homeland security r&d strategy .

congress has historically been interested in identifying and overcoming the barriers to such coordination .

the 112 th congress may conduct oversight of how any new strategic approaches taken by dhs address these longstanding concerns , set milestones for future performance , and project meeting the needs of dhs components and the first - responder community .

for fy2011 and fy2012 , dhs requested that congress transfer some research and development activities within the purview of the domestic nuclear detection office to the s&t directorate .

additionally , dhs under secretary for s&t o'toole has reprioritized and consolidated ongoing research and development activities within the s&t directorate .

the results of the proposed transfer and current reprioritization and consolidation might change the productivity of dhs r&d activities , which have been criticized by stakeholders as having little to show for the federal investment .

congress did not approve this transfer in fy2011 , and the house - passed dhs appropriations bill for fy2012 also does not approve this transfer .

in addition , the house - passed dhs appropriations bill would reduce appropriations for r&d in the s&t directorate by 42% relative to fy2011 .

this may indicate that the slow rate of return shown by s&t directorate r&d investments is not acceptable to some congressional policymakers .

